Potentially revolutionary. Well-written and clearly argued, this book challenges some of our most basic assumptions about how we ought to proceed philosophically and is sure to shake up our tired self-confidence in our philosophical intuitions. A truly innovative book; I know of nothing like it.

Jeremy Wisnewski, Hartwick College, New York





Fischer develops the concept of philosophical therapy to new heights and depths. His analysis is insightful, comprehensive, and richly back-grounded in many episodes in the history of philosophy, from the genesis of the modern mind-world dichotomy to Wittgenstein’s later philosophy.

Dale Jacquette, University of Berne, Switzerland





The idea that some philosophical problems are due to ‘diseases of the intellect’ and need to be treated—like an illness—has been mooted before. But no one has developed this thought, nor given it systematic elaboration. Nor has anyone demonstrated by detailed historical analyses how fruitful this conception can be. Fischer’s book undertakes these tasks, and executes them with exemplary skill and conviction. His case studies of Locke, Berkeley, Ayer and Wittgenstein are enthralling, as are his methodical examinations of the nature of the mind, the attributes of material things, sense perception, and the phenomenon of sudden understanding.

P. M. S. Hacker, St. John’s College, Oxford





By debunking long-entrenched myths, this deeply absorbing book opens up a fresh approach: a therapeutic back-tracking through the intellectual genealogies that led us into philosophical problems we too easily take as given but may thus come to see through. An excellent, adventurous, provocative book.

Garry Hagberg, Bard College, New York





This lucid and fascinating book offers both penetrating diagnosis and effective cure of a crucial subset of philosophical problems.

Louis A. Sass, Rutgers University





This clearly written, insightful and well-argued book makes an important contribution to meta-philosophical discussion, both of the status of philosophical methods of argument and of the underlying sources of philosophical conviction. Philosophers as well as non-philosophers could learn much from this kind of detailed methodological study. A helpful and original book.





Paul Livingston, University of New Mexico





Philosophical Delusion

and its Therapy





Routledge Studies in

Contemporary Philosophy




1. Email and Ethics

Style and Ethical Relations in

Computer-Mediated Communication

Emma Rooksby





2. Causation and Laws of Nature

Max Kistler





3. Internalism and Epistemology

The Architecture of Reason

Timothy McGrew and Lydia McGrew





4. Einstein, Relativity and

Absolute Simultaneity

Edited by William Lane Craig

and Quentin Smith





5. Epistemology Modalized

Kelly Becker





6. Truth and Speech Acts

Studies in the Philosophy of Language

Dirk Greimann & Geo Siegwart





7. A Sense of the World

Essays on Fiction, Narrative, and

Knowledge

Edited by John Gibson, Wolfgang

Huemer, and Luca Pocci





8. A Pragmatist Philosophy

of Democracy

Robert B. Talisse





9. Aesthetics and Material Beauty

Aesthetics Naturalized

Jennifer A. McMahon





10. Aesthetic Experience

Edited by Richard Shusterman

and Adele Tomlin





11. Real Essentialism

David S. Oderberg





12. Practical Identity and

Narrative Agency

Edited by Catriona Mackenzie

and Kim Atkins





13. Metaphysics and the

Representational Fallacy

Heather Dyke





14. Narrative Identity and

Moral Identity

A Practical Perspective

Kim Atkins





15. Intergenerational Justice

Rights and Responsibilities in an

Intergenerational Polity

Janna Thompson





16. Hillel Steiner and the

Anatomy of Justice

Themes and Challenges

Edited by Stephen de Wijze,

Matthew H. Kramer, and Ian Carter





17. Philosophy of Personal Identity

and Multiple Personality

Logi Gunnarsson





18. The Force of Argument

Essays in Honor of Timothy Smiley

Edited by Jonathan Lear and

Alex Oliver





19. Autonomy and Liberalism

Ben Colburn





20. Habermas and Literary

Rationality

David L. Colclasure





21. Rawls, Citizenship, and

Education

M. Victoria Costa





22. Objectivity and the Language-

Dependence of Thought

A Transcendental Defence of

Universal Lingualism

Christian Barth





23. Habermas and Rawls

Disputing the Political

Edited by James Gordon Finlayson

and Fabian Freyenhagen





24. Philosophical Delusion and

its Therapy

Outline of a Philosophical Revolution

Eugen Fischer





Philosophical Delusion

and its Therapy


Outline of a Philosophical Revolution





Eugen Fischer





First published 2011

by Routledge

270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016



Simultaneously published in the UK

by Routledge

2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN



Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.

To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.

© 2011 Eugen Fischer

The right of Eugen Fischer to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Fischer, Eugen, 1970–

Philosophical delusion and its therapy : outline of a philosophical revolution / by Eugen Fischer.

p. cm. — (Routledge studies in contemporary philosophy ; 24)

Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.

ISBN 978-0-415-33179-1

1. Philosophy. 2. Methodology. 3. Delusions. I. Title.

BD241.F495 2011

100—dc22

2010026803

ISBN 0-203-39789-4 Master e-book ISBN

ISBN13: 978-0-415-33179-1 (hbk)

ISBN13: 978-0-203-39789-3 (ebk)





To my parents

Erika and Bernd





Abbreviations


The following abbreviations are used to refer to frequently quoted texts, with page references to the editions used, unless otherwise stated:

3D Three Dialogues between Hylas and Phitonous, 3rd ed., Berkeley

1734/1998b, references to standard pagination (Luce & Jessop

edition of Berkeley’s Works, in the margin of the edition used).

BT The Big Typescript: TS213, Wittgenstein 2005, references to page

numbers of the original TS (in the margin of the edition used).

CV Culture and Value, rev. ed., Wittgenstein 1998.

EHU An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 4th ed., Locke

1700/1975, with references to sections (EHU II.viii.l7 = Book

II, chapter viii, section 17).

FEK The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, Ayer 1940.

MS Wittgenstein manuscript as numbered in the von Wright

catalogue: G.H. von Wright, Wittgenstein, Oxford: Blackwell, 1982, pp. 35ff.

NTV An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, 4,th ed., Berkeley

1732/1998, with references to sections.

OFQ ‘The Origin of Forms and Qualities According to the Corpuscular Hypothesis’, Boyle 1666/1979.

PC Philosophical Commentaries, in: Berkeley 1998, references to

numbered remarks.

PHK A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge,

2nd ed., Berkeley 1734/1998a, references to sections

(I = Introduction).

PI Philosophical Investigations, 3rd ed., Wittgenstein 1953/

2001a, references to sections, sometimes with paragraph and

sentence (PI 109a4-109a6 = section 109, paragraph (a) within

that section, fourth to sixth sentence of that paragraph, in the

German text.

SAG Il Saggiatore, Galilei 1623/1960; where necessary I have

amended this English translation with my own (with S. Bennazzo), based on Galilei 1623/1953.

S&S Sense and Sensiblia, Austin 1962.

TS Wittgenstein typescript as numbered in the von Wright catalogue: G.H. von Wright, Wittgenstein, Oxford: Blackwell,

1982, pp. 35ff.

VW The Voices of Wittgenstein, Wittgenstein & Waismann 2003.





Acknowledgements




During the ten years of work on or towards this book, I have accumulated many and great debts to several institutions, colleagues and students. Until 2006, I had the pleasure of belonging to the philosophy department of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, where I had the great good luck of having Wilhelm Vossenkuhl as my boss and Erich Ammereller and Gerhard Ernst among my colleagues. Among my smaller debts to them are numerous helpful comments on the Habilitationsschrift (Munich, November 2001) from which this book grew.

In its present form, this book was made possible by generous support from the German Research Council (DFG), the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study and the Collegium Budapest/Institute for Advanced Study, who awarded me a Heisenberg Research Readership, a Golestan Fellowship and a Senior Research Fellowship, respectively. These grants and the interdisciplinary company and wonderfully efficient support at the institutes in The Hague-Wassenaar (2005/6) and Budapest (2006/7) allowed me to range far and wide and seriously follow up leads wherever they led—even into areas that were entirely new to me (a rare privilege in an age of forced specialisation). In 2006, I joined the School of Philosophy of the University of East Anglia, which first granted me leave and then provided an exceptionally congenial environment for the completion of an unconventional and ambitious project.

I have learned a lot from discussion with my students—perhaps more than they have learned from me. I am particularly indebted to the two cohorts of the Munich MPhil-programme who attended my classes on Austin, in summer 2000, and Berkeley, in summer 2005. They have been a help at crucial junctures.

I have benefited from discussions with colleagues too numerous to name. For helpful comments on material entering into this book, I am particularly indebted to Erich Ammereller, Gordon Baker, John Collins, Peter Hacker, Dale Jacquette, Wolfgang Kienzler, Oskari Kuusela, Katherine Morris, Ulises Moulines, Rupert Read, Louis Sass, Eike von Savigny, Joachim Schulte, Finn Spicer, and to Angus Ross, who kindly read the entire volume. Discussion with these friends and colleagues greatly improved the book. To Wilhelm Vossenkuhl I owe a whole lot more. My most long-standing debt is to Gordon Baker and Peter Hacker. They supervised much of my graduate work, and I continue to be indebted to ideas they launched and standards they set. Gordon Baker supervised my BPhil- and DPhil-theses. Later I profited from exchanges at courses we co-taught in Venice (March 2000) and Salem (August 2001). Upon Baker’s untimely death, Peter Hacker stepped into the breach and generously offered support when I needed it, regardless of all differences of philosophical opinion.

My greatest debt is to my family. In their different ways, my wife, son and parents have all contributed to the emotional detachment from professional academia without which I could not have done this work.





I would like to thank Editions Rodopi, Amsterdam, for permission to use extracts from my paper ‘Austin on Sense-data: Ordinary Language Analysis as Therapy’, Grazer Philosophische Studien 70, 2005, pp., and Springer Science and Business Media B.V. for permission to use extracts from my papers ‘Wittgenstein’s Non-Cognitivism—Explained and Vindicated’, Synthese 162 (1), May 2008, pp., and ‘Philosophical Pictures and Secondary Qualities’, Synthese 171 (1), November 2009, pp.–110.





Norwich, May 2010





Introduction


Some Perplexing Discoveries




In this book, we will develop an account of philosophical thought that vindicates and facilitates a fresh approach to a wide range of philosophical problems: Much philosophical reflection is shaped by habits of thought of which we are largely unaware. At their root are ‘philosophical pictures’: simple models which have guided the development of our language, to which we unwittingly but systematically assimilate things more closely than we know to be appropriate, when lost in abstract reflection. When under the spell of such pictures, we are prone to systematically form ‘philosophical delusions’. The conflict of such delusions with reality, or among each other, gives rise to a wide range of philosophical problems.—If correct, these ideas vindicate and facilitate a revolutionary reorientation of philosophical work: the adoption of aims and the development of methods which turn much philosophy into a kind of ‘therapy’, guided by meta-philosophical insights into the nature and genesis of the problems that worry us.

Some of the pertinent aims were first explicitly adopted, and some of the relevant methods first mooted, by some thinkers belonging to the ‘Austro-British strand’ of 20th-century analytic philosophy. From the early 1930s onwards Ludwig Wittgenstein adopted the chief goal of liberating himself and others from a certain kind of intellectual unease or disquiet: ‘As I do philosophy, its entire [!] task is to shape expressions in such a way that certain disquietudes disappear’.1 ‘Thoughts at peace. That is the goal someone who philosophises longs for.’ Overcoming disquieting problems ‘is not a matter of pronouncing new truths about the subject of the investigation.’ According to Wittgenstein, it crucially involves ‘assembling reminders’ of familiar facts about this subject, which we knew all along.2 But to return to, or arrive at, the notions of common sense, a philosopher ‘has to cure many diseases of the understanding in himself’, and ‘the philosopher’s treatment of a question is like the treatment of an illness.’ Throughout the 1930s and 1940s, these and related ideas were explored by a number of philosophers influenced by Wittgenstein, most seriously by Friedrich Waismann, John Wisdom and B.A. Farrell.3 Simultaneously but independently, J.L. Austin’s classic lectures Sense and Sensibilia explicitly addressed the main aim of ‘dissolving philosophical worries’ by ‘exposing a wide variety of concealed motives’ for maintaining a ‘disturbing’ philosophical doctrine—instead of examining the arguments philosophers explicitly adduce for it.4

These ideas were ahead of their time and still strike many thoughtful philosophers as too puzzling to even cause offence. To make sense of them, one has to identify pertinent ‘diseases of the understanding’ and to understand, at least in rough outline, the aetiology of the ‘symptoms’ they cause in philosophy. Without such an understanding, ‘therapeutic’ methods cannot be properly developed, the very need for therapy in philosophy—the need, in philosophy, for something it is more helpful than misleading to call a ‘therapy’—remains unclear, and the sparks of a potential revolution lack the fuel to develop into flames.

The key to the identification of relevant intellectual ‘diseases’ is provided by findings about how philosophical reflection is shaped and pre-structured by—unsound—cognitive processes which are not under our direct control and of which we are typically unaware. Following up inspired hunches, the pioneers of therapeutic philosophy sought to expose ‘concealed motives’,5 including ‘false analogies’ and ‘simile[s] at work in the unconscious.’ 6 But the only model of ‘unconscious’ cognition they had at their disposal to develop these hunches, provided by Freudian psycho-analysis, did not readily lend itself to the analysis of philosophical thought, and scientific inquiry into the most pertinent kind of ‘automatic’ reasoning, viz. non-intentional analogical and metaphorical reasoning, did not commence until half a century later. By seizing on results of this scientific work, the present book develops a new conception of the nature of philosophical reflection and the genesis of philosophical problems—which certainly does not apply to all of philosophy but arguably to an important part. This conception will provide a fresh foundation for a revolutionary enterprise that previously hung largely in the air.

With the help of findings and concepts from cognitive linguistics and from cognitive and social psychology, we will analyse how philosophical thought is shaped by metaphors and analogies we are not aware of employing and are prone to misapply. We will analyse how such ‘philosophical pictures’ shape philosophical reflection, give rise to philosophical problems and motivate philosophical theories. We will examine the nature and genesis of classical and of idiosyncratic problems from the four core areas of theoretical philosophy (epistemology and metaphysics, and the philosophies of mind and language): problems about the nature of the mind and about the attributes of bodies, about sense-perception and about the phenomenon of sudden understanding. We will proceed from case studies on major thinkers from two key periods of philosophy who worked within different paradigms and traditions: We will study the early modern empiricists Locke and Berkeley, as well as Berkeley’s 20th-century heir, A.J. Ayer (the immediate target of Austin’s therapeutic efforts), and Wittgenstein (whom we will see to have been his own ‘patient’, in self-therapy). We will thus obtain a new conception of philosophical reflection and philosophical problems, and establish that it applies to a relevant cross-section of the subject. In conjunction with some concepts borrowed from clinical psychology, this new conception will allow us to re-analyse extant models of therapeutic philosophy, due to Austin and Wittgenstein, to explain where and why therapy is called for in philosophy, and to develop techniques to actually carry it out—with purely rational means which fully respect the intellectual prowess and integrity of the thinkers addressed.





1. THE DISCOVERY OF PHILOSOPHICAL DELUSIONS




The work whose results are presented in this volume evolved from a series of largely chance discoveries. The reader might find it convenient to have them briefly set out at the start. An anecdote has it that a radio-astronomer knocked his instruments until they stopped emitting noises he picked up by chance, found unintelligible and therefore immediately put down to a malfunction. The pulsars were then discovered by others, who picked up the same signals and tried to make sense of them. (To be fair, some of the requisite concepts had been developed only in the meantime.) The discoveries to be set out were made by a combination of luck and ‘not knocking the instruments’: by not dismissing unexpected and initially unintelligible observations out of hand as impossible or irrelevant but trying to make sense of them, where necessary by importing or adapting concepts from other disciplines.

The first discovery was the most unsettling. It was made the first Monday of December 2000, in the late evening. The previous summer, I had given a class on J.L. Austin’s Sense and Sensibilia, and was still trying to make sense of his puzzling approach of exposing ‘concealed motives’ for adopting a worrying doctrine, apparently without addressing philosophers’ stated reasons. Suspecting that this approach might be rendered intelligible by features of the particular work Austin was responding to, I turned to A.J. Ayer’s Foundations of Empirical Knowledge and analysed its sophisticated development and defence of the sense-datum doctrine of perception, the doctrine that whenever we see or otherwise perceive anything, all we perceive directly are ‘sense-data’ in our minds. That Monday, I had pulled together various strands of the analysis and found that the way in which Ayer maintained this doctrine had four peculiar features. A bit earlier, Wittgenstein’s comparison of certain philosophical errors to motives elicited in psycho-analysis (a comparison drawn in his so-called ‘Big Typescript’), had prompted me to take up Freud’s Introductory Lectures as bedtime reading. I had then continued with it for pleasure after losing hope that it might help my philosophical endeavours. That evening, I arrived at lecture XVI, where Freud presents the case history of a patient with delusions and gives four crucial features of such beliefs—exactly the same four features I had, some hours before, found Ayer’s belief in the sense-datum doctrine to possess! The cases were analogous precisely in the respects that mattered. Ayer’s belief was a delusion—at least by the lights of the definition used by Freud. A look at recent psychiatry textbooks quickly revealed that this definition was not idiosyncratic but perfectly in line with standard explanations still given today. So a perfectly competent philosopher maintained an influential philosophical doctrine as a matter of delusion, in a familiar literal sense of this term. This totally unexpected, unsettling and electrifying finding (to be presented in Chapter 6) had me engage in further reading (of literature in clinical psychology) and analysis (of Ayer’s texts), which increasingly confirmed the conclusion (though, needless to say, a lot more was involved than had first met my eye).

This discovery prompted me to study models of delusion formation and maintenance, and therapies for conditions involving delusions. I quickly found the conceptual framework of cognitive therapy most helpful, since it renders delusions intelligible as the result of, among other things, cognitive processes amenable to the philosophical tools of logical analysis.7 Aaron Beck’s seminal work on cognitive therapy, namely of depression,8 shows that intellectually perfectly competent subjects may spontaneously and continually make unsound inferences of certain characteristic types, which presuppose utterly unwarranted assumptions that are always variations of the same themes. Such spontaneous or ‘automatic’ inferences, which the subject cannot help making, take him via presuppositions he is unaware of relying upon to conclusions he finds intuitively compelling regardless of what warrant he has for them. When analysing a core part of Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations, I found that Wittgenstein elicits inferences and conclusions of precisely this kind in his own reflections: things he finds it intuitively compelling to say, even though he has no warrant for them.9 He is inclined to spontaneously leap to these conclusions from premises which entail them in conjunction with always the same tacit assumptions— which he reflectively rejects (see Chapter 9). This phenomenon I found to recur in other texts, by Ayer and Berkeley—who tend to endorse the conclusions they leap to and find intuitively compelling (in contrast with the later Wittgenstein who is wary of such ‘intuitions’). I thus encountered the phenomenon of ‘autonomous habits of thought’ in philosophical reflection: In such reflection, thinkers unwittingly but systematically make spontaneous leaps of thought which tacitly presuppose always the same unwarranted assumptions the thinkers are not aware of relying upon, crucially including assumptions the thinkers explicitly reject(!), and which lead to conclusions the thinkers find intuitively compelling for all that. Such leaps may lead thinkers to form delusions and maintain them on the basis of the most specious ‘arguments’.

Like all other firmly maintained beliefs, delusions are reinforced by belief-bias effects well documented by experiments in cognitive and social psychology: Evidence consistent with the belief is noticed and remembered more easily and regarded as more important than evidence that speaks against it; the belief is presupposed in assessing potential evidence and in further reasoning. Both Ayer’s new and Berkeley’s classical arguments for the sense-datum doctrine provide ample evidence for these effects. In particular, I found the doctrine is presupposed, in part or full, in the very arguments adduced in its support—an extreme case of belief bias (Chapters 5–6).

Each of the thinkers I found to have autonomous habits of thought was thus led to find compelling claims apparently at odds with common-sense convictions. Such conflicts lead to the formulation of a characteristic kind of philosophical problems: a reconciliation problem which challenges us to reconcile what appears to be at odds. Philosophers often wonder ‘How is it (possible) that p?’ These questions do not fall out of the clear blue sky; philosophers ask them when they feel that there is some sort of problem or difficulty about the familiar fact that p. This is often due to an apparent conflict between p and an intuitively compelling philosophical claim which may be maintained as a matter of delusion. Such conflicts give rise to the sort of puzzlement in the face of familiar facts that Plato regarded as the starting-point of philosophical reflection.10 This constitutes the specifically philosophical motivation for pursuing many philosophical questions. Ayer is a case in point, as he devotes almost all of his Foundations to explaining how it is possible that we successfully communicate—as we clearly do every day—with expressions that ostensibly refer to publicly accessible material things located in physical space. The ‘problem’ is raised only by his delusional doctrine that all we ever directly perceive and can directly refer to are private and immaterial sense-data located in our minds. Problems whose specifically philosophical motivation is unsound in this way are philosophical ‘pseudo-problems’ which it is usually philosophically pointless to address.

To sum up, autonomous habits of thought have us see difficulties where there are none: In the grip of such habits, philosophers may come to espouse paradoxical claims in the absence of warrant, maintain them due to belief-bias effects and even as a matter of delusion, be puzzled by facts apparently at odds with these delusions, and labour to reconcile the former with the latter. This otherwise unsettling conclusion holds out the promise of a new approach that lets us overcome long-standing and maddening philosophical problems: By reconstructing and examining the lines of thought that motivate such a problem, we may identify moves which tacitly rely on assumptions its proponents explicitly reject, which are unsound by their own lights (rather than by the lights of that unsympathetic know-all, the philosophical critic). Where this is the case, we can overcome the problem by exposing it as a pseudo-problem conjured up in the grip of autonomous habits of thought.

So far we are dealing with a promise extended by a puzzle. Autonomous cognitive habits had previously been observed in conditions like depression or psychosis. I encountered such habits in philosophical reflection. But, surely, the autonomous habits of thought that shape philosophical reflection are not associated with emotional or psychotic disorders (or anything else with an entry in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, for that matter). So when and why do such habits arise in the radically different context of philosophical reflection?





2. THE DISCOVERY OF PHILOSOPHICAL PICTURES




The first intellectual stimulus was once more provided by Wittgenstein’s Big Typescript, which moots the idea that philosophical perplexities may be due to ‘false analogies’ which have been ‘accepted into language’ and then guide philosophers’ reflections in ways of which they are not aware. I did not find ‘false analogies’ in language philosophically relevant in my further enquiries, but the task of contributing to a volume on this text 11 shifted my attention to non-intentional analogical reasoning in which certain actual analogies get systematically misapplied, and this shift proved crucial. I started to analyse the unwitting use of analogy in key texts by Berkeley. Already George Pitcher (an eminent scholar who, in the 1960s and 1970s, worked on Wittgenstein, Berkeley and the philosophy of perception) had noticed various passages in which the mind is excessively assimilated to a place, and had attributed a ‘place-picture of the mind’ to Berkeley.12 Analysing Berkeley’s Three Dialogues, I found this assimilation the tip of an iceberg. Berkeley’s arguments involve a plethora of tacit assumptions. I found there is system to these assumptions: Some entail others. And the particularly fundamental presuppositions, which entail many others, posit analogies. They posit unduly strong analogies between abstract phenomena and simple tangible models: Against explicit better knowledge, Berkeley tacitly presupposes undue analogies between ‘inner’ and physical perception, and between qualities and parts of things; he presupposes that things perceived ‘in the mind’, like things perceived with our eyes, must be around to be perceived, and that qualities, like parts, are located in the things to which they belong (cp. Chapters 4–5).

At this point (September 2005), I started work at an Institute for Advanced Study and attended—purely because it was one of my few duties as a Fellow—the talk of a linguistics colleague. The speaker (Rudi Botha) mentioned in passing ‘conceptual metaphors’ which involve simple tangible models of just this sort. Scurrying to the library, I quickly learned that such models are involved in metaphorical extension, a major process of language development: In language after language, whole sets of related terms (e.g. manipulation terms) are initially applied only to concrete things, actions or achievements (as in “He grasped a stone to throw”) and then get extended to more abstract ‘targets’ (as in “He grasped the implications immediately”), in a systematic manner. In language after language, this process forges a plethora of structural analogies between the concrete and the abstract.

With these and some other bits of cognitive linguistics in mind, I set about analysing Galileo’s famous discussion of ‘secondary qualities’ as the likely beginning of at least one garden path leading to the sense-datum doctrine that was Berkeley’s starting-point. At crucial points, I found Galileo (and later Boyle and Locke) presupposing material analogies between models involved in metaphorical extension and their merely structurally analogous targets, and doing so against better knowledge, a knowledge the thinkers occasionally express explicitly (Chapter 3). Most of the further assumptions tacitly presupposed in the pertinent lines of thought could be derived from those basic presuppositions. A characteristic, recurrent, and systematic mistake in non-intentional analogical reasoning thus emerged as the source of philosophically relevant autonomous habits of thought: the overly literal application of conceptual metaphors, against better knowledge. Looking for an already familiar and suggestive label, I characterised these fundamental mistakes by attaching new content to Wittgensteinian talk of being ‘under the spell of philosophical pictures’ (Chapter 1).

Reading up on non-intentional analogical reasoning, I came across experiments which establish that when we lack knowledge of relevant context or detail, we are prone to unwittingly fill them in by falling back on familiar models: 13 We then unwittingly resort to familiar things which are structurally similar to the things at issue and spontaneously project properties of the former onto the latter; we do so without being aware of using the former as a model or engaging in any analogical reasoning; and we do so in the absence of warrant for crediting the targets with the properties at issue (Chapter 1.2).

In philosophical reflection we frequently lack knowledge of relevant context and detail. Think of how often philosophers consider phenomena ‘in the abstract’ or out of context, generalise too swiftly or extensively, pay little or no attention to concrete examples, or employ technical terms whose application to concrete situations remains unclear. It would therefore be no surprise if thinkers engaged in such reflection proved prone to unwittingly fall back on suitable models that come their way, namely on anything structurally similar to the object of their reflection. For a wide range of topics that have figured prominently in philosophical reflection, the process of metaphorical extension provides structurally analogous models and suggests them to us through the very terms we use. My previous logical reconstructions of philosophical lines of thought had revealed that some eminent philosophers continually make unsound inferences in non-intentional analogical reasoning. This finding now turned out to be perfectly consistent with experimental findings. Shortcomings that are characteristic of much—though certainly not all—philosophical reflection make thinkers prone unwittingly to misapply models offered them by their language, in non-intentional reasoning. From this source autonomous habits of thought may arise in philosophical reflection, entirely independently from the conditions in which such habits were first encountered (depression, psychosis, etc.).

When we presuppose material analogies where only structural analogies obtain, when we presuppose, for example, that to understand or ‘see’ someone’s point is to perceive some thing somewhere, with an organ of sense, we swiftly arrive at conclusions at odds with common sense or facts we acknowledge. In the grip of philosophical pictures and the autonomous habits of thought they fuel, we find such conclusions intuitively compelling for all that. In Boyle, Locke and Berkeley I found two kinds of response to such worrying conflicts between philosophical ‘intuitions’ and accepted facts: the deliberate construction of philosophical theories, and spontaneous glossing over. In the latter case, thinkers assert that the intuitively compelling claim is to be understood somehow differently, in a sense in which it does not conflict with the facts. Thus Berkeley, for example, explains that ‘when I speak of objects existing in the mind . . . I would not be understood in the gross literal sense, as when bodies are said to exist in a place.’ 14

Where salient conflicts cannot be papered over in this way, they occasion the explicit formulation of philosophical problems, such as various familiar problems about the mind and perception (Chapters 2 and 5). These philosophical problems, in turn, occasion the construction of philosophical theories which are required to ‘honour’ both our philosophical intuitions and the facts we accept and are intended to solve the problems raised by their apparent clash, usually by accounting for the facts in ways that appear to bring them into line with the intuitively compelling philosophical claims (rather than the other way round). Upon analysis, Locke’s famous theories of secondary qualities and sense-perception turned out to be of this type (Chapter 3), as did Berkeley’s idealism (Chapter 5) and Ayer’s phenomenalism (Chapter 6). In each case, non-intentional inferences of the sort that had raised the worrying problems recurred in the construction of the theory addressing them.

The conditions favouring non-intentional analogical reasoning and its characteristic mistakes and consequences obtain not invariably but frequently in philosophical reflection. The case-studies presented establish that even the most competent thinkers (including outstanding academics like A.J. Ayer and men of genius like Berkeley and Wittgenstein) are prone to such reasoning, with all those mistakes and consequences, when those conditions obtain. The lasting influence of the problems thus engendered further testifies to the extent to which these phenomena shape philosophical reflection. Quite possibly, a significant part—not all but a significant part—of philosophy is a struggle with philosophical pictures and their consequences.

The findings set out thus lead us to some hypotheses about the genesis of many philosophical problems and the nature of philosophers’ work on them: Philosophical pictures fuel autonomous habits of thought; under their spell we concoct and espouse philosophical delusions (absurd conclusions of non-intentional reasoning which we cannot help relying upon in further reflection, whether we want to or not). The conflict of such delusions with reality, or with each other, has us imagine problems where there are none. In response, philosophers typically devise theories shaped by the same pictures and habits that had them raise the ‘problems’. The result is a set of arguments, doctrines, problems and theories, which are unsound or unwarranted by their authors’ own lights, since they rely, ultimately, on presuppositions the thinkers explicitly reject. Where philosophers struggle with philosophical pictures without understanding their predicament, they attack imaginary problems with theories fired by the same imagination. Absorbed in a quixotic quest brilliant men ride against windmills on asses mistaken for chargers. Understanding our predicament is the first, and decisive, step towards a more productive response to problems which, though imaginary, are among the most long-lived and puzzling of our subject.





3. THE VINDICATION OF THERAPEUTIC PHILOSOPHY




This book will provide support for these hypotheses and explore their implications for philosophical work and method. A caricature of our subject’s development may help to place this effort into perspective. It is not entirely wrong to see philosophy in its present form as the result of a process through which scientific disciplines emerge from within the community of thinkers called ‘philosophers’. To the extent to which a range of notions and concepts, methods and techniques for formulating and addressing problems of a particular kind come to be developed and generally accepted by a certain number of such thinkers, a community of specialists emerges, and with the new scientific community often a new discipline is born: from geometry as philosophy’s arguably first off-spring, to psychology and linguistics as its latest. We have no reason to believe that this process has now come to an end, nor that it has left the subject of philosophy at this stage with one homogeneous class of problems, all of one and the same kind. There is, in other words, no reason to believe that it makes much sense to make sweeping assertions about ‘the nature and genesis of philosophical problems’. Accordingly, the present book is part of an effort to develop new notions and methods to understand and treat one class of such problems, which come to be formulated in one particular way: through non-intentional analogical reasoning of the kind we cannot help engaging in when we are under the spell of philosophical pictures.

Where philosophical pictures engender philosophical problems in the way outlined, at least the most basic ideas of a new approach to the problems are dictated by plain common sense: Instead of struggling to reconcile facts with delusions, we should try to liberate ourselves from these delusions and the problems they conjure up. Instead of rushing to ‘honour’ the claims to which we leap under the spell of philosophical pictures and then find intuitively compelling in the absence of warrant, we ought to establish carefully what warrant we can obtain for maintaining them. Where we cannot obtain any, we ought to give up the claim and abandon the ‘problems’ it created. The proper response to such an ill-motivated ‘problem’ resembles the atheist’s response to the problem of theodicy: ‘Since there is no reason to believe that there is a good, omniscient and omnipotent God (or any kind of Deity, for that matter), there is no reason to agonise over the question: Why is there so much suffering on Earth even though it is ultimately governed by a good, omniscient and omnipotent Deity?’ In other words, the proper response to an ill-motivated philosophical ‘problem’ is to show that it is ill-motivated: that it is raised only by a certain philosophical assumption and that this assumption is unwarranted (or worse). Such a demonstration resolves the problem precisely by showing that we ought not to answer the question that articulates it.

Many good questions about the reasons for human suffering remain for the atheist who has rejected the problem of theodicy: Why is there so much suffering in the world? Which psychological, economic, political and natural processes contribute to it, and in what ways? Similarly, many real questions may remain for us once we have rejected the claim that raises a particular philosophical problem: Once we have seen that we lack all warrant for the sense-datum doctrine of perception, we will no longer wonder ‘How is it possible for us to perceive physical objects, even though we can immediately perceive only immaterial sense-data?’ But there will still be plenty of good questions for us to pursue about the possibility of sense-perception: What conditions facilitate, and what conditions inhibit sense-perception? Which bits and structures of the brain facilitate perception of physical objects in the environment? How do human beings learn to recognise physical objects? Etc. We will, however, have got rid of one particularly maddening and peculiarly philosophical question, and be left in its stead mainly with questions which have come to be addressed—also or only—by other disciplines than philosophy (which arguably also deals with other kinds of problems which do not disappear in this way).

Establishing that a problem is ill-motivated is one thing; getting others or oneself to actually give up its pursuit may be another. Atheists’ critical arguments have done little to shake religious beliefs of the kind that raise the problem of theodicy. In a similar manner, if for different reasons, the claims we espouse under the spell of philosophical pictures will continue to strike us as intuitively compelling even once philosophical analysis has established that we have no warrant for them: After all, those claims are rendered compelling by non-intentional inferences and autonomous cognitive processes which are not under our direct control. Indeed, where non-intentional analogical reasoning is accompanied by belief-bias effects which have us interpret everything in the light of what we find intuitively compelling, and presuppose it in further reasoning, these claims may be maintained as a matter of delusion, and our belief in them will be unresponsive to direct challenges of the unsound evidence or arguments on which they are based. And as long as we maintain these claims, or even just find them intuitively compelling, we cannot give up pursuit of the problems raised by them without the disquieting impression of puzzling problems evaded rather than resolved. Thus it seems that some kind of ‘therapy’ needs to complement philosophical criticism: To enable us to actually abandon what we have seen reason to reject, without misplaced feelings of regret and worry, we need a kind of ‘therapy’ which enables us to shed our philosophical delusions and to distance ourselves from ideas that strike us as intuitively compelling even once we have seen them to be unwarranted.

Philosophers frequently think of therapy ‘in the usual sense’ as necessarily opposed to argument and assume that the use of non-argumentative methods must set therapeutic intervention apart from rational discourse.15 But this is not so. Even exemplary psychotherapies like cognitive therapy16 and rational emotive therapy17 for depression crucially involve argument and the assessment of evidence (to establish, for instance, whether the depressed patient really is as utterly inept as he thinks). Therapy may proceed by argument; therapeutic dialogue may be a form of rational discourse. What sets cognitive and rational therapy apart from other forms of rational discourse are not the (merely supposedly non-argumentative) means employed, but the ends pursued and the problems addressed—which are, anyway, the only things that the very different forms of psychotherapy have in common: Such therapy seeks, first and foremost, to change certain feelings or behaviours and addresses ‘emotional’ and ‘behavioural problems’ associated with illness or disease. Such therapy seeks, e.g., to remove unwarranted and disabling, distressing or disquieting emotions associated with depression.

In his Big Typescript, Wittgenstein repeatedly discusses the ‘disquiet’, ‘uneasiness’ and ‘unrest’ that intellectual problems can cause a thinker and evidently caused him.18 He explicitly adopts the removal of such feelings of intellectual disquiet as his paramount goal.19 At first sight, this is deeply puzzling (to put it politely): Of course philosophical like other intellectual problems may give us sleepless nights when we work on them intensely.20 But surely a philosopher’s most important task is to solve that problem— rather than to liberate himself from whatever feelings he may personally have about it. And even if we wished to attend to such feelings, their removal need not be explicitly advertised as a distinct goal: Even when an intellectual problem gives us sleepless nights, we automatically stop worrying about it, the moment we know its solution or resolution—and serious thinkers will only stop worrying about it the moment they have acquired such knowledge.

All this changes when, and only when, the worrying problems at issue are engendered by autonomous cognitive processes which are unsound. We have already seen that when the intuitively compelling conclusions of non-intentional inferences raise an ill-motivated problem, we will only stop worrying about the problem once we have not merely shown that the problem is ill-motivated but done something more to distance ourselves from the intuitively compelling claims that raise it. But there is also a more fundamental upshot. When a child is afraid that monsters might come in at night, we face a merely imaginary security problem; the only genuine problem we face and need to solve is the ‘emotional problem’ that consists in the child’s unwarranted feelings of fear. When unsound non-intentional inferences sweep us along, settle us with paradoxical delusions, and thus make us imagine and worry about problems where there are none (‘philosophical monsters’, as it were), the only genuine—rather than imaginary— problems we face and need to solve are the ‘emotional problem’ constituted by our unwarranted feelings of disquiet and the ‘behavioural problem’ that is constituted by the fact that we are wasting our time on ill-motivated questions we would rightly ignore if we were not under the spell of the pertinent philosophical pictures. When this happens, it is reasonable to explicitly adopt the aim of resolving emotional or behavioural problems as one’s paramount goal. Of course few philosophers are as acutely disquieted as Wittgenstein by the problems they are working on. For the solid majority, the ‘behavioural’ problems take precedence over the ‘emotional’ problems: We need to liberate ourselves, first and foremost, from the urge to engage in efforts we would rightly reject as pointless if we were not under the spell of a philosophical picture.

After discovering the existence of philosophical delusions, I went out of my way to stress that such delusions need not constitute symptoms of any disease. I did so, basically, for fear of arguing myself completely out of the job market and because the suggestion that the work—as opposed to the private life—of philosophers like A.J. Ayer might evidence any kind of non-somatic disease struck me as plainly incredible. It struck me thus prior to careful reflection which self-censorship had prevented. Years later, at a conference on philosophy as therapy (Liverpool, June 2008), I found myself surrounded by talk of philosophy as a cure for intellectual pathologies and, having obtained a permanent position in the meantime, without an excuse for not seriously exploring the notion. It quickly emerged that the autonomous cognitive processes I had reconstructed qualify as ‘pathological processes’, in a perfectly standard sense of the term, and that being under the spell of a philosophical picture meets a common job specification for ‘pathological conditions’. Being under the spell of a philosophical picture is constitutive of a ‘disease of the understanding’, a kind of intellectual altitude sickness that can befall any of us when we try to scale the heights of abstract reflection with undue haste and without due precautions (Chapter 6). When reasoning driven by philosophical pictures engenders unwarranted philosophical disquiet or pointless efforts to answer ill-motivated questions, we are hence dealing with problems of the kind addressed by non-somatic therapy: emotional and behavioural problems associated with some illness or disease. The discovery of philosophical pictures and their effects thus vindicates the project of therapy in philosophy which pursues the kind of aims and addresses the kind of problems that are characteristic of non-somatic therapy.

It also facilitates the development of new methods to do the job. To put an end to worries and pointless efforts engendered by ill-motivated problems we need to weaken the delusions that give rise to those problems. By definition, delusional beliefs are unresponsive to criticism of the evidence or arguments on which they are based. They were therefore regarded as unsuitable targets for cognitive or rational therapies until, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, cognitive behavioural therapists started to develop more indirect approaches. 21 The core idea was to give the patient insight into the largely autonomous cognitive and psychological processes that have him form and maintain delusional beliefs. Once a variety of behavioural exercises has weakened the psychological motivations that underlie the pertinent delusions, the subject then becomes increasingly able to question these beliefs, follow up the hypothesis that they may be due to the unsound processes discussed with him, and understand the beliefs in question as the results of autonomous cognitive and psychological processes which have overpowered him. The insight into the nature and ways of his pertinent thinking enables him to distance himself from its deliverances, in word, thought and deed.

I submit that philosophical, unlike paranoid or other psychotic delusions are typically formed and maintained due to purely cognitive processes and that further psychological motivation is not essential to them. Where such a motivation is absent, we can significantly weaken our delusions by coming to understand how we come to form and maintain them. This book’s account of how philosophical pictures shape philosophical reflection lets us understand just that: It lets us understand how competent thinkers can come to form and maintain philosophical delusions through non-intentional and automatic reasoning. This will help us to develop fresh methods for overcoming the problems thus raised, namely by coming to understand their nature and genesis (Chapter 7). We will find that to deal successfully with such problems is indeed ‘not a matter of pronouncing new truths about the subject of the investigation’ (as Wittgenstein put it). 22 But neither is it merely a matter of reminding oneself of familiar facts about the subject of the investigation (the mind, perception, understanding, etc.). Rather, it turns on acquiring a better understanding of the way we think about the subject of the philosophical investigation when engaged in such investigation. It turns on acquiring new or improved self-knowledge. The key to successful therapy in philosophy is improved self-understanding, namely such self-understanding as we may obtain through a novel epistemology of the subject, which takes into account autonomous cognitive processes and is informed by findings and concepts from various branches of cognitive science.





4. OBJECTIVES, STRATEGY AND STRUCTURE




According to standard explanations of the notion, a procedure qualifies as ‘therapeutic’ to the extent to which it is designed to cure illness or relieve the symptoms of disease.23 In the conditions addressed by exemplary psychotherapies, the symptoms at issue take the shape of emotional or behavioural problems.24 An activity is ‘therapeutic’ in the same sense as exemplary psychotherapies to the extent to which it is aimed at solving emotional or behavioural problems associated with processes or conditions we can describe as ‘pathological’, as ‘disease’ or ‘illness’.

In different ways, the ancient Stoics, Epicureans and Pyrrhonists made efforts to solve emotional problems which arise in everyday life and may be encountered by philosophers and non-philosophers alike; e.g., they sought to relieve disabling anxiety in the face of the uncertainties of life.25 Some of the philosophical counselling practiced today addresses similar emotional as well as behavioural problems, which are encountered prior to or independently of philosophical reflection. 26 I propose to say that philosophical efforts addressing such problems are constitutive of ‘philosophical therapy’. Wittgenstein and Austin, by contrast, pioneered efforts aimed at putting an end to intellectual disquiet and pointless efforts engendered by—and only by—philosophical reflection. Such efforts, to solve emotional and behavioural problems that arise in and through philosophical reflection, are constitutive of ‘therapeutic philosophy’. 27

This book is about therapeutic philosophy. It does not seek to give an overview over the various philosophical efforts that can aptly be described as ‘therapeutic’, in one sense or the other.28 Indeed, it is not even intended, primarily, as a contribution to the exegetical debates surrounding extant efforts in therapeutic philosophy, such as the work of the two pioneers mentioned. 29 Rather, this book deploys concepts and insights not yet available to earlier philosophers, with the main aim of providing fresh foundations for the enterprise, and of refining and developing ways of engaging in it: On the basis of a new account of philosophical reflection, inspired by Wittgenstein and informed by more recent cognitive science, this book will explain where and why therapeutic philosophy is called for, and develop methods for such therapy in philosophy—not the kind of set routines capable of mechanical execution that many philosophers intuitively associate with the term “method”, but structured yet flexible techniques of the kind used in cognitive therapy.

The term “therapy” implies that there is a disease or illness to be cured (namely, by the therapy). This implication cannot be cancelled simply by saying that the term is being used in a metaphorical sense: As we shall see (in Chapter 1), metaphorical extensions of established terms escape vacuity by preserving their core inferential relations to other terms. So, even if we use the term “therapy” metaphorically, it has to imply that there is some ‘disease’ or ‘illness’, in either a literal or a metaphorical sense, which is to be ‘cured’ (literally or metaphorically). To give a substantive rather than vacuous explanation of why therapeutic philosophy is called for, we must therefore (i) identify—literal or metaphorical—‘diseases’ or ‘illnesses’ from which philosophers suffer and (ii) explain why these diseases or illnesses have to be cured, in order to resolve or overcome familiar, and preferably important, philosophical problems.

In contrast to Austin’s pertinent efforts, Wittgenstein’s work has frequently been characterised as in some sense ‘therapeutic’. Indeed, a growing body of interpretations describe this work as ‘therapeutic’ in a sense that claims more than that it is ‘non-theoretical’ or ‘confessional’. While leading to ever more intriguing suggestions and provocative fresh ideas, this body of work has, however, not yet yielded a substantive explanation of what therapeutic philosophy is and why it is called for. Most of these interpretations develop in some way the theme that therapy is necessary ‘to help us work ourselves out of confusions we become entangled in when philosophising’.30 But they do not proceed to identify any ‘disease’ or ‘illness’: Either they do not identify processes that systematically engender, or conditions that systematically involve such confusions; or they fail to explain why these processes or conditions qualify as ‘pathological’ and as some sort of ‘disease’ or ‘illness’. A less popular but more straightforwardly therapeutic tradition squarely takes Wittgenstein to address emotional problems, namely individual philosophers’ feelings of worry and puzzlement rather than the problems and puzzles they worry about; as Gordon Baker puts it, Wittgenstein addresses ‘individuals’ troubled states of mind which have as their intentional objects particular conceptual confusions, tensions, paradoxes, or puzzles.’31 But so far no processes systematically generating such emotional problems have been identified and shown to actually occur and be pathological.

By examining how philosophical pictures and autonomous cognitive processes shape philosophical reflection, we will fill this gap: We will identify processes of non-intentional and automatic reasoning which are particularly likely to occur under conditions frequently met in philosophical reflection, which systematically have us form and maintain philosophical delusions, and which thereby raise familiar and disquieting philosophical ‘problems’ that in turn occasion pointless theorising. We will find that these processes are constitutive of diseases of the understanding—and shape not all of philosophy but much philosophical reflection. On the basis of these findings, we will explain the need for therapeutic philosophy and develop methods to practice it.

The new account of philosophical reflection which will emerge employs subject-relative notions like warrant (you may have warrant for a claim for which I have none), delusion (a paranoid conspiracy-theorist may, by accident, hold as a delusion what someone privy to well-kept secrets suspects with good reason) or non-intentional reasoning (where one thinker may deliberately reason to a conclusion another non-intentionally infers). There is therefore only one way of establishing our account’s accuracy and scope with the requisite rigour: We need to conduct case-studies on individual thinkers, preferably influential thinkers whose work has shaped significant parts of modern philosophy.

The influence of philosophical pictures is easiest to spot and acknowledge in unfamiliar settings and reflections that are either shaped by pictures that no longer hold us captive today or are couched in concepts we no longer use. We shall therefore proceed from case-studies on two early modern thinkers belonging to the lastingly influential empiricist tradition, namely Locke (Chapter 3) and Berkeley (Chapters 4–5), before turning to two protagonists of 20th-century analytic philosophy. The first is the logical empiricist A.J. Ayer, who re-developed Berkeleyan ideas with more sophisticated tools (Chapter 6) and became the target of Austin’s therapeutic efforts (Chapter 8). The other is Ludwig Wittgenstein, who, in the course of efforts to ‘cure in himself’ diseases of the understanding, examined his own non-intentional reasoning in some detail and thus left us with exceptionally extensive and detailed evidence for such reasoning (Chapter 9). All these philosophers struggled with a propensity to unwittingly misapply the two major conceptual metaphors of the mental, namely perception- and manipulation-metaphors for intellectual activities and achievements. We will develop our meta-philosophical argument through case-studies on these four thinkers, which follow up how the misapplication of these metaphors led to problems in epistemology and metaphysics and the philosophies of mind and language, namely problems about the mind and the attributes of bodies, about sense-perception and about linguistic understanding.

The book develops this argument in three steps, in three parts. The first part analyses how philosophical pictures shape philosophical reflection. It identifies and examines an autonomous cognitive process which is unsound and particularly likely to occur in philosophical reflection: the overly literal application of conceptual metaphors, against better knowledge, in non-intentional analogical reasoning, which then permeates further reflection through belief-bias effects. The second part analyses how this process—nicknamed the ‘pictorial process’—generates philosophical delusions, whose conflict with further convictions, or each other, gives rise to illusory but maddening problems. This establishes the need for therapy in philosophy. The third part explores extant and fresh methods to meet this need and actually practice therapeutic philosophy.

Each part consists of three chapters. Chapter 1 develops the concept of ‘philosophical pictures’ with the help of concepts and findings from cognitive linguistics and psychology, and uncovers the ‘pictorial process’ through a case study on two intuitions at the heart of the modern conception of the mind that, in the 17th century, came to displace earlier Aristotelian notions. Chapter 2 shows that the pictorial process can account for a whole cluster of intuitions that shape the classical conception of the mind as a private and transparent realm of inner perception, and gave rise to classical mind-body problems. These problems can be dissolved—though not completely overcome—by coming to understand their nature and genesis. Once we have thus been provided with an incentive to analyse in detail how philosophical pictures shape philosophical reflection, Chapter 3 analyses Locke’s closely related accounts of secondary qualities and sense-perception, and systematically takes stock of the effects of picture-driven reasoning, which we shall find to shape two conceptual frameworks of early modern philosophy, some puzzling doctrines about primary and secondary qualities, and various arguments, problems and theories involving those doctrines. Philosophical pictures can shape philosophical reflection at several levels and from beginning (concept-formation) to end (the theories that are to solve the picture-raised problems that set the agenda).

The second part shifts the focus from philosophical intuitions and intuitive reasoning to carefully crafted philosophical argument and examines how the processes and effects analysed lead competent thinkers to form and maintain philosophical delusions. To do so, it follows up how those Lockean accounts evolved into the lastingly influential sense-datum doctrine of perception, and considers the first systematic defence of the doctrine, due to Berkeley, as well as its most sophisticated development, due to Ayer. Chapter 4 shows that Berkeley was under the spell of the same philosophical pictures as Locke and that these pictures shaped the very methods and strategies of argument he employed. Chapter 5 shows that all his arguments for the sense-datum doctrine, including those that became part of sense-datum theorists’ standard repertoire, presuppose what is at issue, that the unsupported and paradoxical doctrine is absurd, in a strict sense of the term, and that the pictorial process and its accompaniments systematically lead competent thinkers to espouse and maintain such absurdities. Proceeding from an analysis of Ayer’s redevelopment of the sense-datum doctrine, Chapter 6 shows that these absurdities qualify as delusions and that the pictorial process that systematically generates them qualifies as ‘disease’ and constitutes a kind of intellectual altitude sickness that is likely to befall us when we lose ourselves in abstract thought. When we are under the spell of philosophical pictures, we are liable to surround ourselves with delusions which have us imagine problems where there are none.

These findings vindicate and facilitate the adoption of therapeutic aims and the development of therapeutic methods, for much philosophical work. Chapter 7 points out reasons to believe that the struggle with philosophical pictures and their offspring is central, and still central, to philosophical work, explains when and why philosophers engaged in this struggle ought to adopt therapeutic aims, and shows that, when applied on a larger scale, the approach to picture-raised problems we have developed (starting in Chapter 2) is actually up to the challenge of liberating us from philosophical delusions by letting us understand our predicament: This approach lets us understand how picture-driven reasoning leads us not just to endorse the particular belief at issue but shapes all our philosophical thinking about the subject, directly and indirectly (through belief-bias effects). The next two chapters then, first, show that Austin and Wittgenstein adopted the therapeutic aims thus vindicated and, second, deploy some concepts derived from cognitive therapy to extract further therapeutic methods from those two extant models of therapeutic philosophy. Chapter 8 analyses and vindicates Austin’s response to Ayer, in Sense and Sensibilia, and spells out when and how ordinary language analysis can be employed as therapy in philosophy. Chapter 9 analyses Wittgenstein’s way into and out of the problem about sudden understanding that is at the centre of the investigations of understanding and reading in his later main work. The analysis shows that in his Philosophical Investigations Wittgenstein is practicing what he is preaching, and elicits a subtle method of self-therapy that anticipates some guiding ideas of later cognitive therapy. We can overcome the problems we imagine under the spell of philosophical pictures by exposing the autonomous habits of thought that fuel those flames of fancy.

In brief: By showing that, and analysing how, philosophical reflection is shaped by philosophical pictures and, more generally, by autonomous cognitive processes of which we are largely unaware, we will provide new foundations for therapeutic philosophy, which allow us to vindicate its aims and to develop pertinent methods. We thus arrive at a new vision of philosophy, which applies not to all of the subject but to an important part: Where it is a struggle with philosophical pictures and the delusions they engender, philosophy is best practised as a kind of therapy, guided by the findings and theories of a novel metaphilosophy—a novel epistemology of philosophy—in something like the way in which cognitive psychotherapy is guided by the findings and theories of different branches of psychology.





Part I

Philosophical Pictures





1 Philosophical Pictures


The Birth of ‘the Mind’




Pictures rather than propositions, metaphors rather than statements, determine most of our philosophical convictions. At any rate, they determine many of our most fundamental philosophical convictions. Philosophers alive to the power of pictures have tended to focus on metaphors deliberately employed and pictures actually endorsed by the philosophers guided by them, like the picture of the mind as a repository of images or as always the most sophisticated machinery of the day—a mechanical clock, a telephone exchange, a computer.1 In this book, by contrast, we shall develop and vindicate the idea that philosophical reflection may be systematically guided, and misled, by metaphors and analogies that philosophers are not aware of relying upon. This idea will prove the key to a new understanding of the nature and genesis of many philosophical problems, which vindicates a radical reorientation of philosophical work.

At least part of the core idea it is built on was first mooted by Ludwig Wittgenstein, in his Big Typescript and in contemporaneous sources: ‘We encounter [philosophical problems] only when we are guided not by practical purpose in forming our sentences, but by certain analogies within language’ (BT 427). Many a ‘false analogy’ has been ‘accepted into language’ (BT 409). They guide us without our being aware of this: ‘To use [psychoanalysis’] way of putting things . . . [such] a simile [is] at work in the unconscious’ (VW 69). Such a ‘false picture’, applied to cases where there is nothing analogous to its crucial feature, is frequently at the bottom of philosophical perplexity (BT 428). We can sum this up by coining the notion of ‘being under the spell of a philosophical picture’. In first approximation:

We are under the spell of a philosophical picture when our philosophical reflection is guided by certain analogies within language, without our being aware of being guided by them.



I would like to show that philosophers often are, in this sense, under the spell of philosophical pictures. This is not a philosophical claim which purports to answer a philosophical question. Rather, it is a meta-philosophical claim about how philosophers reason about the topics about which they raise philosophical questions and problems, and construct theories to solve them. This meta-philosophical claim amounts to a hypothesis about how actual people in flesh and blood actually reason when actually engaged in a particular kind of intellectual activity. In brief, it is an empirical hypothesis. We shall develop the concept of ‘philosophical pictures’ in such a way as to turn our claim into a respectable hypothesis, amenable to empirical confirmation and disconfirmation. In this chapter, we will marshal enough evidence to warrant the claim’s adoption as a working hypothesis. In the next chapter we will come to see that, and why, the further pursuit of this hypothesis promises to be philosophically most rewarding.

To turn our basic claim into a respectable hypothesis, we will develop the notion of a philosophical picture with the help of some concepts and results from cognitive linguistics and cognitive psychology, which are in fact consistent with various Wittgensteinian strictures but were not yet available to Wittgenstein (who had to make do with Freudian psychoanalysis as the most advanced psychology of his day). Those new concepts and results allow us, first, to identify the relevant ‘analogies within language’ and, second, to explain how these analogies guide us without our being aware of it (how they are ‘at work in the unconscious’). This will allow us to see that, and how, an experimentally documented cognitive process interlocks with an empirically documented linguistic process and shapes philosophical reflection: It serially generates philosophical intuitions which are unsound by the lights of the very thinkers who feel bound to honour them. The most salient conflicts between such intuitions and other convictions give rise to illusory but maddening problems.

These philosophical problems can be overcome by coming to understand their nature and genesis: not by finding out new truths about their subject (about the mind, perception, meaning, etc.), let alone by constructing new philosophical theories about that subject (theories of the mind, perception, meaning, etc.), but by gaining new meta-philosophical insight into the way we think about this subject and come to raise those problems, when engaged in philosophical reflection. To build up to the conclusions that motivate this new approach to—one important kind of—philosophical problem, we will reconstruct some of the philosophical intuitions which shaped the early modern conception of the mind and trace how these intuitions gave rise to classical mind-body problems which still worry us today.





1. CONCEPTUAL METAPHORS AND

STRUCTURAL ANALOGIES




Metaphor (from Greek “meta-pherein”, i.e., ‘to transfer’) is the transfer of terms initially applied to things of one sort (the elements of the source domain), to things of a different kind (the elements of the target domain). The transfer is typically motivated by an actual or assumed analogy between the former and the latter. In the simplest case, this is a ‘material analogy’, where the source and the target share one or more particular properties. We think, for instance, that lions are strong and courageous and lambs innocent and docile, and accordingly say that Achilles is a lion and the small child a lamb, in case we think that they share one or more of those properties with these animals. Thus we apply an animal-predicate “F” (“is a lion”, “lamb”, etc.) to a human being in case Fs are exemplary owners of some properties (strength, courage, etc.) and we wish to credit the man at issue with one or more of those properties. Some contexts may leave it quite open which of the potentially pertinent properties get attributed; other contexts suggest some before others; and sometimes convention has rendered the metaphorical application of the animal-term practically synonymous with the attribution of one particular property: We say, “Achilles is a lion”, meaning that he is courageous like a lion—and might as well just have said, “Achilles is courageous”. Focus on these simple and obvious cases led philosophers for centuries to disregard metaphor as a stylistic device relevant mainly in poetry and rhetoric.

Far more common and important, however, are the less simple and salient cases of metaphor which linguists started to study only about thirty years ago:2 Frequently, we do not merely transfer one single term, in virtue of a material analogy, but transfer a whole set of related terms, forging a structural analogy. Indeed, such metaphorical extension is one of the major processes driving the development of language:3 We tend to conceptualise unfamiliar or abstract matters in terms initially applied literally to concrete or familiar things or actions, whose use we extend metaphorically to abstract or new contexts. Thus the verb “to grasp” started its career in talk about physical actions (‘He grasped a stone to throw’) and was then put to new use in talk about intellectual achievements (‘He grasped the implications of the claim’).4 For English, such metaphorical extension is well documented for a wide range of abstract domains of discourse, including talk about argument, communication, emotions, intellectual activity and economic development.5 A debate rages in cognitive linguistics about whether such extension occurs in all natural languages. But it is safe to say that it occurs in very many languages, often with comparatively slight differences between languages which are otherwise very different. For example, English and many Australian Aboriginal languages alike recruit a host of perception-terms for talk about intellectual activities and achievements; but where English employs terms for visual perception, most Aboriginal languages employ terms for auditory perception—where the Englishman ‘sees’ a point or implication, the Aborigine ‘hears’ it.6 Metaphorical extension is the single most important process whereby languages become equipped to deal with the abstract. Much of the ‘mental vocabulary’ of the major languages of philosophy (English and German, Latin and Ancient Greek) is recruited in this way from the domains of grasping and seeing, manipulation and perception.7

Typically, metaphorical extension is wholesale: The use of a whole set of related terms is extended from the initial (‘source’) domain to a new (‘target’) domain. Consider, for example, the plethora of perception-related terms recruited for talk about the intellectual accomplishment of understanding actions:

It is clear or obscure to me why you did what you did, according to whether or not I manage to see any reasons for acting that way. I may look for reasons where these are hidden or be blind to reasons that are in plain view. An illuminating explanation which throws new light on your action will let me see reasons I had previously overlooked, and thus get a fuller picture of these reasons, or at least let me catch some glimpse of them, where I was previously completely in the dark. For instance, a fresh look at the situation to which you responded may reveal threats in whose light your action no longer looks as out of character as it did at first sight. Those brighter than others will find it easier to make out such reasons, and point them out to those dim-wits who need to have the reasons shown to them. Now that his account has opened my eyes and lets me see your true reasons, I finally see your action in the right light. To see it aright, I had to look at it from another perspective.





More generally, terms initially applied in talk about visual search came to be employed, wholesale, in talk about goal-directed intellectual efforts: efforts to solve problems, answer questions, explain facts, events or actions, etc.

Metaphorical uses of words are commonly thought to involve poetic creativity or license (if only at the point of their inception). However, at any rate the wholesale extension now at issue involves more logical rigour than poetic license and a rather fettered sort of creativity. It is systematic almost to the point of being boring (or beautiful, depending upon your perspective). It derives metaphorical senses for ever more expressions from a basic mapping which maps an element (object, property or relation) of the source domain (here: visual search) onto an element of the target domain (here: intellectual effort). In the present source domain, the principal achievement is that of finding, which takes the shape of seeing what one is looking for. The principal achievements in the target domain are those of knowing and understanding. To understand something is to know its reasons or causes or whatever explains it. Seeing and knowing therefore are the most basic elements of the respective domains. The ‘basic mapping’ links them:





(1) S sees x → S knows x





Further mappings can be obtained by simple logical and modal operations. By replacing “sees” by “knows” in otherwise topic-neutral sentence-frames (‘base extension’), we obtain:





(2) S does not see x → S does not know x

(3) It is possible (for S) to see x, i.e., x is visible (for S)→ It is possible (for S) to know x

(4) It is not possible (for S) to see x, i.e., x is invisible (for S) → It is not possible (for S) to know x

(5) X makes it possible (for S) to see y, i.e., x makes y visible (for S) → X makes it possible (for S) to know y

(6) X makes it impossible (for S) to see y, i.e., x makes y invisible (to S) → X makes it impossible (for S) to know y

(7) S tries to get to see x, i.e., S looks for x → S tries to get to know x





The terms on both sides can also be adverbially qualified, as in:





(3’) It is easily possible (for S) to see x, i.e., x is readily visible (for S) → It is easily possible (for S) to know x



In cognitive linguistics, such mappings of several related ‘models’ (to the left of the arrows) onto several related ‘targets’ (to the right of the arrows) are called ‘conceptual metaphors’. For example, lines (1) to (7) and their progeny (like 3’ above or 8 below), constitute the conceptual metaphor ‘Intellectual Effort as Visual Search’.

Inferences known as metaphorical entailments8 seize on familiar facts about the source domain and on such mappings. Their conclusions yield further mappings which extend the conceptual metaphor, or new metaphorical senses which are ‘motivated’ by those mappings and ‘realise’ that metaphor. The source-domain facts can be either empirical or conceptual (consequences of definitions or explanations of meaning). For example: Until the mid-19th century, the adjective “evident” was literally used to mean ‘distinctly visible, conspicuous’. This explanation and mapping (3’)—treated as an implication—jointly entail a conclusion that introduces a still familiar metaphorical sense of this term:





If x is evident, then x is distinctly/easily visible.

If x is easily visible, it is easily knowable.

If x is evident, then x is easily knowable.



Or take the trivial empirical fact that when things are bright and shining they are (by and large) readily visible. Together with the same mapping, this yields the metaphorical sense of the adjective “clear”, applied until the mid-19th century to physical objects which are bright or shining (‘teeth as clear as ivory’):9 If a fact or cause, reason or consequence is clear, it is easily knowable (and if statements or explanations are clear, they are easy to understand, i.e. their meaning or content is easy to get to know).

Through such entailments, the same mapping may motivate the extension of several related terms. In early modern English, the term “obvious” was literally used to mean ‘situated in the way, positioned in front of or opposite to, facing’. When things are situated right in our way, they are readily visible. This trivial fact about the source domain and mapping (3’) jointly allow us to say that facts etc. that are easily knowable and ‘perfectly clear and manifest, such as common sense might suggest’ are obvious—a metaphorical use established since the mid-17th century:





If x is obvious (stands right in our way), then x is well visible.

If x is well visible, then x is easily knowable.

If x is obvious, then x is easily knowable.



In the same way, mapping (5) above facilitates several metaphorical entailments which seize on several different trivial facts about how things can be made visible, and thus motivate talk of people, investigations or explanations ‘exposing’, ‘unearthing’, ‘revealing’, ‘illuminating’ or ‘opening our eyes to’ reasons or causes, facts or events—whatever we try to get to know or understand:





If x sheds light on y, then x makes y visible (in the dark).

If x makes y visible (in any way), then x makes it easy to get to know y.

If x sheds light on y, then x makes it easy to get to know y.



In the same way, again, we can seize on mapping (6) and the truism that things are hard or impossible to see in the dark, to extend the verbs “obscure” and “obfuscate” with their related adjectives from their literal meanings ‘to make dark, to deprive of light or brightness’ and ‘to cast into darkness or shadow’, respectively, to the metaphorical senses we employ when criticising speakers for obscuring facts or implications with obfuscatory rhetoric which makes it hard to grow aware of those facts or implications.

To recruit a source-domain expression for use in the target domain, these simple metaphorical entailments each seize on one implication of the expression, which also serves as, or falls under, the antecedent of an extant mapping. Further mappings can be obtained by exploiting more than one implication (where available): If S ‘overlooks’ x, for instance, then (i) S does not see x, even though (ii) x is visible (from the position of S). (i) and (ii) are the antecedents of mappings (2) and (3), respectively. Those relations get mapped onto ‘S does not know x’ and ‘it is possible (for S) to know x’, respectively. A more complex metaphorical entailment thus yields the new mapping:





(8) S overlooks x → S doesn’t know x, though it is possible for him to know x



This mapping motivates saying that people ‘overlook’ implications, hints, points, risks, etc. they are in a position to, but fail to, appreciate. Another complex entailment lets us say that some people deliberately fail to notice what others may inadvertently overlook: When you deliberately close your eyes in front of something, you do not see that thing, even though it is visible, and do not want to see it. Our first three mappings take us to a conclusion that forges another new mapping





(9) S closes his eyes to x → S does not know x, even though he is in a position to get to know x, because he does not want to get to know x.



Accordingly, we say that people are prone to ‘close their eyes’ to inconvenient truths.

Base extension and metaphorical entailments preserve inferential relations between the terms extended. Regardless of whether we are talking about a sparrow on the roof or the implication of a hypothesis, that I ‘overlook’ it implies both that it is more or less ‘evident’ and that I fail to ‘see’ it even so, and that I ‘point it out’ to you implies that I ‘see’ it myself. In addition to inferential relations which are, like these, forged by semantic entailments, also relations forged by defeasible common-sense inferences get preserved: When a box is standing right in our way (i.e., is literally obvious), it will be easily visible—except of course if it is dark. This relation is preserved in the target domain, in which analogous defeasibility conditions obtain: An obvious implication is easy to see or discern—though not when it is obscured by obfuscating rhetoric. In this way, a multitude of implications, including subtle nuances of use, get preserved as the term gets extended from the source- to the target-domain. (Compare the different implications of “His remarks let me catch a glimpse of his intentions” and “His remarks made his intentions obvious.”)

This preservation of inferential relations between terms and, thereby, of relations between the domain-elements they stand for forges a structural analogy between source domain and target domain:

A is structurally analogous to B iff a set of elements of A can be mapped onto a set of elements of B, which stand in some of the same relations to each other.





The process of metaphorical extension systematically forges extensive structural analogies between perceptual activities and achievements and various intellectual activities and achievements including knowledge and understanding. More generally, the process systematically forges extensive structural analogies between simple concrete models and usually more abstract targets.

This is a sufficient condition for metaphor. We typically recognise the use of an expression as ‘metaphorical’ the moment we recognise such a structural analogy. To take a simple but compelling example, you will regard talk of ‘table-legs’ as just another literal use of the word “leg”—until you get to know that in German the bottom-ends of the legs are called the ‘feet’ of the table and someone suggests calling the top of the table that ‘stands’ on those legs its ‘back’ and the underside its ‘belly’. The proposal preserves the spatial relations that obtain between the legs, feet, backs and bellies of broad-backed four-legged animals like bears or cows. The moment you recognise the structural analogy between these animals and your kitchen-table, you will recognise talk of the latter’s ‘legs’ as metaphorical (at least when it is part of the proposed idiom). This allows us to link the cognitive linguists’ theoretical notion and our everyday recognition of metaphor:

A conceptual metaphor is a mapping of elements from a source- to a target-domain which preserves relations between the mapped elements (and thus forges a structural analogy).



The use of an expression is metaphorical if the expression is being applied to an element of an abstract or unfamiliar target domain on which a conceptual metaphor maps an element of a concrete or familiar source domain, to which the expression is or was applied as well.



Conceptual metaphors systematically forge structural analogies between simple concrete models and abstract targets which are frequently the object of philosophical reflection. To the extent to which those metaphors are ‘linguistically realised’, i.e., ‘motivate’ actual metaphorical uses of terms in the way outlined, these analogies can be said to have been ‘accepted’ or built ‘into language’. They do not quite fit Wittgenstein’s description of the ‘analogies within language’ that he takes to guide philosophical reflection: These structural analogies are not ‘false’ but do actually obtain. However, as we shall see, the moment we engage in philosophical reflection, we are prone to unwittingly but systematically mishandle such analogies, in what cognitive psychologists call ‘non-intentional analogical reasoning’, where they can be said to be ‘at work in the unconscious’.





2. NON-INTENTIONAL REASONING

AND PHILOSOPHICAL PICTURES




Much of our reasoning is analogical in nature; indeed, analogical inference is the motor of intellectual creativity, scientific and more mundane. We take some things to be analogous to others with a similar structure, and infer from the fact that something holds true of these models that it also holds true of those other things. Sometimes we do this deliberately and carefully. We will then consider the models and the things they are models of, known as their ‘targets’, will establish that models and targets share certain structural or relational properties, will infer the hypothesis that the targets might also share certain other, related properties of the model, and will finally test this hypothesis by further study of the targets at issue.10 At the other extreme, we may spontaneously and unthinkingly assimilate some things to others that are structurally similar to them, without being aware of using the latter as a model: We may unwittingly project further features of the models onto targets structurally similar to them. Since, by and large, we find it intuitively compelling to assimilate things in this way to the models we are not aware of employing, such non-intentional analogical reasoning may decisively shape or pre-structure our thoughts.

At present, such reasoning is only beginning to be studied in cognitive psychology. The pertinent work is emerging from a line of research into the role of analogy in text comprehension and interpretation.11 In the most pertinent experiments subjects were given a set of short stories to read and were later asked some questions about their content. Among ‘filler’ texts, each set included a pair of structurally similar stories (e.g. one story about the expeditions and findings of a zoologist and one about those of a marine biologist), where one text gave specific information at a point where the other remained vague or ambiguous (where the story about the zoologist relates a particular finding, the story about the marine biologist speaks only of an unspecified ‘discovery’). All subjects were given the same vague story, but different subjects were given different versions of the more detailed story (where in one version the zoologist discovers a new species, in another he discovers a new form of physical deformity). The experimenters wanted to find out whether subjects would fill in detail or disambiguate the crucial statements in the vague story by analogy to the more precise story they had read previously and, if so, whether they were aware of using the more precise story as a model. To find out, they asked subjects, after a ‘filler’ task, to indicate which of several statements in a list had been part of the stories they had read. The list’s key items were statements obtained by disambiguating or embellishing the crucial statements in the vague story, namely by analogy to the corresponding statements in the structurally similar model (such as, e.g., the statement that the marine biologist discovered a new species). In 72.5% of the choices concerning such key items, they were misattributed to the vague target story, compared with 25% misattributions otherwise. When subsequently asked whether they had found all stories completely intelligible on their own or had occasionally found themselves referring to earlier stories to make sense of later ones, 80% of subjects replied all stories were completely intelligible on their own. The experimenters concluded that subjects had employed the more precise story as a model in interpreting the vaguer target story, without realising they had done so. Reading speed measures were consistent with the assumption that the projection of properties from the model to the target occurred upon first reading rather than upon memory recall.

In more general terms, the conclusion is that people may unwittingly use or treat a structurally analogous object (here: a more detailed story with the same structure) as a model and spontaneously leap from the observation that it has a certain feature (here: that it relates the discovery of, say, a new species) to the conclusion that the target (here: a vaguer story) has the feature as well, while unaware of invoking any model or relying on any analogy. More generally, these experiments establish the occurrence of ‘non-intentional analogical inferences’:

A thinker makes a non-intentional analogical inference iff he spontaneously makes an inference that presupposes that some thing (the target) is in some respect like a structurally analogous other thing (the model), while unaware of presupposing this or invoking any model.





Crucially, such inferences are made irrespective of whether or not the subject’s beliefs and other propositional attitudes are consistent with the conclusion inferred.12

The participants in the experiments were not set any specific goal prior to reading, but were simply given passages ‘to read and remember’. Presumably, analogical inferences are more likely to be made non-intentionally when we are not engrossed in deliberate goal-oriented reflection. Second, the participants non-intentionally used a more detailed story or more fully known model to interpret a less detailed story or less fully known target. Presumably, the lack of knowledge of detail or context is what has us unwittingly fall back on pertinent models. Third, the participants seized in each case on a single structurally similar story, which was previously unfamiliar to them: an ‘ad hoc model’ seized upon when proffered. As likely as not, the propensity to spontaneously make analogical inferences is even stronger when the object of interest is structurally analogous to a suitably simple and already well familiar model, and extends to cases where such a model is not proffered but suggested by some salient cue. These three considerations take us to a hypothesis about when non-intentional analogical reasoning is likely to occur: Thinkers are prone to make non-intentional analogical inferences when (1) they pursue no specific goal, (2) they lack knowledge of relevant detail or context and (3) a structurally similar familiar model is available and suggested to them.

These conditions are frequently met in philosophical reflection: Frequently, philosophical reflection is not directed towards any specific goal. Often, it involves swift generalisation or general reasoning without detailed reference to specific examples, and is couched in technical terms defined without any such reference; this easily leaves thinkers adrift without much awareness of actually relevant detail or context. Third, we have just seen that conceptual metaphors forge structural analogies between concrete or publicly observable phenomena (objects, activities, achievements, etc.) which are familiar, and many more abstract phenomena which are common topics of philosophical reflection. Where these conditions are met it is reasonable to explore the hypothesis that philosophers thinking about such abstract phenomena unwittingly treat the source-domains of conceptual metaphors as models for their target domains, and spontaneously project properties of the former onto the latter.

Since conceptual metaphors preserve inferential relations, we can draw some of the same inferences from metaphorical talk as from literal uses of the pertinent expressions. If I failed to see an implication that was obvious, staring right in my face, I must have deliberately closed my eyes to it (unless I was momentarily blind). When I have closed my eyes to the problem, I failed to see it—and could not have pointed it out to you. Etc. But while competent speakers need not be able to classify this talk correctly as metaphorical and may take it to involve literal non-perceptual senses of the pertinent terms, they can readily identify fallacies which arise from mixing literal with what are actually metaphorical uses of those terms. In everyday contexts, we immediately see through fallacies of equivocation like: ‘I can see everything inside this room. But I cannot see any solution to this problem. Therefore the solution, if one exists, must be outside this room.’ Or: ‘My eyes work well; I just passed an eye-test. But I could not see the obvious implication of your statement. Therefore the eye-test must have tested other eyes than those with which I ought to have seen the implication that was right in front of my nose.’ Since we ordinarily see through such fallacies immediately, there is nothing inherently misleading about these well-established metaphorical uses of terms.

But even when metaphorical expressions do not mislead us, we may systematically make and countenance inferences which are just as bad, in non-intentional analogical reasoning. That we spontaneously make an inference which presupposes that the target is in some respect like the model, while unaware of presupposing this, implies that we may presuppose that the two are alike in ways in which we do not want to assimilate them, including ways in which we know the two to be different. For example, a thinker may unwittingly presuppose that ‘seeing’ implications is like seeing keys also in that it literally involves an object perceived somewhere, at some location, or in that it literally involves the use of an organ of sense. Non-intentional analogical reasoning may materialise in the shape of leaps of thought with presuppositions like:





(K) To know something is to perceive some thing that is literally located at some place, literally with an organ of sense.



Leaps of thought which rely on such presuppositions will of course be inconsistent with many of his other convictions and knowledge, conceptual and other. But since non-intentional analogical inferences are made irrespective of whether or not their conclusions are consistent with the subjects’ other beliefs and attitudes, thinkers may find even paradoxical conclusions intuitively compelling.

As we shall see, such leaps are made by philosophers who know full well that when applied to these intellectual achievements and activities, perception-terms are not used literally and do not have these literal implications. Later (in Chapters 4–5), we will follow up the way in which leaps with presuppositions like (K) drive the reflections of Berkeley, who acutely observes:

Nothing [is] more usual, than for philosophers to speak of . . . things existing in the mind. Nor is there anything in this, but what is conformable to the general analogy of language; most part of the mental operations being signified by words borrowed from sensible things; as is plain in the terms comprehend, reflect, discourse, etc. which being applied to the mind, must not be taken in their gross original sense. (3D 250)





I propose to use the notion of ‘being under the spell of a philosophical picture’ to capture this phenomenon, this kind of unsound inference which we may make again and again against our better knowledge, and which we are arguably particularly prone to make under conditions frequently occurring in philosophical reflection:

A thinker is under the spell of, or adheres to, a philosophical picture iff he systematically makes non-intentional analogical inferences which assimilate targets to models of a conceptual metaphor, in ways in which the thinker knows them to be different.



Let’s call such inferences ‘picture-driven’. Examples include leaps of thought which presuppose such obviously ‘false analogies’ as (K) above and (R) below. Let’s say that a thinker who unwittingly but systematically makes such leaps is in the grip of the perceptual picture of knowledge and the perceptual picture of reflection, respectively.

This notion of ‘philosophical pictures’ is very different from those previously linked to the project of a philosophical therapy. Thus the classical Wittgenstein commentary by Gordon Baker and Peter Hacker characterises a philosophical picture as a ‘proto-theory’ or set of claims which need not be explicitly stated but to which one is naturally led by widely shared propensities in philosophical thinking and which inform a wide range of philosophical theories.13 Our present notion, by contrast, does not refer to claims but to models, and serves to characterise not what we obtain due to certain cognitive propensities but these propensities themselves, namely the propensity to excessively assimilate certain targets to a certain model. This notion differs also from the one employed by more pronouncedly ‘therapeutic’ interpretations subsequently pioneered by Baker. There, a thinker is said to be under the spell of a philosophical picture in case he is in the grip of one of several equally valid ways of seeing things, without being aware or without acknowledging that he is; as a result, the thinker is free to adopt a new picture or carry on as before, once he has been made aware of the hold the picture has on him.14 And it makes no sense to try to refute the picture.15 Here, by contrast, the notion is used to characterise the propensity to make a certain kind of demonstrable mistake in non-intentional reasoning, which thinkers cannot help making against their better knowledge.16

Analogical inferences are never logically valid; they are always risky, and the conclusion is never guaranteed to be true when the premises are true. There is therefore no point in applying to such inferences the notion of ‘unsoundness’ that applies to deductive inferences and calling analogical inferences too ‘unsound’ in case they are logically invalid or proceed from false premises. But analogical inferences in which we unwittingly rely on supposed similarities between targets and models, which we know not to obtain, are unsound in a different—and stronger—sense: They proceed from a premise the thinker knows to be false. As a result, their conclusions are bound to be unwarranted by the lights of the thinker who infers them. Indeed, in addition to this epistemic, they are guaranteed to suffer from a semantic defect: Since such inferences project a feature of the model onto a target which does not share it, their immediate conclusions are guaranteed to be either false or meaningless.

For our purposes, it does not matter which of these—and other—explications captures more accurately what Wittgenstein meant by ‘philosophical pictures’ (and he may have had different things in mind in different works or passages). Rather, we need to find out whether the phenomenon we have characterised actually occurs, and matters, in philosophy. In the text-comprehension experiments we considered a moment ago, experimenters made available a pertinent model (a more detailed story), offered pertinent premises (the vaguer story), and checked whether the subjects leaped from them to a conclusion suggested by the model (the statement filling in detail by analogy). Instead of eliciting such leaps of thought (in controlled experiments or non-controlled surveys), we can study non-intentional analogical reasoning by analysing lines of thought which thinkers have already rehearsed, arguably under conditions facilitating such leaps, and laid down in philosophical texts. We can study non-intentional analogical reasoning in philosophy by analysing philosophical texts in which the results of such reasoning were set out in a polished shape that contains no inconsequential slips but preserves those lasting mistakes their authors were unable to see through.

Non-intentional analogical inferences lead to conclusions that the thinkers who make them are prone to find intuitively compelling. They may either proceed from stated assumptions or from premises not deemed worth stating (being either too trivial or too widely shared at the time). Where they proceed from stated assumptions, these inferences will show up in the text as gaps in the explicitly stated argument (argumentative gaps). Where they proceed from tacit premises they will typically materialise as philosophical intuitions. In the presently relevant sense,

Intuitions are non-perceptual judgements which thinkers (i) arrive at without being aware of making an inference, (ii) find intuitively compelling, and (iii) frequently maintain in the absence of argument (regarding them, perhaps, as sources of ‘intuitive insight’).





The attribution of non-intentional analogical inferences to thinkers unaware of making any analogical inference (or any substantive move whatever, for that matter) is then by inference to the best explanation: I propose to offer such attributions to explain philosophical intuitions and gaps in philosophical arguments, as set out in philosophical texts. Such attributions are part of accounts that explain why competent thinkers have certain—paradoxical—intuitions or go along with arguments that contain gaps that cannot be closed by invoking views they state elsewhere.

Psychological experiments establish that competent thinkers actually make non-intentional analogical inferences and do so under conditions which are frequently met in philosophical reflection. Empirical work in cognitive linguistics documents the actual occurrence of a linguistic process that systematically generates models of the kind thinkers unwittingly seize on in such inferences. To determine whether a particular philosopher actually makes non-intentional analogical inferences which employ models built into his language, we proceed in three steps: First, we identify pertinent explananda in his work: paradoxical intuitions and gaps in his argument which cannot be bridged convincingly by invoking any of his stated views. Second, we develop a cognitive reconstruction of those moves or intuitions, which is similar to a ‘rational reconstruction’ in that it explains how competent thinkers can or could come to make or have certain—alas unsound—moves or intuitions, namely as a result of cognitive processes for which there is independent experimental evidence and which demonstrably occur under conditions which are frequently met in philosophical reflection. We develop a cognitive reconstruction of the previously identified moves and intuitions, which shows how they could result from non-intentional analogical inferences (picture-driven inferences) and related phenomena to which we shall presently turn. Third, we need to show that this explanation of the pertinent moves and intuitions is superior to competing explanations, ideally refuting the latter. Where all three steps can be made, the conclusion that the thinker is under the spell of particular philosophical pictures and actually made the picture-driven inferences specified by the cognitive reconstruction is warranted as the best available explanation of why the thinker made the moves or had the intuitions at issue.

In the most interesting cases, we are dealing with paradoxical philosophical intuitions which many philosophers, perhaps entire generations of philosophers, regarded as too obviously true to merit argument—and therefore usually accepted in the absence of argument. In this chapter, we shall develop a cognitive reconstruction of a cluster of such intuitions and will refute the two most important alternative explanations, to support the hypothesis that those influential intuitions are actually due to the picture-driven inferences we shall reconstruct. Such reconstructions of unsound non-intentional inferences are easiest to grasp and accept where we share the intuitions at issue in part but not completely. In this and the next chapter, we shall therefore reconstruct a cluster of intuitions which initially shaped the modern concept of the mind that, in the 17th century, displaced earlier notions of Aristotelian provenance. In later chapters, we shall demonstrate the application of the new approach to particular thinkers, and will engage in increasingly detailed exegetical analysis of the works of two early modern philosophers, Locke and Berkeley, to develop cognitive reconstructions that explain some paradoxical claims and striking gaps in their arguments, which have puzzled commentators.





3. A COGNITIVE RECONSTRUCTION:

PHILOSOPHERS’ NEW ‘MIND’




We hypothesised that thinkers are particularly prone to make non-intentional analogical inferences under conditions which include familiarity with a model that is suggested to them and is structurally analogous to the target they think about. A conceptual metaphor can suggest suitable models to speakers of a language that realises it, and may well do so the more forcefully the more pertinent expressions are used simultaneously in literal talk about the source-domain and in metaphorical talk about the target-domain. While still alive today, the perceptual metaphor we considered was at this kind of peak in the 17th century, when practically all the still-common metaphorical senses of perception-terms were either first coined or already well established and when those same terms still retained their initial literal senses, many of which have become obsolete or archaic in the meantime. For example, the adjectives “evident” and “obvious” have lost their literal, perceptual sense completely, as has the noun “idea” which, from the mid-16th to the mid-18th century, was used in the sense of ‘image’ or ‘likeness’ (as when Locke uses it to speak of images in a mirror, in EHU II.i.25). The formerly common literal use of “to consider” to mean ‘to view attentively’ is now archaic. The pure perceptual sense of “to contemplate”, namely ‘to look at with continued attention, gaze upon, view, observe’, has been superseded by ‘to observe or look thoughtfully’, a mixture of the pure perceptual with a ‘mental’ sense, viz. ‘to view mentally’.

At this time, a new concept of ‘the mind’ displaced from philosophical discussion earlier concepts of Aristotelian provenance, viz. the notions of ‘rational’, ‘sensitive’ and ‘vegetative souls’. These notions pin down those clusters of ‘powers’ whose possession makes living beings the kind of beings they are: The ‘vegetative soul’ consists of those powers that make the difference between living beings and lifeless objects, viz. the powers of growth, nutrition and reproduction. The ‘sensitive soul’ is made up of those powers that distinguish animals from plants, namely the powers of perception, sensation, locomotion and a-rational desire (or appetite). The ‘rational soul’ or ‘intellect’, finally, consists of those powers that set human beings apart from other animals—the powers of reasoning and rational volition. The new concept of ‘the mind’ has a radically different rationale and extension: It was not introduced to identify powers that make the difference between different kinds of being, and the entity denoted was charged with the tasks of both the sensitive and the rational soul, with sensing and perceiving as well as with thinking and volition.

Let us consider two intuitions which—among others—shaped the new concept. The first is forcefully conveyed by terminological explanations prefacing Locke’s Essay Concerning Human Understanding (henceforward EHU):

‘By those denominations, I mean some object in the mind . . . such as it is there seen and perceived to be . . . By determinate, when applied to a simple idea, I mean that simple appearance, which the mind has in its view, or perceives in itself, when that idea is said to be in it’. (EHU p. 13, my underlining)





The term “the mind” here stands for two things: first, for a perceptual space in which objects of perception are located and, second, for a perceptual organ with which they are ‘viewed’. This organ, also called ‘the understanding’, is ‘like the eye’ and ‘makes us see, and perceive all other things’ (EHU II.i.1). It is here treated metonymically as the subject of perception (as we do in speaking of what ‘our eyes see’ when saying what we see with our eyes). While Locke feels torn between an immaterialist and a materialist conception of the mind (EHU IV. iii. 6, p. 542), the latter is, by most of his contemporaries, ‘thought to take up no [physical] space, to have no [physical] extension’ (EHU II.ix.1). The fundamental claim all parties take for granted is that



(I1) There is in us some sort of space and organ of perception (‘mind’), and things (‘ideas’) which we perceive in and with it.





The second core intuition is well conveyed by Locke’s distinction of two principal actions of the mind. Using the term “thinking” as a generic label for all kinds of cognition, Locke distinguishes: ‘perception, or thinking’ and ‘volition, or willing’ (EHU II.vi.2)—with the implication that, just as to will something is to perform an act of volition, to think something is to perform an act of perception. He explains that a man can get clear on what this action is simply ‘by reflecting on what he does himself, when he sees, hears, feels, etc. or thinks’ (EHU II.ix.2), treating thinking as one kind of perception along with seeing, hearing and feeling. Such perception only occurs when some sort of idea is in the mind (EHU II.ix.2–4). Hence:



(I2) To think (in the generic sense) is to perceive an idea in the mind, with the mind.

Locke is representative of 17th-century philosophers in that he states reasons for and against further developing these intuitions in one way or another (e.g., into a materialist or immaterialist conception of the mind), but provides no explicit argument for these two fundamental assumptions themselves, which he regards as obviously true (EHU I.i.8). On the other hand, we shall see (in the next section) that they are not part of common sense as implicit in (now or then) ordinary language, not the sort of thing anyone could have (then or now) believed all along, prior to philosophical reasoning or as the result of the mere exercise of linguistic competencies. Nor were these assumptions part of received academic wisdom (which can be built on without explicit discussion): Within the Aristotelian scheme of things, the workings of the ‘sensitive soul’ (sensation and perception) but not of the intellect (cognition) had been taken to involve inner spaces and organs of perception. I1 and I2 are distinctively philosophical and, at the time, fresh intuitions—which current scholarly consensus takes to have been shared, without explicit argument, by many early modern thinkers.17 We will now develop a cognitive reconstruction which explains how these common but otherwise apparently inexplicable intuitions can be generated by the cognitive process we have outlined: the overly literal application of conceptual metaphors, in non-intentional analogical reasoning, namely, the excessive assimilation of thinking, knowing, understanding, etc. to sense-perception.

At its root are analogical inferences which can be represented as deductions relying on tacit presuppositions like (K) above or (R) below:



(R) To think about something is to perceive some thing that is literally located at some place, literally with an organ of sense.



As premises these inferences take truisms which reflect the metaphorical uses of perception-terms motivated by the present metaphors. They let me say (metaphorically) that I think about or ‘consider’ an issue that has been ‘put before me’, and ‘look at’ it ‘from all sides’ and ‘with eagle-eyes’, in order to ‘discern’ all of its implications for our business. But—of course— none of these intellectual efforts (which form the target domain of the perceptual metaphors reconstructed) essentially involves the literal use of our eyes, or objects literally in our environment:



(T1) To think about something is not to perceive any thing that is literally located in our environment, and is not to literally use one’s eyes—or any other external sense-organ.



However, those prone to excessively assimilate thinking to visual perception will then find it natural to leap to a conclusion: If thinking about something does not involve seeing something located in our environment, around us, then it must involve seeing something located within us; and if it does not involve use of any external sense-organ, then it must involve use of some internal sense-organ. In other words: Together with (R)—and only together with (R)—the truism (T1) entails



(C1) To think about something is to perceive some thing (literally) located in us, (literally) by using an internal organ of sense.



Through this and analogous picture-driven inferences, with conclusions about other intellectual activities and achievements, the early modern concepts of ‘mind’ and ‘idea’ can be introduced:



(D1) “the mind” = def.: (a) the inner space in which we perceive the things we do not perceive with our five senses; (b) the inner organ of sense with which we perceive the objects in that space.



The things perceived in this inner space, with this inner organ, are called ‘ideas’. Again speaking metonymically of the organ as subject of perception, Locke, for instance, defines:



(D2) Whatsoever the mind perceives in itself . . . that I call idea. (EHU II.viii.8)



This much takes us to the conception of a perceptual space and organ crucially involved in cognition (and, perhaps, some other things) which is called ‘the mind’ and is placed quite literally in us: We thus come to posit senses and organs of inner perception in our heads, as Locke does in positing (without further argument) that ideas are ‘convey[ed] . . . to their audience in the brain, the mind’s presence room (as I may so call it)’, where they have to show up in order ‘to bring themselves into view, and be perceived by the understanding’ (EHU II.iii.1; cp. Chapter 3.5).

Like Locke (EHU IV.iii.6, p. 542), most philosophers attracted to this conception at the same time felt uneasy about it. The crucial conclusions leading up to it—C1 and its analogues—contradict convictions many thinkers are unable or unwilling to shed, such as



(T2) To think about something is not to perceive anything in our bodies, and is not to employ any bodily organ of sense.



A response to such contradictions for which there is evidence in early modern texts is the spontaneous reinterpretation of the problematic conclusions that thinkers find intuitively compelling. Thus many early modern thinkers explain that C1 is of course not to be taken literally (thus Berkeley in 3D 250; cp. EHU II.ix.10):



(C2) To think about things is not to perceive anything literally located ‘in’ us. It is to perceive something in an ‘inner space’ that is not literally, physically in us, with an ‘inner sense’ that is not to be confused with any bodily organ of sense.



But, crucially, this explanation does not retract the picture-driven idea that thinking is, quite literally, one kind of perception along with seeing, hearing and feeling, and with proper organs and perceptual spaces which must be somehow internal if they are not external. It does not tell us that to think about things is to ‘perceive’ them merely in the well-established metaphorical sense of some perception-verbs (like “look at” in “looking at a question from all sides”). Rather, it only rejects the suggestion that the pertinent spaces and organs of perception compete for space in our body with the organs of the other senses. (We will follow this up below, at the end of Section 5.)

To have a handy label for the typically spontaneous response illustrated by this explanation, we can speak of ‘sublimation’ (though without the term’s Freudian implications) and say that thinkers ‘sublimate’ conclusions which strike them, on the one hand, as intuitively compelling but, on the other hand, as too primitive or patently false to be taken seriously even for a moment.

A thinker sublimates a claim iff in the face of a conflict with claims he accepts he spontaneously places a new interpretation on the claim’s key terms, which apparently allows him to maintain its expression.





Frequently, sublimating explanations—like C2—merely tell us that the key terms are not to be understood ‘in a gross literal sense’ (to borrow words from Berkeley) but in some other way (which often is not spelled out). Such negative sublimation has thinkers spontaneously regard the mind defined by D1 as a non-physical space and non-bodily organ of inner perception.

By using the terms “mind” and “idea” to paraphrase the initial conclusion C1 or its sublimated variant C2, we obtain, respectively, a ‘materialist’ and an ‘immaterialist’ version of a specific instance of the intuition I2 we seek to explain:



(I2*) To think about things is to perceive ideas in the mind, with the mind.



Exactly parallel lines of thought lead from truisms about knowing and understanding, which reflect other conventional metaphorical uses of perception-terms, to analogous conclusions about these achievements: Like thinking-about, these achievements essentially involve perceiving ideas in the mind, with the mind—further specific instances of I2. To sum up the explanatory hypothesis thus obtained: Picture-driven inferences have thinkers posit a perceptual space and organ in us; negative sublimation removes the two from our bodies and turns them into immaterial ‘minds’.

Together with conclusions like I2*, the truisms that we sometimes think about, know or understand things then entail that there are such things as minds and ideas perceived in them. Indeed, the existence of minds then seems to be an utterly trivial consequence of the obvious fact that we sometimes think about, know or understand things. To convince yourself of the existence of minds and ideas all you need to do is to think a thought or indulge in recollections:

I suppose it will be easily granted me that there are such ideas in men’s minds; everyone is conscious of them in himself, and men’s words and actions will satisfy him that they are in others. (EHU I.i.8)





The existence of minds and ideas—the other intuition I1 we seek to explain— thus appears too obvious to merit philosophical argument.

This illustrates an empirically well documented phenomenon which is not restricted to abstract reflection but almost ubiquitous: belief bias.18 Quite regardless of their subject-matter, our loyalty to our extant beliefs, warranted and unwarranted, is commonly reinforced by several bias effects of which we are hardly ever aware: We tend to notice evidence that confirms our beliefs more readily than uncongenial evidence, attach more weight to the former than the latter, and accept argument, sound and unsound, more readily when it leads to a conclusion we believe true. At the heart of this cluster of bias effects is an interpretation bias, namely our potentially helpful propensity to spontaneously and immediately interpret new information in the light of extant knowledge—real and supposed. Such interpretation becomes problematic where we interpret statements and evidence in the light of merely supposed knowledge, unwarranted beliefs or unsound intuitions. Such interpretation usually makes these beliefs and intuitions appear more reasonable than they actually are and further inquiry seem less pressing. When thinkers spontaneously interpret, for example, truisms about people having thoughts or memories in the light of intuitively compelling conclusions like C1 or C2, they regard every single thought or memory they have as evidence bearing witness to the existence of the mind and thus come to take for granted that there is such a space and organ of inner perception, without asking for further evidence or argument.

We thus arrive at the hypothesis of a tri-partite process, which I propose to call the ‘pictorial process’: (1) Picture-driven inferences take thinkers to paradoxical conclusions they find intuitively compelling in spite of the con-flict with common sense. (2) They sometimes sublimate these conclusions in the face of this conflict. (3) The conclusions which they find intuitively so compelling they spontaneously want to save them then bias their equally spontaneous interpretation of further talk and evidence, which leads them to maintain the conclusion without further argument (or, in other cases, on the basis of obviously defective arguments). These three spontaneous, non-reflective moves may occur prior to all deliberate reflection and generate philosophical intuitions we feel compelled to honour—as it were, the surface pull of dark waters moved by powerful undercurrents of thought which quietly flow in directions we know to be wrong.





4. REFUTING A FIRST ALTERNATIVE:

RECOVERING THE ORDINARY ‘MIND’




Our working hypothesis, then, is that the pictorial process led early modern thinkers to have the intuitions I1 and I2 and to adopt and maintain them in the absence of argument. To show that this explanatory hypothesis offers the best available explanation of these intuitions, we need to refute at least the most plausible alternative explanations. We therefore now turn to the two (I think) most plausible and at any rate epistemologically most relevant competing explanations, before considering the arguably most familiar one (typically traced to Gilbert Ryle).

Biased interpretation of ordinary talk may obscure the paradoxical nature of the conclusions obtained through unsound non-intentional inference and its sublimation. It may have us think that I1 and I2 are pieces of common sense, as implicit in ordinary language, or result from mere— legitimate—extension of conceptual metaphors we employ every day. This cloaks two alternative explanations in an appearance of great plausibility. The first is this: Analytic philosophers like to elicit quite specific intuitions by inviting readers to imagine a certain case, scenario or situation, and to consider what is the right thing to say or judge in or about that situation (e.g., to judge whether the protagonist of a Gettier case really ‘knows’ a given proposition). These intuitions are commonly regarded as the deliver-ances of ordinary recognitional, classificatory and linguistic competences. If I1 and I2 are pieces of common sense, as implicit in ordinary language, then surely they can be put down to the exercise of these kinds of competences, even if they are not intuitive judgements about a specific case. I would now like to show that our two intuitions are no such pieces of common sense. To do so, we have to analyse another crucial conceptual metaphor, which motivates the major pre-philosophical use of the term “the mind” (but has, alas, not been analysed in any detail before).

Metaphorical conceptualisations of cognitive activities and achievements seize mainly on two source domains: visual perception and manual operation. The roots of that ordinary use of “the mind” lie in the development of a manipulation metaphor for feats and failures of remembering. We remember the things we manage to ‘retain’, are unable to remember those that ‘escape’ us, and may ‘recollect’ what we once ‘retained’ but then ‘escaped’ us. These terms obviously stand in the same inferential relations to each other, both when we are speaking about attempts to restrain a writhing animal (the earliest, now obsolete, sense of “retain”) or efforts to retain a fact. We are dealing with an embryonic conceptual metaphor.

‘The mind’ is born as we relax the requirement of physical contact: To remember something, you do not have to hold the writhing or fluttering animal with your hands or to your body; it is quite enough to keep it in your cage or corral, a confined space that belongs to you. We thus obtain a metaphor that uses spatial relations and movements to conceptualise feats and failures of remembering, including recall of past events, remembering dates and facts, and thinking of things to be done. The basic mapping from which we can generate all others, to obtain what I will simply call the conceptual ‘Metaphor M’ is:



(1) x is inside a space belonging to S → S remembers (or can readily think of) x



Base extension and complex metaphorical entailments generate further mappings. By simple negation:



(2) x is outside the space belonging to S → S does not remember x.



That x ‘leaves’ a bounded space in any way implies that it was once in that space but is now outside it. Hence we may derive, with mappings (1) and (2):



(3) x leaves the space of S → S forgets (no longer remembers) x



That x enters or ‘comes into’ a space implies that it was outside the space and is now in it. Hence, with the same two mappings:

(4) x enters the space of S → S remembers something he previously did not remember.



These four mappings motivate the use of a plethora of expressions including the noun “mind”: (1) We ‘keep’, ‘hold’ or ‘have in mind’ whatever it is we manage to remember, or (changing the bounded area into a container, the corral into a cage) ‘bear it in mind’. (2) Things ‘out of mind’ are not remembered or thought of: ‘out of sight, out of mind’. (3) Things that have ‘slipped (from) our mind’ or, to put it in now obsolete terms, have ‘gone’ or ‘passed out of mind’ have been forgotten. (4) Something ‘comes to mind’ when it occurs to us, especially upon reflection—prior to which we could not readily think of it.

These movements may be caused by subjects, yielding straightforward extensions of the conceptual metaphor: We may make something enter a space by bringing it into that space. Hence, with (4):



(5) x brings y into the space of S → x makes S remember something he previously did not remember



Thus something or somebody may ‘bring’ or ‘call’ things ‘to mind’, and somebody ‘puts’ something ‘into someone’s mind’ when he makes him think of something he previously did not. We can also bring people or things back into our presence by ‘recalling’ or ‘recollecting’ them from the more distant locations they occupied in the meantime. And we can move things in the reverse direction: That we ‘put’ something somewhere implies that we deliberately have it occupy that position. Hence, with mapping (2), when we ‘put something out of mind’, we deliberately do not remember or think of, but ignore it:



(6) S puts x out of his space → S ignores x



To sum up, the common-sense concept of ‘the mind’ is at home in a manipulation metaphor (of ‘holding’, ‘bearing’, ‘bringing’ and ‘putting’ things), built around the basic mapping of a spatial relation, namely spatial inclusion.

In metaphorical extension, terms literally applied to a concrete source-domain get extended to more abstract target-domains. The present metaphor motivates such extension of many manipulation-verbs and terms for spatial relations. It also allows us to extend the use of terms referring to physical spaces: The conceptual metaphor requires reference to some bounded space that is not hermetically sealed, where things can enter and leave, and be put in or out. Hence any term referring literally to some such physical space can be recruited through metaphorical entailment. We can therefore readily understand the picture Plato offers in his Theaetetus (197c ff.), of the mind as an aviary in which we ‘keep’ what we have learned, the facts we caught and caged like birds. Ordinary English exploits analogous entailments in recruiting a term referring to a suitable part of our body, viz. our head (with its several openings): If x is in my head, it is inside a space belonging to me (where things can be put or enter and leave). With mapping (1), this motivates saying that the things I remember ‘are in my head’, and mapping (4) motivates saying that what I could not retain (viz. ‘in my head’) ‘went in one ear and went out the other’. Further mappings allow me to say that I try to ‘put’ things ‘into’ someone’s else’s ‘head’ or ‘keep’ them in mine, and to tell people to ‘put out of their head’ things they should stop thinking of (forget about).

While equally ordinary, the term “the mind” is different: It has no application in the source-domain of the present metaphor and hence is not extended from it to the target–domain. It is only used as part of, or in conjunction with, metaphorically used expressions. Where it is an integral part of such expressions (e.g. “bear in mind”), the meaning of the whole (here: ‘to think of’) is not a function of the meaning of its constituent words. Where “the mind” is employed in conjunction with metaphorically used expressions which are independently meaningful, as in “His name has escaped my mind”, it can be deleted without loss or change of meaning (I might as well just say ‘His name has escaped me’). It then does not so much contribute to the meaning of the expression as highlight how the expression is being used: It is employed as a metaphor-marker, to highlight that the manipulation terms it complements are being used metaphorically. We can use it effectively to flag metaphorical use precisely because “the mind” has no use except in conjunction with metaphorically used expressions.

Since it has no prior literal use, it does not carry any baggage of inferential relations which might constrain its use as a metaphor-marker or as part of metaphorically used expressions. It adds nothing to the familiar metaphorical meaning of the expression it complements or completes: That we ‘retain something in the mind’ simply means that we retain it, in a familiar metaphorical sense of the verb—we remember it. “To bear x in mind” means ‘to think of x’, in the sense of taking x into account in one’s thinking; and that ‘I keep x in mind’ just means that I do not forget x in my thinking. In particular, none of these metaphorical expressions implies that when we remember or think of something, this thing (or anything else, for that matter) is at any particular location.

Metaphor M further evolves through mergers with other conceptual metaphors, which engender new metaphorical entailments. This is possible where metaphors cohere and their target-domains overlap. We actually merge Metaphor M with the perceptual metaphor previously discussed. Their target-domains overlap: Remembering often involves and sometimes crowns intellectual efforts. (We finally manage to think of something we tried to remember but could not think of readily.) Together with thinking-about, knowing and understanding, these cases of remembering thus fall into the target-domain of the metaphor Intellectual Effort as Visual Search. There are hence two equally well-motivated metaphorical ways of talking about these cases: We ‘come to see’ the facts and events that finally ‘come to our mind’. Since Metaphor M allows us to say that these facts and events, i.e. the things we remember, ‘come to’ or ‘leave’ just any non-hermetic bounded space, and since our visual field is such a space, the two metaphors cohere: There is a conditional link between an element of the source domain of the perceptual metaphor and the core element of the source domain of Metaphor M: If x is visible to S, x is inside a space belonging to S. This ‘source-link conditional’ can serve as the premise of a metaphorical entailment which motivates extending a source-domain term of the perceptual metaphor to the target domain of M. The conditional and M’s basic mapping (1) entail: If x is visible to S, S can remember or readily think of x. Accordingly, we say that we ‘can still see’ what we manage to remember, broadening the metaphorical use of “to see” which we already use to say that we manage to think of a solution. The further mappings of M then motivate saying that things we cannot remember (well) are (almost) invisible (as in ‘hazy memories’), that things we no longer remember have become invisible (‘fallen into the dark abyss of oblivion’), etc.

With some exceptions (like “retain”), the manipulation-verbs recruited by Metaphor M require completion by the phrase “in the mind” when used metaphorically. By contrast, the perception-terms recruited as outlined all have metaphorical senses of their own, on their own. When used in conjunction with them, “in the mind” is semantically redundant and merely used as a metaphor-marker. It can be used as such also when speaking about parts of the target-domain that do not overlap with that of Metaphor M: “I finally saw the solution in my mind” means the same as “I finally saw the solution”, i.e., that I finally ‘saw’ the solution, in a familiar metaphorical sense of that term—I finally managed to think of it. Used as a semantically redundant metaphor-marker, the phrase “in the mind” does not carry the implication that the solution ‘seen’ or thought of (or anything else, for that matter) is at any location.

Once picture-driven reasoning has led us to the philosophical conception we considered previously, belief-bias effects may have us read this conception into the ordinary talk we have now analysed. But the latter by no means implies the former. In all this ordinary talk, the phrase “in the mind” and its cognates are used either as an integral part of metaphorical expressions without semantically relevant inner structure, or as a metaphor-marker which indicates that the expressions it complements are being used in a familiar metaphorical sense. Either way, the phrase “in the mind” is semantically inert and carries no implications. Statements like ‘I finally saw the solution in my mind’ hence do not imply—I1—that there are in us any spaces of perception in which we perceive things, namely—I2—when we think. These philosophical intuitions are not implied by ordinary-language statements. They are not pieces of common sense as implicit in ordinary language. They cannot be put down to the mere exercise of ordinary linguistic skills or to related recognitional or classificatory skills.





5. REFUTING A SECOND ALTERNATIVE:

MISAPPLICATION, NOT EXTENSION




While our ordinary ‘mind-talk’ does not imply these intuitive assumptions, it is tempting to opt for a related explanation: It is tempting to think that the—legitimate—extension of the conceptual metaphors that motivate our ordinary ‘mind-talk’ might generate I1 and I2. It is of course clear from the start that this competing hypothesis can explain at most part of what we seek to explain: Like Locke, many philosophers who had these intuitions felt attracted to them on a straightforwardly literal understanding—they felt attracted to a materialist conception of the spaces and organs of perception they found it compelling to posit in us. And on such a literal reading, the present intuitions can be obtained from the metaphors discussed only through the overly literal application of the latter, not by their mere extension. We will now establish, however, that the mere extension of these metaphors cannot account for the present intuitions even on their weakest reading, while overly literal application of these metaphors can explain them on all their readings.

We can extend a conceptual metaphor through base extension and metaphorical entailments (Section 1). Base extension involves only topic-neutral logical and modal operations on a basic mapping. The basic mapping of a perceptual metaphor maps what we do or achieve with our external sense-organs (eyes or ears, etc.) onto a more abstract target domain. Topic-neutral operations on such a mapping will clearly fail to introduce the notions of inner spaces and sense-organs. Metaphorical entailments seize on extant mappings and conceptual or empirical facts about the source-domain. But the only locations, perceptual spaces and sense-organs figuring in the source-domain of a perceptual metaphor are locations in our physical environment, parts of that environment, and external sense-organs like the eyes in our face. Hence facts about them and about the concepts referring to them are the only empirical and conceptual facts metaphorical entailments can seize on. By merely extending a perceptual metaphor, we can therefore motivate ever more metaphorical talk of ‘external’ locations (describing implications as being ‘in front of our noses’), ambient perceptual spaces (a lecture ‘expanding my horizon’) and ‘external’ sense-organs (revelations ‘opening my eyes’), but no such talk of ‘inner’ locations, spaces and organs of perception. (Apparent counter-examples are discussed below.)

We can, however, further extend the metaphorical use of perception-terms by merging perceptual with other metaphors, in particular with Metaphor M. This move allows us to say that things are ‘seen’ or otherwise perceived ‘in the mind’. But even then, mere extension of metaphors does not motivate saying metaphorically that things are ‘seen’ or otherwise perceived ‘in us’, in some internal space of perception. The reason is this: We can develop Metaphor M through metaphorical entailments which seize on facts about any non-hermetic bounded space, outer or inner, and can, in particular, say that we ‘keep’ and ‘retain’ the things we remember ‘in the head’. (So far, so good.) We can also develop Metaphor M through merging it with perceptual metaphors, namely when the two cohere. (Still good.) But when we develop Metaphor M to motivate metaphorical talk of things being ‘kept’ and ‘retained’ inside us, namely in our head, it no longer coheres with metaphors invoking visual perception: If x is visible to S, x is inside a space belonging to S, namely his visual field. But this field does not even partially overlap with the inside of his head, and it is not the case that if x is visible to S, x is inside the head of S. The moment we opt for an inner space to ‘keep’ or ‘retain’ things in, we sever the previous link between the source domain of perception-metaphors and the source domain of Metaphor M. We are then left without any source-link conditional that could serve as premise of a metaphorical entailment (cp. Section 4). Hence we cannot motivate metaphorical talk of ‘seeing’ or otherwise ‘perceiving’ things ‘in our head’ or in any other ‘inner space’ by merging Metaphor M with perceptual metaphors. So we can metaphorically conceptualise remembering and thinking-of either as keeping things in an inner space or as seeing them. But we cannot metaphorically conceptualise these intellectual activities and achievements as seeing things in an inner space.

To understand a—merely—apparent counter-example, note that precisely because perceptual and inner metaphors fail to cohere, precisely because we cannot literally see things in our heads, we can effectively flag our talk of ‘seeing’, e.g., past events as being metaphorical by merging expressions motivated by the perceptual and inner metaphors that fail to cohere. This is what we do when we say, e.g., “I still see x in my head.” This combines “I still see x” and “x is in my head”. Used in the metaphorical senses we considered, the two mean pretty much the same, viz. ‘I still (manage to) think of/remember x’. While redundant in terms of content, the phrase “in my head” serves to indicate that the verb “to see” is being used in a metaphorical sense. Similarly, “I have x before my inner eye” results from a combination of “I have x before my eyes” and “I have x in my head” (into which an inner eye would look). The former means ‘I can see x’ in the given metaphorical sense, i.e., ‘I think of/remember x’—the same as “I have x in my head”. The adjective “inner” which thus gets inserted into “I have x before my eyes” therefore does not add or alter content or meaning. Hence it does not serve to attribute properties or relations to anything, in literal or metaphorical speech, but serves to indicate that speech is metaphorical. It is not used to attribute any property to an eye, and we do not say or imply that there is an eye literally or figuratively ‘in’ us. Rather, we indicate that the overall expression “S has x before his eye” is being used metaphorically. In the context of ordinary talk of intellectual activities and achievements, we use ‘inner’—like ‘mental’—epithets as metaphor-markers. For the above reasons, we cannot do otherwise.

When we extend metaphors through metaphorical entailments, inferential relations between pertinent terms get preserved. By contrast, when we use an expression (like “inner” or “in my head”) as a metaphor-marker to flag the use of another expression as metaphorical, neither it nor its constituents retain their inferential relations. (“I see x in my head” simply means ‘I see x in a familiar metaphorical sense of this verb’ and I am not entitled to draw an inference from the semantically irrelevant constituent “in my head.”). We can introduce talk of ‘inner’ spaces and organs of perception into discourse about cognition only through merging metaphors that fail to cohere and, hence, only through metaphor-markers and not through metaphorical entailments. By extending familiar conceptual metaphors, we hence cannot motivate metaphorical talk of ‘inner perception’ that would imply that, in suitably metaphorical senses—I1—there are ‘in’ us ‘spaces’ and ‘organs of perception’, which we—I2—use when we think. If we find these intuitions natural or compelling, this cannot be due to mere extension of the conceptual metaphors that motivate our ordinary mind-talk.

Like Locke, many philosophers who had these intuitions felt torn between a figurative and a literal understanding of these intuitions, and between an immaterialist and a materialist conception of the spaces and organs of perception they found it compelling to posit in us. While quite subtle argument is required to show that mere extension of conceptual metaphors cannot give rise to the intuition that there are ‘spaces’ and ‘organs of perception’ ‘in’ us, in a metaphorical sense of these terms, it is clear from the start that such extension cannot incline us towards the intuition that there are, quite literally, spaces and organs of inner perception in our physical bodies.

Accordingly, we have outlined a process whereby these intuitions are obtained not through extension but through overly literal application of the metaphors discussed (Section 3). The crucial first inference—from T1 to C1—is no metaphorical entailment: Its premise does not state a source-domain fact but explains the relation between elements of the source- and of the target-domain. Its other leg is not a mapping constitutive of a conceptual metaphor (like: If ‘S looks at x’ then S thinks about x) but a presupposition obtained only by applying this metaphor overly literally (like ‘If S thinks about x then S looks at something that is literally located at some place, literally with an organ of sense’).

The second step, negative sublimation, might then appear to flag a merely metaphorical understanding of the conclusion that to think about something is to perceive some thing located in us, by using an internal sense-organ. But the gloss—C2—does not tell us to understand the verb “to perceive” in the familiar metaphorical sense of a perception-verb: It does not state that to think about something is to ‘consider’ or ‘look at’ it, in any familiar metaphorical sense of these verbs, viz. to think of or about it. Instead of this truism, the gloss states the substantive claim that to think about something is to perceive something in an ‘inner space’ that is not literally, physically in us, with an ‘inner sense’ distinct from any bodily sense-organ. In other words: What we are told (by C2) to regard as metaphorical (in the first conclusion C1), is not the use of the verb “to perceive” but only that of the phrases “located in us” and “internal organ of sense”. This endows the verb not so much with a metaphorical as with an ill-defined hybrid sense, and reflects the fact that thinking was classified, without further ado, as a kind of perceiving, which differs from visual, auditory, etc. perception ‘only’ in involving a different sense-organ, and objects which are located neither literally around us nor literally within us. In both their ‘raw’ and their sublimated shape, the intuitions at issue result not from the—legitimate—extension but from the misapplication of conceptual metaphors.

Gilbert Ryle famously suggested that the classical conception of the mind rests on the category mistake of placing minds into the same category as bodies.19 We have now found reason to believe that it is only due to another, in a way more fundamental, category mistake that minds came to be posited in us, in the first place: Thinkers came to posit minds in us because they excessively assimilated intellectual to perceptual activities and achievements and thus placed cognition in the same category as visual perception, as Locke manifestly did when he characterised ‘perception, or thinking’ as one of the two main actions of the mind (EHU II.vi.2) and explained that a man can get clear on what this action is simply ‘by reflecting on what he does himself, when he sees, hears, feels, etc. or thinks’ (EHU II.ix.2)— treating thinking as one kind of perception along with seeing and the rest.

Many philosophers influenced by Ryle or Wittgenstein took the classical conception of the mind to rest on the category mistake of placing minds, thoughts and ideas into the same category as physical objects, and put this mistake down to an alleged propensity to take nouns to stand for such objects. However, there is evidence that we do not have such a general propensity. Many philosophers have found it intuitively compelling to credit the nouns “mind”, “thought” or “idea” with a physical or quasi-physical denotation. But very few have found this compelling for nouns like “debt” or “bank account” (see Chapter 2.3). We have now won through to an arguably better-justified hypothesis: We can explain the specific propensity to assimilate ideas to physical objects and minds to physical spaces as a consequence of the propensity to excessively assimilate intellectual to perceptual activities and achievements and place cognition into the same category as sense-perception. This category mistake has thinkers posit objects of inner perception which we perceive in us when we think, in something like the way in which we perceive physical objects when we use our eyes, and thus has them assimilate from the start the ‘ideas’ and ‘minds’ they have posited in us to such objects and their spatial environment.

The findings we have derived from cognitive linguistics and psychology let us understand why even the most competent thinkers may make this fundamental category mistake: Metaphorical extension has forged a structural analogy between visual search and intellectual efforts, and under conditions which frequently obtain in philosophical reflection, human beings are prone to unwittingly fall back on simple concrete models that are structurally analogous to the targets they are thinking about, and to spontaneously project properties from the former onto the latter.





6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK: UNSOUND INTUITIONS




Let’s take stock. We have considered intuitions which shaped an influential conception of the mind. We have reconstructed how the overly literal application of conceptual metaphors, in non-intentional analogical reasoning, could generate those philosophical intuitions, which were typically accepted without further argument (Section 3). We then refuted the two most plausible alternative explanations: Those intuitions are not pieces of common sense, as implicit in ordinary language, early modern or current, which we could put down to the exercise of linguistic competencies (Section 4). Nor can the intuitions be obtained through natural and legitimate extension of the conceptual metaphors that motivate our ordinary ‘mind-talk’ (Section 5). Once we have excluded these and other explanations (which we have dismissed in passing), the explanation we have advanced emerges as the best available explanation, and inference to the best explanation allows us to conclude that whenever thinkers had the philosophical intuitions reconstructed prior to or in absence of explicit argument, these intuitions were generated by the pictorial process we hypothesised, viz. through the misapplication of conceptual metaphors in non-intentional analogical inferences.

We can further confirm this hypothesis, and show that the best available explanation is in fact good, by showing that the explanatory strategy on which it rests is generally successful: by showing that the pictorial process we have posited can explain not only the present but also a host of further philosophical intuitions and otherwise inexplicable gaps in philosophers’ arguments. Indeed, the strategy allows us to explain these intuitions and gaps as the results of cognitive phenomena (like non-intentional analogical reasoning) and psychological effects (like belief-bias effects) for which there is independent, experimental, evidence. In the next chapter, we shall show that the process we have identified can account for a whole cluster of related intuitions which are jointly constitutive of the lastingly influential conception of the mind as a private and transparent realm of inner perception which houses thoughts, beliefs and memories, as well as feelings and sensations of all kinds. In the third chapter, we will then show that a pictorial process involving a different philosophical picture can account for another cluster of philosophical intuitions and moves, including wild doctrines and patently incomplete arguments that have baffled commentators and have, so far, defied explanation.

The new explanatory strategy allows us to overcome a difficulty arising from the Freudian framework which was all Wittgenstein had at his disposal to develop the ideas about pictures and analogies from which we started. To simplify slightly, that framework does not contain sufficient resources to decide between mutually incompatible attributions of unconscious beliefs and desires to a subject. This difficulty is mitigated by the requirement that the patient finally come to acknowledge the attributions as correct. Wittgenstein transfers this idea to the unconscious analogical reasoning he took to be at the bottom of much philosophical perplexity:

One of the most important tasks is to express all false thought processes so true to character that the reader says, “Yes, that’s exactly the way I meant it”. To make a tracing of the physiognomy of every error.



Indeed, we can only prove that someone made a mistake if he acknowledges this expression as the correct expression of his feeling.



For only if he acknowledges it as such, is it the correct expression. (Psychoanalysis.)



What the other person acknowledges is the analogy I’m presenting to him as the source of his thought. (BT 410)





But since the analogical reasoning at issue is ‘unconscious’ or, more accurately, non-intentional and involves the use of models the thinker is unaware of employing, the acknowledgement of the thinker is not a necessary, let alone a sufficient condition for the attribution of such reasoning to him to be correct. With the means at Wittgenstein’s disposal, we cannot satisfactorily justify the attribution of such unconscious thought processes to thinkers.

The present explanation of why certain thinkers accept certain claims in the absence of argument thus fills an explanatory gap. Philosophically more importantly, it also enables us to soberly assess our warrant for intuitive judgements which we tend to accept without argument. We have explicitly refuted two explanations that would render such acceptance of I1 and I2 justified. Common-sense beliefs are privileged in that we are entitled to maintain them without argument until they are challenged with good reasons. But we have found that I1 and I2 are not pieces of common sense (and noted in passing that they were, at the time, not pieces of received academic wisdom, to which the same point would have applied). We have also seen that I1 and I2 cannot be obtained through—entirely legitimate—extension of the conceptual metaphors that motivate our ordinary ‘mind-talk’, something a competent speaker might well do without explicitly advertising it. The intuitive judgements at issue are hence warranted only if the thinker is able to explicitly back them up with argument. As long as he does not bother to adduce any argument to support them, those intuitive judgements will be unwarranted.

While irrelevant for the issue of whether the attribution of a non-intentional cognitive process to him is correct, the thinker’s acknowledgement of this process makes him aware of the fact that his intuitions are unwarranted. This happens in two steps. First, explanations like the one of I1 and I2 given above make us realise that we mistook for truisms what are in fact substantive claims whose truth we may not simply take for granted. They make us realise that our acceptance of these intuitively compelling claims is warranted only to the extent to which we manage to support them with sound reasons. Second, and once we have realised the need to give reasons, we may acknowledge the picture-driven inferences reconstructed as the only reasons we are able to give (now that we have got clear on how we came to have those intuitions). Picture-driven inferences are unsound by the lights of the very thinker who makes them: They rely on an assumption the thinker knows to be false; and since they project a feature of the model onto a target known not to share it, their (immediate) conclusion is guaranteed not to be true (but either false or meaningless). Once we have acknowledged them as the sole reason we are able to adduce to support those intuitions (which we previously accepted without giving any reasons), we thus come to see that we lack all warrant for accepting them.

At a more general level, the proposed explanation of intuitions I1 and I2 shows us that we need to be wary of the intuitions we have when doing philosophy. Such intuitions are frequently accorded some sort of evidentiary value; the intuition that p is often taken to support the assumption that p. Indeed, intuitions have traditionally been regarded as immediate insights, gained by the exercise of certain competencies, cognitive or linguistic. This has made conflicts between different people’s intuitions hard to adjudicate in a reasoned manner—it then seems that if you disagree with me, you or I are simply incompetent. Philosophers in the analytic tradition have frequently focussed on specific intuitions about particular cases, situations or scenarios, elicited by presenting these cases or situations and asking whether such-and-such is the right thing to say in or about them. It is plausible to put such intuitions down to the exercise of cognitive or linguistic intuitions. We have studied less specific and more fundamental intuitions. We could explain them as the result of non-intentional inferences. Disagreements about such intuitions, therefore, do not reduce us to table-thumping and mutual accusations of incompetence: The inferences that generate them can be assessed for soundness. In this chapter, we have identified a process of non-intentional inference which is systematically unsound: a process which first has us systematically assimilate targets to models of conceptual metaphors in ways in which we know the two to differ, and then has us presuppose the wild but intuitively compelling conclusions in further reasoning about the topic. We thus find that philosophical intuitions need not result from the exercise of a competence; they may be due to cognitive distortions, i.e., to recurrent, characteristic and systematic mistakes in non-intentional reasoning. They deserve not our blind trust but a second and third look—which, in many cases, will reveal that we lack all warrant for what we find too compelling to merit argument. Both at a more specific and at a more general level, the psychology of philosophy can thus lead us to epistemological conclusions.

In the following chapters, we will show that the process of non-intentional reasoning we have identified, viz. the ‘pictorial process’, can account for whole clusters of related intuitions. And we will see why such explanations are philosophically rewarding: The clash of the intuitions explained with other convictions gives rise to classical mind-body problems which still worry us today—and which we can overcome by coming to see through the intuitions that raise the problems.





2 Through Pictures to Problems


Minds and Bodies




For better or worse, intuitions are a pillar of philosophy. In particular thinkers in the tradition of twentieth-century analytic philosophy frequently base claims on specific intuitions about what to say in or about specific cases, situations or scenarios presented for the purpose. Such intuitions can be largely put down to the exercise of recognitional, classificatory or linguistic skills and have often been used to support philosophical claims about concepts like ‘knowledge’, which seem to play a central role in many familiar philosophical problems. In the previous chapter, we have embarked on the study of philosophically relevant intuitions of a different and perhaps more influential kind: We have started to examine intuitive judgements which are not about specific cases or situations and which have not been used to support conceptual claims but rather led philosophers to advance metaphysical or other ‘substantive’ claims without much, if any, argument. We examined the intuitively compelling claims that—I1—there are in us spaces and organs of perception (‘minds’), in and with which we perceive things (‘ideas’), namely—I2—whenever we think of or about something. We concluded that their champions advance and accept these claims because they are under the spell of philosophical pictures: because they excessively assimilate the targets to the models of conceptual metaphors, in non-intentional analogical inferences which they make unwittingly but systematically. In this chapter, we will further develop and defend this hypothesis and show that it is the key to the resolution of a wide range of philosophical problems.

We can develop and defend the hypothesis that particular intuitions are due to picture-driven reasoning by showing, first, that this hypothesis can account for them while alternative explanations cannot and, second, that it is part of a successful explanatory strategy, which can also explain further philosophical intuitions which are about the same topic or are had by the same thinker. In this chapter, we will show that the pictorial process we have made out can account also for further intuitions which, together with the two already discussed, make up what we can safely call the ‘classical conception of the mind’ which dominated early modern philosophy and still passes for common sense today. In the next chapter, we will show that the same process can also account for another cluster of once popular and highly influential intuitions, namely about secondary qualities and sense-perception as an operation of the minds thus posited in us. In the two following chapters, we will then turn from clusters of widely shared intuitions to the intuitions of a particular thinker, from ‘thematically related’ to ‘personally related’ intuitions, and show that the phenomenon of picture-driven reasoning can account for all the core intuitions that led Berkeley from generally popular views about sense-perception to his metaphysical idealism, and which have puzzled modern commentators. In the process, we will also widen the scope of our investigation: We will see that philosophical pictures shape not only philosophers’ intuitions but also their— our—problems, doctrines, arguments, theories and explanations.

We will now follow up how non-intentional reasoning in the grip of philosophical pictures led to a whole cluster of related intuitions, namely the intuitions that shaped the classical conception of the mind as a private (Section 1) and transparent realm housing our thoughts, beliefs, memories and their ilk (Section 2). By getting clear on their genesis, we can rationally assess such picture-driven intuitions. The clash of these unsound intuitions with further convictions systematically gives rise to ill-motivated but maddening philosophical problems, including mind-body problems which still worry us today (Section 3). We can resolve—though, alas, not completely overcome—such problems by showing that they are ill-motivated: by getting clear on our motivation for raising them and showing that this motivation is unsound (Section 4). Such ‘diagnostic analysis’ is facilitated by the systematic study of how philosophical pictures shape philosophical reflection (Section 5).





1. COMPREHENSIVE ANALOGICAL REASONING:

THE PRIVACY OF MINDS




The philosophical notion of a non-physical ‘inner’ space of perception involved in all kinds of cognition swiftly evolved into the classical conception of the mind as a (i) private and (ii) transparent realm of inner perception that (iii) houses thoughts, beliefs and memories, along with sensations of any kind and description. Each of these three constituent claims struck those who made them as intuitively compelling, in the absence of argument. Also these three intuitions can be explained by the ‘pictorial process’ we have seen to account for the most fundamental intuitions that have us posit minds in us: by picture-driven inferences leading to paradoxical conclusions which may get subjected to spontaneous reinterpretation (sublimation) and influence our further reasoning through various belief-bias effects.

When we engage in non-intentional analogical reasoning, we do so in a comprehensive rather than selective fashion: When we spontaneously project certain features of the source-domain onto the target-domain, we unwittingly but systematically presuppose in our reasoning about the former that its elements have properties or features which we actually know only the models in the source-domain possess. Once thinkers have unwittingly projected fundamental features from the source-domain of sense-perception and its mostly physical objects onto the target domain of cognition and everything else conceived of as an operation of the mind, they unwittingly seize on ever more familiar facts about the source domain in reasoning about the target domain, in whole series of non-intentional analogical inferences. These picture-driven inferences lead to several related conclusions which we find intuitively compelling in philosophical reflection. Some of these conclusions we maintain only upon sublimation; all of them are prone to be presupposed in further reasoning and spontaneous interpretation of ordinary talk and familiar facts. The tri-partite pictorial process we have outlined leads to whole clusters of related philosophical intuitions, including the three that shape the classical conception of the mind.

These three intuitions can be obtained through non-intentional inferences in which the mind that has been posited in us is assimilated to a literal, physical, space of, literally, sense-perception, namely in three fundamental respects in which the explicit (sublimating) explanations we have considered take the two to differ:

To be ‘perceived’ in the mind, as anywhere else, objects have to be present and suitably located relative to the pertinent sense-organs.

In the mind, as in all physical spaces, things ‘exist’ in the sense that they occupy a spatial position or place in it.

The mind, as any physical space, has itself a physical location: If it is ‘in’ us, it is located in our body.





Once these three fundamental features have been projected, against better knowledge, from the source–domain of sense-perception of objects in physical environments, onto the target–domain of cognition, conceived of as an operation of the mind, ever more familiar facts about the source-domain are recruited in further reasoning which presupposes (I) to (III) above.

Thus the following line of thought takes us from our first two intuitions—I2 and I1 above (Chapter 1.4)—to the intuition that the mind is a private realm (source-domain facts represented in italics):

Reasoning ‘Private’



(1) I perceive things in my mind (when thinking about, understanding, remembering something, etc.). (2) If a thing is perceived somewhere it is there (at that place). Hence [with I, from 1 & 2]: (3) The things I perceive in my mind are in my mind. (4) But one and the same thing can only be at one place at a time. Hence [with II, from 3 & 4]: (5) The things I perceive in my mind cannot at the same time exist outside my mind. (6) My mind is inside me. Hence [with III, from 5 & 6]: (7) The things I perceive in my mind can exist only inside me and nowhere else. (8) But others cannot look inside me, or perceive the things inside me. Hence [from 7 & 8]: (9) Others cannot perceive the things I perceive in my mind.





Negative sublimation (Chapter 1.3) of the penultimate conclusion (7) elevates the final conclusion (9) to the rank of metaphysical necessity:

The things that I perceive in my mind exist only inside me, but not literally in my body. But the only things others could possibly perceive inside me are the things in my body (cut open, x-rayed, etc.). Hence:





(I3) Others cannot possibly perceive the things I perceive in my mind.

All the inferences involved are unsound by the lights of thinkers who go along with the sublimating explanations we have considered and the immaterialist majority-view of the mind to which they give rise: The presuppositions (I) to (III) are all inconsistent with the definition of the mind as a figuratively ‘inner’ space without physical extension or location. This inconsistency reflects the same fundamental defect of non-intentional analogical reasoning in philosophy that materialised at an earlier stage in the shape of leaps of thought presupposing the likes of (R) and (K): the excessive assimilation of targets to simple concrete models, against thinkers’ better knowledge.

Picture-driven leaps may be followed by sublimation. Ever more analogical inferences take thinkers to further conclusions which are at odds either with common sense or with the first sublimating explanations given, such as the explanation that the mind is an inner space without physical extension or location. The latter, for instance, is incompatible with the conclusion of the first inference above, that the things perceived in the mind exist at a suitable location, namely at some place in the mind. But of course thinkers who found it intuitive to posit minds in which we perceive things we do not perceive with our five senses found it equally intuitive to add that these things are in the mind. This occasioned another round of sublimating explanations. Thus, Berkeley explains that the conclusion does not go beyond the premise:

[W]hen I speak of objects as existing in the mind . . . I would not be understood in the gross literal sense, as when bodies are said to exist in a place . . . My meaning is only that the mind comprehends or perceives them. (3D 250)





Locke probably relies on this kind of explanation in the passage we used to introduce the ‘new’ early modern conception of the mind, when he explains: ‘I mean that simple appearance, which the mind has in its view, or perceives in itself, when that idea is said to be in it’ (EHU p. 13) The idea ‘is said to be in the mind’ when it is perceived in the mind; the cautious formulation suggests that Locke here wants to treat this as a façon de parler: An idea can be said ‘to be in the mind’ just in case it is perceived there.

The notion that things are perceived in minds was introduced through sublimation of conclusions—like C1 above (Chapter 1.3)—that assimilate intellectual activities and achievements to visual or other sense-perception. It is therefore natural to explain the new talk of things perceived in the mind by reference to those familiar activities and achievements: That something exists in the mind means that it is perceived in the mind, and that it is perceived in the mind means that the subject understands it, thinks of it, remembers it, etc. Thus Berkeley, in the passage just quoted, uses the phrase “comprehends or perceives” as if the two, understanding and perceiving, came down to pretty much the same, and Locke explains and reasons:

[I]f these words (to be in the understanding) have any propriety, they signify to be understood. So that, to be in the understanding, and not to be understood; to be in the mind, and, never to be perceived, is all one, as to say, any thing is, and is not, in the mind or understanding. (EHU I.ii.5)





This explanation renders “x is in the understanding” synonymous with “x is understood” and suggests (though no more) that we regard “x is in the mind” and “x is thought of” as equally synonymous. These moves turn the phrases “in the understanding” and “in the mind” into integral parts of metaphorically used expressions without semantically relevant inner structure (Chapter 1.4). They thus deprive these phrases of all implications, including the presently problematic spatial implications.

The first kind of sublimating explanation, negative sublimation, failed to provide the expressions explained with any determinate content: For example, we were merely told that the mind is a space, but not in the literal physical sense, and that things are perceived in it, but not with any bodily organ of sense and not literally (physically) ‘in’ it either. The present explanations, by contrast, do provide talk of ‘inner perception’ with determinate meaning and content. But such ‘positive sublimation’ suffers from another flaw: Its champions ignore the explanations almost the moment they have given or invoked them. For example, Locke explains—in line with the present explanations—that when he speaks of ‘ideas’ (perceived in the mind), he simply means whatever we can think or reason about, or understand or remember (EHU I.i.8, quoted in the next section); in the very next sentence he then suggests that everybody is conscious of the things in his own mind, while having to infer the presence of ideas in others’ minds from their words and deeds—where he clearly thinks not of the public and frequently material objects or events we think of or remember but of the contents of inner spaces of perception secluded from others’ view (EHU I.i.8, quoted in Chapter 1.3). Indeed, already in giving the present sublimating explanation, Locke seems to waver in his resolve to treat talk of things ‘being in’ an inner space of perception as purely metaphorical: After explaining that ‘to be in the understanding’ simply is ‘to be understood’, he implicitly equates ‘being in the mind’ not with ‘being thought of’ in some suitably generic sense, but with ‘being perceived’.

Our account lets us understand why this is so. The present glosses belabour the symptoms of a fundamental cognitive process, a process of non-intentional reasoning to which we are prone in abstract reflection: In such reflection we are prone to excessively assimilate targets to their metaphorical models, against our better knowledge. We find it intuitively compelling to assimilate cognition to perception also in elementary ways in which we know the two to differ. This results in a tension between our intuitions and our knowledge. Explanations that try to resolve this tension by honouring our intuitions have to remain nebulous if they are not to be in open conflict with our knowledge. Explanations that try to resolve this tension by respecting our knowledge, by contrast, are simply ignored in further intuitive reasoning. No mere redefinition of terms allows us to steer a clear course between the Scylla of vacuity and the Charybdis of patent falsity.





2. FURTHER INTUITIONS:

THE TRANSPARENCY OF MINDS




Once his sublimating explanations have become part of a thinker’s standard repertoire, they may be seized on in non-intentional reasoning which also involves analogical inferences that tacitly rely on presuppositions at odds with those explicit explanations. A case in point is a line of thought that leads to the familiar idea that the mind is a transparent realm of whose dwellers the subject cannot fail to be aware (if he bothers to pay attention). Like the reasoning that led to the idea of the mind as a private realm, it recruits familiar facts about the source–domain of sense-perception (again in italics, below). In addition, it employs the two sublimating explanations we have just considered (underlined below):

Reasoning ‘Transparent’



(1) A thing is in my mind if and only if I perceive it in my mind. (2) When I perceive a thing somewhere, I know that it is there (at that place). Hence [from 1 & 2]: (3) When a thing is in my mind, I know that it is there, in my mind. (4) That a thing ‘is in the mind’ simply means that it is being thought of, understood or known, or remembered, etc. Hence [from 3 & 4]: (5) When I think of, understand or know, or remember something, I know that I think of it, know or understand it, remember it, etc., as the case may be.





This is the seminal version of the influential assumption that if a subject S believes (knows, remembers, etc.) that p, then S knows that S believes (knows, remembers, etc.) that p. The seminal version of this claim is maintained by Locke: ‘He that contemplates the operations of the mind cannot but have plain and clear ideas of them’ (EHU I.i.7). Since knowledge implies factuality—S can only be said to know that such-and-such if it is the case that such-and-such—the converse is trivial. We thus obtain an even stronger conclusion:



(I4) We know that we have a certain thought or belief when we have it, and vice versa.



This claim has been frequently maintained, often as a necessary a priori truth. Indeed, in this shape the present claim is the foundation on which some current theories of self-knowledge are built.1

Reasoning Transparent derives its conclusion from three premises. Two of these, viz. (1) and (4), are true by linguistic legislation, namely sublimating explanations of meaning. These assumptions are necessarily true and those that give them know a priori that they are true. The relevant instance of the remaining premise—(2)—can then easily be regarded as of the same sort: When I perceive a thing in my mind, I know that it is in my mind. ‘S perceives x’ carries the implication that S recognises x. And when we recognise an idea (thought, memory, etc.) as such, mastery of the concept of ‘idea’ (‘thought’, ‘memory’, etc.) would seem enough to ensure that we conclude that the thing we perceive is in our mind rather than in our environment. A conclusion entailed by necessary a priori assumptions is itself a necessary a priori truth. To sum up, the interplay of picture-driven inferences and sublimating explanations could explain how competent thinkers, first, come to have the intuition I4 and, second, immediately regard it as a necessary a priori truth.

Finally, such analogical reasoning can determine how we populate the inner realm of perception we may thus come to regard as private and transparent. When we talk of the mind today, we spontaneously populate it with thoughts, beliefs and memories. But this is not how early modern thinkers first populated it. Locke, for instance, introduces ideas, subsequently defined as ‘whatever the mind perceives in itself’ (EHU II.viii.8) by explaining:

[T]he word idea . . . serves to stand for whatsoever is the object of the understanding when a man thinks . . . [namely for] whatever it is, which the mind can be employed about in thinking. (EHU I.i.8)





In other words, the things we perceive in the mind, with the mind, are the things we think about, know, understand and remember. The present account lets us understand how one can arrive at this view: The conceptual metaphors we have reconstructed conceptualise thinking, knowing, understanding and remembering something as looking at or seeing that very thing, namely the event, object, person, fact, question or solution we think about, understand or remember. When we apply these metaphors too literally in the most straightforward fashion, we will presuppose, e.g., that to think about or ‘consider’ something is to perceive that very thing literally at some place, literally with an organ of sense, and will find it intuitively compelling to conclude that we perceive the things we think about in the mind, with the mind.

The things we think about are of course usually public and frequently physical in nature: You and I may think about the very same event, fact or problem, and we may both think about or remember the same physical object or person in flesh and blood. The sublimating explanations we have considered a moment ago let us say that these things are perceived, and exist, in our minds: According to these explanations, that a problem is in my understanding simply means that I have understood it, and that you are in my mind simply means that I think of you. So we may maintain without obvious problem that our minds contain the things we think of, understand or remember.

But non-intentional analogical reasoning may drive us to find it incredible that physical objects or people should dwell there. For one thing, they stand or walk around in our environment. And two non-intentional analogical inferences take us from our very first intuitions to the conclusion—(5) in ‘Reasoning Private’ above—that the things I perceive in my mind cannot at the same time exist outside my mind. The excessive assimilation of cognition to visual perception, in non-intentional analogical reasoning, thus takes us first to the conclusion that to think of people or other objects of thought is to perceive them in the mind, where they are when we perceive them with the mind, and then leads us to the conclusion that our mind cannot contain these ‘external’ objects but only private ideas.

Facing this apparent conflict, Locke and Berkeley simply leaped to the conclusion jointly implied by the two horns of the apparent dilemma: When our minds contain the things we know, reason or think about, but contain only ideas formed in the mind, then those objects of thought and knowledge are our own ideas:

Since the mind, in all its thoughts and reasoning, has no other immediate object but its own [!] ideas, which it alone does or can contemplate, it is evident that our knowledge is only conversant about them. (EHU IV.i.1)





Equally without argument, Berkeley asserts in the opening sentence of his Principles, designed to proceed from an uncontroversial starting-point, that ‘it is evident to any one who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge, that they are . . . ideas’ formed in various ways in our minds (PHK 1). The overly literal application of perceptual metaphors can account for this perplexing intuition, which conflates ideas with their intentional objects, i.e., with the objects of thought and knowledge which they are ideas of.

An alternative response to the apparent conflict populates the mind with thoughts, beliefs and memories. It is a truism that when we think of or about something, we have or think thoughts about it. This provides us with two candidates for the role of object of perception in the mind: the thought and the thing it is about. Picture-driven leaps of thought and their sublimation may convince us that to think, or have some thought, about something is to perceive some thing in the mind, with the mind. Further non-intentional analogical reasoning—such as the first steps of ‘Reasoning Private’—may have us take for granted that the mind cannot contain the kinds of ‘external’ things that most thoughts are about. We are then left with only one candidate for the position of ‘object in the mind’: the thoughts about those external things. Analogous reasoning applies, mutatis mutandis, to knowing and remembering, and may lead us to regard beliefs and memories as things perceived in the mind. While the metaphorical idioms of ordinary English have us ‘keep in mind’ people, physical objects and public events, facts and dates, as well as things to be done, overly literal application of the pertinent conceptual metaphors in non-intentional analogical reasoning may have us, first, postulate quite different, essentially inner and nonphysical, minds in us and, second, populate them with thoughts, beliefs and memories of or about those ‘external’ things. Since thoughts, beliefs and memories are all of, or about, these things, we can then resolve the apparent conflict by saying, for instance, that to think of somebody (or ‘bear him in mind’) is to perceive in the mind a thought of that person.

This yields another positive sublimation, to which thinkers may resort in view of the conflict between the picture-driven conclusion that we perceive in the mind the things we think about and the equally picture-driven conclusion that the mind cannot contain such ‘external’ objects: It tells us that a thing we think about is perceived in the mind, in the sense that we perceive in the mind a thought of that thing. To sum up, a plethora of picture-driven leaps and the sublimation of some of their conclusions generate the intuitions that are jointly constitutive of the classical conception of the mind as a non-physical, private and transparent space of inner perception which houses thoughts and their ilk.





3. ILL-MOTIVATED PROBLEMS:

PUZZLES ABOUT MIND AND WORLD




Non-intentional analogical reasoning of the kind we have characterised as ‘picture-driven’ systematically generates whole clusters of philosophical intuitions. These intuitions are bound to be unsound: The non-intentional analogical inferences at their root rely on assumptions—like R or K (Chapter 1.2), or I to III (above in Section 1)—which the subject rejects and are therefore unsound by the subject’s own lights; their spontaneous reinterpretation saves some conclusions from obvious falsity but gives thinkers no right to maintain what they find intuitively compelling. Biased interpretation and other belief bias effects may then have thinkers espouse and maintain these intuitions in the continued absence of warrant. When under the spell of philosophical pictures, thinkers are prone to fall prey to whole clusters of unsound intuitions.

In picture-driven reasoning we systematically assimilate a target-domain to a source-domain, in respects in which we know the two to be different. Such reasoning is guaranteed to take us to conclusions (like C1 in Chapter 1.3) that are at odds with familiar facts and common-sense convictions (like T1 in Chapter 1.3), and may take us to conclusions which are inconsistent among themselves (like the parties to the conflict we encountered at the end of the previous section). We have seen how such conflicts are spontaneously glossed over by sublimating explanations. But as picture-driven reasoning takes us to ever more paradoxical or mutually inconsistent conclusions we find intuitively compelling, conflicts multiply beyond anyone’s ability to sweep them under the carpet through spontaneous reinterpretation. Where spontaneous responses no longer hide them from others and ourselves, such conflicts between philosophical intuitions and other convictions or intuitions become salient, and have us frame philosophical problems of a distinctive kind: Frequently eager to maintain both parties to such a dispute, we wonder how to reconcile what appears to be at odds. When there appears to be a ‘tension’ between a claim q they find intuitively compelling in philosophical reflection and some conviction p they are unable or unwilling to give up, philosophers tend to formulate ‘reconciliation problems’ by questions of the form:





How is it possible that p [namely, given that it is the case that q]?



Philosophers speak of a ‘tension’ when they take p and q to jointly entail a contradiction or otherwise unacceptable conclusion and thus request an answer that ‘reconciles’ p and q, namely shows against first appearances that they do not entail the dreaded contradiction or consequence.

A case in point is the ‘problem of other minds’ that is raised by the intuition that the mind is a private realm. The picture-driven ‘Reasoning Private’ takes us to the intuitively compelling conclusion—I3—that others cannot possibly perceive the things I perceive in my mind (Section 1). The sublimating explanations we have just analysed (Section 2) have us regard thoughts, beliefs and memories, etc., as things which subjects perceive in their minds—and, thereby, as things we get to know about through perception. We may then take our previous conclusion to entail that others cannot possibly get to know what thoughts, beliefs and memories I have, and wonder:

How is it possible that we often know what others think, believe or remember [namely, given that we cannot possibly perceive the things in their minds]?





The problem then unfolds as all the easy answers to this question are seen to fail. Similarly, the intuition generated by the next line of non-intentional analogical reasoning (‘Reasoning Transparent’), that ‘he that contemplates the operations of the mind cannot but have plain and clear ideas of them’ (EHU I.i.7), appears to be inconsistent with phenomena of self-deception and generates problems also whenever philosophers find it compelling to posit operations of the mind of which subjects manifestly fail to be aware (as Locke, e.g., does in EHU II.ix.8–9).

Reconciliation problems come in different shapes; they need not be expressed by questions of the above form. A case in point is the ‘ontological mind-body problem’, the most fundamental reconciliation problem generated by the intuitions we have analysed. Its seminal version is posed by the question: What kind of things are the things in the mind (thoughts and beliefs, memories and sensations, etc.)? In the words of a popular textbook: ‘What is the real nature of mental states and processes? In what medium do they take place, and how are they related to the physical world?’2 To understand what the problem is, we need to understand why we ask this question.

Questions of the form ‘What kind of things are Fs?’ are frequently asked in the course of exercises in ontological taxonomy. But this is clearly not so in the present case: Philosophers asking the present questions typically have no quarrel with the classification of beliefs or pains as ‘mental’. Nor do they wonder about whether beliefs are really states or whether having a pain is a process or an event. Which of several available logical or ontological categories the various ‘mental things’ fall into is not at issue.

When philosophers try to render the present question compelling to freshmen or a general audience, they typically contrast the things in the mind with the physical objects in the world:3 Beliefs and desires, thoughts and memories, pains and itches, hopes and expectations may be a rather motley crew. But they all, so the story goes, share some basic properties. They have a temporal extension and location (are dateable): I held my belief until you corrected my mistake; I entertained the thought for a few minutes while shaving, but then turned to other things; the stomach pain set in half an hour after dinner and lasted until I relieved myself, etc. But they have no extension or location in physical space: The pain in my stomach does not compete for space with the foodstuff being digested; the thought going through my head is not moving through it in the same sense as the blood pulsing through my brain, etc. A few further features are commonly added to obtain some such list of differences between mental and physical things as this:

Physical things Mental things

• have mass and physical extension and location • have neither mass nor physical extension or location

• fall under the laws of physics • do not fall under physical laws

• are public or ‘objective’ • are private or ‘subjective’



This contrast tends to make people feel uneasy: Thoughts and their ilk appear to be strangely non-embodied things existing in an ethereal medium. It is because we feel uneasy about this apparent nature that we ask: What is the real nature of mental things? In what medium do they exist?

This peculiar unease tends to be absent in analogous cases. Few people feel uneasy when reminded that debts and bank accounts have no mass or physical extension: that debts have no spatial but only a temporal extension (exist from the time they have been incurred until they have been repaid or remitted) and do not fall under the laws of physics (but obey only those of the Civil Code). While analogous to the above juxtaposition of physical and mental things, this suggestive formulation does not conjure up the disquieting idea of strangely non-embodied bank-notes due for return to ethereal vaults. This difference is, I submit, due to the fact that our abstract reflection about thoughts and sensations, in contrast with our reflection on debts and bank accounts, is driven by perceptual pictures. I.e.: Our language realises conceptual metaphors which take visual and tactile perception, respectively, as source–domain, and cognition and sensation, respectively, as targets. And in philosophical reflection we are prone to unwittingly but systematically assimilate these target- to those source-domains.

This is particularly straightforward in the case of sensations, to which we systematically extend terms from the source-domain of tactile perception: We say, in a well-established sense of these terms which we recognise as metaphorical the moment we are apprised of the process of extension, that we ‘feel’ sensations we have and are ‘numb’ when unable to ‘feel’ them, and we describe them with adjectives like “throbbing”, “piercing” or “sharp” which literally apply to objects we can literally feel with our fingers (unless they have gone literally numb from cold). We say we ‘feel’ pain ‘in’ the parts of our body that hurt, and the pain is said to ‘be in’ that part. But—of course!—to feel a pain in the stomach is not to perceive anything that is literally located in our body; a pain that can be said to ‘be in’ our stomach does not sit there between body-tissue and half-digested food. So, we conclude, it must be perceived in that non-physical inner space of perception, the mind, where it does not have to compete for space with physical things and material stuffs. While intuitively compelling, this inference is curious: In our familiar metaphorical idiom, there is no implication that a sensation ‘felt in’ the head or stomach is literally located in these body-parts—or anywhere else, for that matter. That a pain is not literally in our body hence does not imply that it must be located somewhere else. When, even so, we find it intuitively compelling to infer that since pains are not literally located in bodies they must be perceived in minds, rather than in the heads or stomachs in which they are commonly said to be ‘felt’ and ‘be’, we simply presuppose that—S—to feel a sensation is to perceive something that is located at some place not merely in that well-established metaphorical sense. Where competent speakers do this against their better knowledge, we are dealing with what we called a ‘picture-driven inference’, driven by what we may call the ‘perceptual picture of sensation’.

Above, we discussed the more involved cases of thought and memory, where picture-driven leaps place the objects of thought and memory into our bodies, from which negative sublimation may move them into immaterial minds as alternative spaces of perception. The merger of the phenomenal space of sensation with the perceptual space occupied by objects of thought marks the birth of the modern concept of the mind, which combines the domains of sensation and cognition which the previous, Aristotelian, scheme of things had assigned to different ‘souls’, viz. to the sensitive and the rational psyche, respectively. The picture-driven leaps discussed are the beginning of inferential avalanches of non-intentional analogical inferences, which rely on tacit presuppositions—first on the likes of K, R and S, and then on I to III—which take us to the full-fledged ‘new’ conception of the mind as a non-physical, private and transparent realm of inner perception, in which we perceive thoughts, beliefs, memories and sensations.

The right-hand side of the table above can be read as an expression of this classical conception. It can also be read as an expression of genuine truisms: In ordinary language, we do not literally credit thoughts, beliefs, memories or sensations with a position or extension in physical space. One of the presuppositions driving the picture-driven reasoning at issue—viz. (II)—has it that in the mind, as in our environment, things ‘exist’ in the sense that they occupy a spatial position or place. This takes us from that conceptual truism to the conclusion that thoughts, beliefs, memories and sensations occupy a position in some non-physical or ethereal space. The table above thus is either read as a record of the conclusions of picture-driven leaps of thought, or prompts such a leap, when it leaves us with the disquieting impression that thoughts and their ilk are strangely non-embodied things existing in an ethereal medium.

This impression is disquieting because it would appear to be incompatible with a scientific world-view which allots only physical objects a place in the universe. Accordingly, those who ask the present questions typically request an account of the nature of mental things (states, processes, etc.), which reveals that they do not exist (obtain, occur, etc.) in any non-physical or ethereal medium. This account is to reconcile various claims apparently at odds with it with our scientific world-view. The ontological mind-body problem is a reconciliation problem. Different philosophers champion different claims apparently in need of being reconciled with that world-view and thus address different versions of the problem. The ‘full-fledged’ version of the problem asks us to reconcile that world-view with the classical conception of the mind. A ‘minimalist’ version of the problem ‘merely’ asks us to reconcile the fact that we have beliefs, thoughts and sensations with that world-view.

In these, and in various ‘intermediate’ versions of the problem, either the claims to be reconciled with a scientific world-view or the impression of a conflict between the two parties is due to non-intentional analogical reasoning in which we excessively assimilate various targets to the model of visual perception of physical objects. In the previous sections, we have reconstructed (some of) the non-intentional reasoning that leads to the classical conception of the mind, which is indeed incompatible with a scientific world-view (and with common sense, properly understood). The truism that people have thoughts and beliefs, memories and sensations, on the other hand, is brought into apparent conflict with this world-view only by the picture-driven line of thought which proceeds from the leap to the conclusion—cp. C1—that to have thoughts, etc., is to perceive things somewhere. But of course neither—cp. T1—around us, in our environment, nor—cp. T2—somewhere inside our body, but—cp. C2—somewhere figuratively ‘within’ us. But this merely papers over the conflict without resolving it, and we cannot help presupposing that—(I)—to be perceived in the mind, as anywhere else, objects of perception have to be present and suitably located relative to the pertinent sense-organs. They have to have a spatial location. But we do not credit thoughts and beliefs, memories and sensations with any physical extension. Hence it seems that we can only have a thought, belief or sensation if we perceive objects which have some spatial location—they are somewhere—but lack physical extension. This is inconsistent with a scientific world-view which grants only objects with physical extension a spatial location or place in the universe. Through such intuitive reasoning, the truism that people have beliefs, thoughts and sensations appears to come into conflict with our scientific world-view, and to lead us straight into a puzzling problem.

Reconciliation problems are ill-motivated in at least two cases: in case the proponent lacks warrant for at least one of the claims that appear to be at odds, and in case he lacks warrant for the assumption that there is a tension between them. Picture-driven reasoning is bound to be unsound. Where its conclusions are not subsequently supported by sound argument, thinkers espousing them will lack warrant for them. In the different versions of the ontological mind-body problem either one of the assumptions to be reconciled or the assumption of a tension between truisms and our scientific world-view are due to picture-driven reasoning—and are hardly ever backed up by further argument. In its several versions, this classical mind-body problem is ill-motivated.

To sum up, we have considered the phenomenon of picture-driven reasoning, i.e., non-intentional analogical reasoning in which we apply conceptual metaphors more literally than we know appropriate. We have seen that this phenomenon can account for fundamental and consequential philosophical intuitions: intuitions that have shaped the modern conception of the mind and raised mind-body problems that still worry us today. Philosophical pictures can generate fundamental philosophical intuitions which clash with other convictions (or each other) and thus raise philosophical problems. Alas, these intuitions are unsound and the maddening problems ill-motivated.





4. RESOLVING PICTURE-DRIVEN PROBLEMS




This in itself disappointing finding vindicates a new approach to maddening problems: Where we have reason to believe that thinkers raising philosophical problems are under the spell of philosophical pictures, it is reasonable to explore whether those problems are ill-motivated. In other words: We can try to resolve philosophical problems by getting clear on our motivation for raising the pertinent questions and searching the lines of thought that motivate them for moves unsound by our own lights. We can try to resolve such problems by identifying and refuting their philosophical motivation.

We often have a specifically philosophical motivation for raising philosophical questions. Take questions of the form ‘How is it possible that p?’ and an example we will encounter in the next chapter: ‘How is it possible that people can attribute colour, smell or taste to physical objects?’ Taken out of context, it is utterly unclear what philosophers asking the question want to know. Do they want to know how the senses of sight, smell and taste have evolved? Or how people come to master colour-concepts, etc.? Or something else entirely? While an evolutionary biologist or a psycholinguist might use that interrogative sentence to ask one of those two questions, we will see that philosophers came to raise it due to lines of thought which suggested to them that physical objects do not in fact have any such ‘secondary qualities’ as we take them to have, so that our ordinary attributions of colour and taste to such objects are bound to be false or even meaningless. Something similar is of course true of the question ‘How is it possible that we know (as we often do) what others think, believe or remember?’ This question is at least partially motivated by a line of thought—‘Reasoning Private’—that suggests to us that we cannot possibly perceive the things in others’ minds, and by the thought that at any rate the most straightforward way of getting to know about thoughts and beliefs is to perceive them. In these and similar cases, certain lines of thought which suggest that it cannot be the case that p, that there is some sort of difficulty about its being the case that p, add a fresh problem about the subject under investigation— the perception and attribution of colours, our knowledge of others’ beliefs, etc.—to the problems other disciplines raise about it.

Where the lines of thought that suggest the existence of some such impossibility or difficulty are unsound, the specifically philosophical motivation for raising those questions is unsound. In such cases, we can resolve the problem by identifying and removing this motivation, that is, by reconstructing and refuting the pertinent lines of thought and thus showing that there is no such difficulty as we believed to confront us. In this case there is no specifically philosophical problem about the fact that p, in addition to, say, problems of biology or psychology.

In a sense, this suggestion merely takes one step further what is a common approach to problems motivated by philosophical paradox. A philosophical paradox is defined as an argument from—often apparently trivial— premises the proponents initially accept, via steps they find compelling, to a conclusion apparently at odds with common sense (whence ‘paradox’, from the Greek “para doxa”, meaning ‘against—common or established— opinion’). Where the conclusion of a paradox appears to be at odds with the common-sense conviction that p, philosophers tend to wonder: ‘How is it possible that p?’ Thus the sceptical argument from dreaming purports to show that we cannot acquire any perceptual knowledge about our physical environment and thus motivates the question; ‘How is it possible that we can acquire knowledge about the things around us, through our senses?’ Philosophers who address this question are typically not interested in the neurological prerequisites that make it possible for us to acquire perceptual knowledge, or about what information-processing tasks need to be successfully mastered by that neurological hardware if we are to acquire perceptual knowledge—or any other such scientific question. Rather, they want to address the challenge posed by sceptical arguments which we find intuitively compelling while refusing to believe their conclusions. Accordingly, the most common philosophical response to the question is to analyse these paradoxical arguments in the hope of identifying mistakes in them.

Many paradoxical arguments divide into two parts. All paradoxes purport to show that there is some sort of difficulty about p by arguing for a conclusion q that appears to entail or imply that not-p. Many paradoxes also seek to show that this difficulty cannot be overcome (that q indeed entails or implies not-p). The sceptical argument from dreaming, for instance, has it that you can acquire perceptual knowledge only if you can exclude the hypothesis that you are merely dreaming what you take yourself to see or feel. (As you look at it now, you know there is a book in front of you only if you can rule out the hypothesis that you are merely dreaming that you are reading this book.) This first step of the argument purports to establish that there is a difficulty or challenge that has to be overcome, if we are to acquire perceptual knowledge: We have to rule out the sceptical hypothesis that we are currently dreaming. The second step then argues that this difficulty or challenge cannot be overcome: that we cannot refute the hypothesis that we are only dreaming, because in this case we would have exactly the same experience. (You may have exactly the same experience when you are reading this book and when you are dreaming.) This argument provides a specifically philosophical motivation for asking: ‘How is it possible that we can acquire knowledge about the things around us, through our senses (viz. even though this requires refuting the dream hypothesis)?’

By identifying defective assumptions or inferences in different parts of the argument, we can either solve or dissolve the problem it raises:

We solve a problem if we provide a true justified answer to the question articulating it.



We dissolve the problem if we refute our reasons for asking this question and show we are justified in dropping it as pointless (or worse).





We solve the problem when we accept the first half of the paradoxical argument and the challenge it poses but refute the second half of the argument that purports to show that this challenge cannot be met and devise a way of addressing this challenge (e.g. when we can explain how to refute the dreaming hypothesis by establishing the coherence of our present with past experience and further knowledge or beliefs). This is of course the most common approach to problems motivated by paradox. By contrast, we dissolve the problem when we dig deeper and expose defects already in the first part of the argument, which appears to establish the existence of a challenge or difficulty (here: the apparent need to refute the dreaming-hypothesis).

Our analysis of how picture-driven reasoning raises philosophical problems suggests that the common approach to problems motivated by paradox can be fruitfully applied (i) more generally, to more problems than are commonly linked to paradox, and (ii) more thoroughly, to dissolve rather than merely solve the problems addressed. Typically, philosophers apply the term “paradox” only to arguments that are explicitly stated and lead to conclusions which we find it natural to draw from the premises but do not endorse for a minute. (Again, the conclusions of sceptical arguments are a case in point—we do not believe for a minute that we cannot possibly get to know, say, whether there currently is a book in our hands.) But also tacit lines of thought leading to conclusions we explicitly endorse satisfy the definition of the term. Our analysis has revealed such paradoxes: lines of non-intentional reasoning we are not aware of engaging in, where often only either the premise or the conclusion is stated explicitly and the latter may be explicitly endorsed, in spite of its apparent conflict with common sense. Such tacit paradoxes can motivate philosophical questions no less than their more prominent cousins.

Where these lines of thought are picture-driven, we are prone to make exactly the kind of mistakes we typically hunt for in familiar explicit paradoxes. Since we typically reject the conclusions of the latter, we assume that at least some of their assumptions must be false or some of the inferences made from them invalid. Since we initially accept the explicit assumptions and countenance the inferences made from them, we suspect that we must have made some ‘hidden mistake’: that at some step we tacitly relied on an inference-principle that is invalid or on a presupposition that is false, that we inadvertently placed an unduly substantive reading on a merely otherwise plausible assumption, or placed an unduly paradoxical or even meaningless interpretation on an otherwise unexciting or straightforward conclusion. The pictorial process we have outlined involves mistakes of precisely these kinds: Picture-driven leaps of thought systematically have us rely on tacit assumptions we explicitly reject and leap to wild conclusions we have no right to maintain. Various kinds of sublimating glosses obscure this defect without remedying it: Positive sublimation of picture-driven conclusions has us maintain claims for which we have no warrant, and negative sublimation has us cleave to conclusions to which we cannot even give proper meaning and content. Finally, when we do make an effort to explicitly justify what we find compelling, belief bias has us unwittingly presuppose what we mean to establish, and frequently read our conclusions into common-sense statements with which we then conflate them. In the cases we have considered so far, and in all the cases we will encounter as we proceed, picture-driven inferences are involved already in creating the impression of a challenge or difficulty. Where picture-driven reasoning raises philosophical problems, it is likely to go wrong from the very start and it is reasonable to try to dissolve, rather than solve, these problems.

In the sense explained, a problem may have both a solution and a dissolution, namely in case the paradox raising it goes wrong at both stages: If the paradox goes wrong in arguing that a conclusion q is incompatible with a common-sense conviction p, exposing and correcting this mistake puts us into a position to explain how it is possible that p, given that q. But if the argument also goes wrong already in arguing for q, this explanation has no philosophical point and is irrelevant except as a jeu d’esprit. Dissolutions render solutions irrelevant. (Dissolutions trump solutions.)

A major strand of twentieth-century analytic philosophy, commonly associated with Vienna, Cambridge and Oxford, and the period 1930– 1960, developed in various different ways the idea that philosophical problems ought to be not solved but dissolved, namely by showing that the questions articulating them are meaningless. (Hence a problem can only be either solved or dissolved, but never both.) These attempts tended to rely on controversial criteria of sense and were in many cases unable to make stick the charge of meaninglessness. For example, few philosophers perplexed by sceptical paradoxes could be convinced that they are unable to attach proper meaning or content to the question of how it is possible for us to acquire knowledge about things around us, through our senses. For problems that are actually (if, perhaps, unbeknownst to us) raised by— tacit—philosophical paradoxes, the present considerations give radically different content to the idea that we can dissolve philosophical problems, which makes the idea more widely applicable. By reconstructing and refuting the paradoxical lines of thought that lead us to ask the question, we expose and remove what philosophical motivation we had for asking it. We thus show that it is right to drop the question as philosophically pointless. The focus here is on defects not of the question articulating the problem but of the (paradoxical) conclusion motivating the question. The defects to be exposed include both lack of meaning and lack of warrant: It is utterly pointless for us to wonder how a certain supposed difficulty can be overcome both when we cannot give any content to the claim that there is such a difficulty (no meaning to the sentence purporting to articulate such a claim), and when we have no right to believe that there is one.

Warrant is of course a subject-relative notion: One thinker may be entitled to a belief for which another has no warrant. Accordingly, we can only expose certain thinkers’ lack of warrant (and not lack of warrant, tout court), and exposure of someone’s lack of warrant for a paradoxical conclusion will only dissolve that problem for him and those who share his relevant beliefs (and ‘disbeliefs’). And of course one person or generation may come to acquire warrant for a belief for which another had none. But this does not make for any practical difference between lack of warrant and lack of meaning: The latter too can be remedied, namely by innovative linguistic legislation (which may be well motivated); also the bounds of sense are moving frontiers. We can therefore safely borrow the philosophically well-established verb to sum up the approach suggested: Let us try to dissolve philosophical problems by reconstructing and refuting the lines of thought that motivate them.

The proof of this pudding lies in the eating. There is no reason to believe that every philosophical question we find worrying or perplexing will turn out to have been motivated by an unsound line of thought. Whether the approach allows us to cope with a particular question, we can find out only by applying it to that question or problem. It is not a cure-all but a good bet. In particular, it is a good bet wherever we have reason to believe that we are under the spell of philosophical pictures: We have seen that picture-driven reasoning systematically raises philosophical problems and that such reasoning involves steps that are unsound by the thinker’s own lights, at different stages of the pictorial process we made out.

A philosophical picture tends to be at the root of several philosophical problems and questions: It drives thinkers to maintain several conclusions which appear to be at odds with common sense, science—or each other. When in the grip of a philosophical picture, we thus tend to raise a whole series of subtly related reconciliation problems. Where philosophical pictures are indeed at the root of a philosophical problem, this problem is therefore likely to be just one branch of many growing from eventually the same roots. We hence stand to kill several birds with one stone, if we proceed not from the branch-tip but the root-end: if we do not start out with a particular problem and work our way ‘down’ through the reasoning raising it to the picture or pictures driving that reasoning, but rather start out with a philosophical picture and follow up how this picture—often in conjunction with others—shapes the formulation of philosophical terminology, claims, problems and theories (which generate new problems in trying to solve others). This leads us to the main idea of a new approach. Let us call it the approach of ‘systematic diagnostic analysis’: To dissolve a set of philosophical problems, we

reconstruct how one or more pictorial processes (picture-driven inferences, sublimation and belief bias) lead thinkers to maintain paradoxical conclusions in the absence of warrant, and then

inquire into the motivation of several philosophical questions about the topic at hand, with particular attention to apparent tensions in our beliefs and intuitions apparently at odds with common sense or with each other.





Where we find that a question is motivated by lines of thought which are unsound by our own lights and people are unable to come up with new and sound reasons for asking it, we can show that we are justified in rejecting the question as pointless.





5. DEVELOPING A DIAGNOSIS




This approach builds on the kind of cognitive reconstruction of philosophical intuitions and argumentative gaps we have started to develop in the previous chapter. Before we proceed further, let us get clear on how to devise and develop such a reconstruction, proceeding from such evidence as is provided by actual philosophical texts. Three kinds of moves are involved in the pictorial process we have posited: non-intentional analogical inferences in which thinkers unwittingly but systematically assimilate the targets to the models of conceptual metaphors, in ways in which they know the two to differ; spontaneous reinterpretation of conclusions thus obtained, to paper over their clashes with conceptual truisms thinkers respect; and various forms of biased reasoning in which conclusions thus obtained are either presupposed in leaps of thought or channel our attention. Together they form evidential icebergs. Sublimating reinterpretation may yield explanations authors explicitly give. These explicitly stated explanations are, as it were, the icebergs’ very tips—the first we will see of them. Biased interpretations and reasoning are right above and below the water-line—we can discern much of them when we have a close look, namely through logical reconstruction of explicitly stated lines of thought that reveal leaps of thought with a certain kind of presuppositions. Non-intentional analogical reasoning is the bulk submerged in dark waters—we reconstruct it through inferences to the best explanation, in the process of accounting for recurrent presuppositions, larger gaps in arguments and apparently paradoxical intuitions espoused without any argument.

We only start looking for such icebergs when we are in sufficiently cold waters—when we have encountered potentially pertinent explananda, namely apparently unsupported intuitions (like I1 to I4, in this and the previous chapter) and argumentative gaps (like the gaping hole in the middle of the ‘argument from conceivability’ we shall encounter in the next chapter). The first things to look out for then are those we just located in the icebergs’ tips:

1. Negative sublimating explanations provide first evidence for picture-driven reasoning: The fact that an author finds it necessary to stress that something is not to be taken literally indicates that this does not go without saying, that there is, in him or his audience, a propensity to take a metaphor more seriously than the author knows appropriate. For example, you have probably never found it necessary to remind yourself or explain to others that when you say you are ‘keeping’ someone ‘in mind’ you are not saying that the poor man is being kept in some place (and unable to go home). By contrast, Berkeley did find it necessary to explain:

[W]hen I speak of objects as existing in the mind or imprinted on the senses; I would not be understood in the gross literal sense, as when bodies are said to exist in a place, or a seal to make an impression upon wax. (3D 250)



2. Positive sublimating glosses do not wear their character on their sleeves in quite this way. Consider:

[W]hen I speak of objects as existing in the mind . . . My meaning is only that the mind comprehends or perceives them. (3D 250)



[I]f these words (to be in the understanding) have any propriety, they signify to be understood. (EHU I.ii.5)





These explanations purport to coin new expressions with a figurative sense: “x exists in the mind” and “x is in the understanding”. Whether they are sublimating glosses, i.e. introduced to paper over conflicts between picture-driven conclusions and truisms thinkers cannot deny, is something we can find out by considering how these expressions are used, once given: by considering whether we can replace the new expressions by the more familiar terms declared synonymous with them (and, e.g. replace “x is in the mind of S” by “S understands x”) without turning a prima facie plausible claim into a palpable falsehood. We thus find, e.g., that right after defining ‘ideas’ as whatever we understand or think about, Locke ‘presume[s]’ it obvious ‘that there are such ideas in men’s minds; everyone is conscious of them in himself, and men’s words and actions will satisfy him that they are in others’ (EHU I.i.8)—which is not the least bit obvious if the things ‘in the mind’ or ‘in’ a part of it are the mansions we dreamily think of and the financial situation we have understood.

Sublimating glosses may figure prominently in the explanation of core terms of a philosophical terminology (such as the terminology of ‘minds’ and ‘ideas’ or of ‘substances’ and ‘accidents’, which we will encounter in the next chapter). Where this happens, the use of that terminology constitutes prima facie evidence for widespread adherence to philosophical pictures among the thinkers who employ those terms.

3. Explicit comparisons and classifications which place into the same category things we would ordinarily put into entirely different categories offer further prima facie evidence that thinkers who advance them without argument or further explanation are prone to excessively assimilate different things. Locke, for example, compares the understanding, defined as the ‘power of thinking’ (EHU II.vi.2), with an organ of perception: ‘The understanding, like the eye . . . makes us see, and perceive all other things’ (EHU I.i.1). Even more suggestive is the fact that he explicitly places the models and targets of perceptual metaphors into the same category: He contrasts the two actions of the mind ‘Perception, or Thinking’ and ‘Volition, or Willing’, implying that to think something is an act of perception, just as to want something is an act of volition (EHU II.vi.2) and writes ‘What perception is everyone will know better by reflecting on what he does himself, when he sees, hears, feels, etc. or thinks, than by any discourse of mine’ (EHU II.ix.2), thus treating thinking as a mode of perception alongside seeing, etc.

Where we have come across such prima facie evidence, it is reasonable to consider whether the thinker might be misapplying a conceptual metaphor in non-intentional analogical reasoning. The first task is to verify whether the things apparently assimilated to each other figure in the target- and source-domains of conceptual metaphors which are at least partially realised in the language, natural or technical, used by the thinker at issue. Locke assimilates to each other thinking and sense-perception, and ‘minds’ and bounded spaces. We thus need to verify whether the more concrete things (here: sense-perception and bounded spaces) figure in the source-domains of conceptual metaphors whose target-domains contain the less concrete counterparts (here: thinking and minds).

To get started, we need to identify a set of terms whose use got extended from the source to the target domain (say, from perception to various cognitive activities or achievements). On this basis, we have to define a mapping of elements from the source-domain onto elements of the target-domain (like the mapping ‘Intellectual Effort as Visual Search’ in Chapter 1.1), and to establish that this mapping preserves inferential (or other) relations between the elements involved in it. For detailed explanations of how to proceed from here to the proper reconstruction of conceptual metaphors, the reader is referred to the specialist literature in cognitive linguistics.4 In the present case, we find that Locke’s early modern English realises conceptual metaphors which map perceptual onto intellectual activities and achievements (Chapter 1.1), while things are more complicated with bounded spaces and minds: Much ordinary talk of the latter is motivated by a conceptual metaphor—Metaphor M—which maps spatial relations onto feats and failures of memory, but does not map anything onto minds as distinct elements of the target domain, in addition to those feats and failures which are attributable to human beings (Chapter 1.4).

We then need to see whether the intuitions and argumentative gaps we intend to explain can be accounted for by the mere extension of these metaphors. Where we find that we cannot (as in Chapter 1.5), we should see whether those intuitions etc. can be obtained by their overly literal application (as in Chapters 1.3 and 2.1–2.2). Where this kind of cognitive reconstruction is successful, we have obtained a working hypothesis that is to be explored for strength and assessed in comparison with competing explanatory hypotheses.

In rough approximation: The more otherwise unintelligible claims or inferences we can account for as the result of the overly literal application of the given metaphors, and of the further steps of the pictorial process, the stronger our hypothesis becomes. Careful logical reconstruction of the text may reveal ever more claims and argumentative leaps in need of an explanation. Next we determine whether our cognitive reconstruction can be extended in a way that can account for the assumptions bluntly assumed or quietly presupposed. Whether these are ‘otherwise unintelligible’ then depends upon what other explanations are proposed and stand up to scrutiny.

The most obvious strategy for obtaining such alternative explanations is to search the given and related texts for arguments stated elsewhere in support of the claims or presuppositions to be explained. The existence of such arguments will weaken the case for attributing picture-driven reasoning to the given thinker if, and only if, the ‘new’ argument does not itself contain unsound moves that can be best explained as the result of picture-driven reasoning. In the next chapter, for example, a cognitive reconstruction of picture-driven reasoning will provide the (to my knowledge) first explanation of why Galileo, Boyle and Locke found compelling the ‘argument from conceivability’ which commentators so far despaired of understanding. Looking for alternative explanations, we will encounter the ‘argument from science’ which appears to independently support a part of its conclusion— and will find that this argument presupposes this latter conclusion from the start and throughout. Hence our explanation will prevail unchallenged.

Such explanations are of immediate philosophical relevance because they facilitate the assessment of the warrant thinkers have for the claims and inferences thus explained. The thinkers whose epistemic situation you and I are most interested in probably are you and me, respectively; the most interesting application of the present approach is to one’s own case. Here, we may complement the analysis of textual evidence, and generate further evidence, through self-experimentation similar to a kind of self-scrutiny to which Wittgenstein submitted himself (Chapter 9).

I engaged in such experimentation in formulating first hypotheses about the development of the classical conception of the mind: I had noticed that when wanting to take up or refer (back) to the claim that the mind is a non-physical inner space, I frequently paraphrased it as the claim that our thoughts, beliefs, and pains are non-physical and private things (such paraphrases—which paper over a major step—were subsequently edited out of the text). That is, I observed in myself a tendency to leap from the claim that the mind is a non-physical inner space to the claim that the things in the mind are non-physical and private (further presupposing that thoughts and beliefs are things ‘in the mind’), and to regard this move as entirely trivial. So I asked myself why this move should be right, resolved to give whatever answer would occur to me promptly, regardless of how embarrassingly simple it might be (to exercise no self-censorship), and jotted down what answers occurred to me. They were all variants of the same two lines of thought:

Certain things are perceived in minds. Clearly, the things perceived in minds are or exist in minds. But the mind is an inner space without physical extension. So the things that are or exist in the mind have no such extension either: The things perceived in minds have no physical extension.



The things I perceive in my mind are in my mind. So they cannot simultaneously exist outside my mind. Since my mind is inside me, the things I perceive in my mind can exist only inside me. So they are bound to be hidden in me and you cannot perceive the things I perceive in my mind.



I then tried to work them up into logically valid arguments, in two steps. First, I (i) filled in assumptions that struck me as pertinent truisms, until (ii) I obtained a line of thought I found intuitively compelling. In the first case, I obtained:

(1) Certain things are perceived in minds. (2) If a thing is perceived somewhere it is there (at that place). (3) Hence the things perceived in minds are in minds. (4) The mind is a space without physical extension. (5) Things that are in others cannot have a bigger extension than the container they are in. (6) Hence, by (4) & (5), things that are in the mind have no spatial extension either. Hence, by (3) & (6): (7) The things perceived in minds have no spatial extension.





In the second case, I obtained a version of ‘Reasoning Private’ (Section 1). Then I determined how, and how literally, I had to interpret the key expressions (“perceive”, “without extension”, “is in”, etc.) in order to obtain a valid (though not necessarily sound) argument. I then cast these interpretations into the mould of assumptions presupposed—and thus obtained I to III (Section 1). These assimilate the target-domain of cognition and other supposed operations of the mind to the source-domain of visual perception of physical objects, in ways inconsistent with (sublimating) explanations I was spontaneously inclined to give. I thus came to conclude that I am, to some extent, under the spell of perceptual pictures of the kind we have attributed to Locke.

Where the moves an author treats as trivial strike us as equally compelling when reading his work, where we (have come to) spontaneously employ the same terms in our own reflections, and where we are inclined to spontaneously give the same (sublimating) explanations of them as we later find the author to give in passing, such self-experimentation can also be used to generate hypothetical attributions of particular philosophical pictures to that other author. Such working hypotheses can then be tested by going through the steps set out above. Conversely, where we share the intuitions of earlier philosophers, their cognitive reconstruction based on textual evidence can help us to make sense of what wild reasoning we may elicit from ourselves when engaging in the kind of self-experimentation outlined. To sum up, textual analysis complemented by self-experimentation allows us to formulate and test cognitive reconstructions of philosophical intuitions and argumentative gaps.

Such reconstructions provide the basis for systematic diagnostic analysis that helps us to dissolve philosophical problems by identifying and refuting what philosophical motivation we have for raising them. We have thus won through to the basic ideas of a new approach to at any rate one class of philosophical problems: Where such problems are raised only due to ultimately picture-driven reasoning, we can dissolve them through systematic diagnostic analysis based on cognitive reconstruction of philosophical intuitions and argumentative gaps. We will now show that some important problems of metaphysics, epistemology and the philosophy of perception belong to the relevant class. Important philosophical problems in several core areas of philosophy are raised in the grip of philosophical pictures and can be dissolved by coming to understand their nature and genesis and the way in which we think about the topics at issue when engaged in philosophical reflection.





3 Pictures’ Effects


From ‘Secondary Qualities’

to ‘Perceptions’




Philosophical reflection is decisively shaped by non-intentional and automatic reasoning—by inferences we are not aware of making. The problems, arguments and theories philosophers explicitly state, develop and debate are visible waves on seas whose waters are largely moved by deep currents of thought beyond our direct control, flowing in depths into which we do not normally peer.

Proceeding from a body of experimental work done over the last four decades in cognitive and social psychology, various cognitive scientists have developed the distinction between two kinds or ‘systems’ of cognition.1 Their ‘dual process accounts of cognition’ distinguish between cognitive processes which are automatic, unconscious, associative and fast, and processes which are controlled, typically conscious, serial and comparatively slow. These processes are taken to be cued by different content and contextual triggers. Controlled processes, they maintain, are prone to be triggered mainly (though not exclusively) by the encounter of novel, complex or unusual cases, exceptions, logical complexities like negation, counterfactuals and hypothetical reasoning as well as by perceived high stakes, self-consciousness and the expectation that one will have to justify one’s responses. Automatic processes, by contrast, pertain, first, to the execution of routine or simple tasks, where they are particularly likely to be triggered by time pressure, distraction or the need to do different things at once, as well as pertaining, second, to reasoning about familiar matters where it may be triggered when the stakes are perceived to be low or no goal is being pursued. Much philosophical reflection is about perfectly familiar things, things we do or encounter every day, and is not directly geared towards any particular goal. In brief, in philosophy the conditions are frequently right for inferences of the automatic, unconscious, associative and fast kind.

The most obvious potential cognitive outcomes of automatic or unconscious inferences are intuitions: non-perceptual judgements we make without being aware of drawing any inference and find intuitively compelling—frequently to the point of deeming further argument for them unnecessary. In the course of the last ten years or so, 2 philosophers have grown increasingly interested in exploring the ways in which automatic or unconscious reasoning shapes such intuitive judgements in philosophy, frequently taking their cues from dual process accounts of cognition. We have embarked on an inquiry roughly of this kind, though with a slightly different scientific inspiration, less theoretical baggage and a wider philosophical scope: While previous philosophical work along these lines has been inspired by accounts shaped by research into cognitive heuristics and biases, we have developed ideas launched by work specifically on analogical and metaphorical reasoning. We did so without using the conceptual frameworks of extant dual process accounts of cognition (which have various theoretical commitments I prefer to steer clear of). Instead, we have built up to a new notion which remains neutral between, and open to different theoretical interpretations: the notion of ‘being under the spell of philosophical pictures’. With the help of this notion, we have examined non-intentional analogical reasoning in which thinkers assimilate targets to models of conceptual metaphors, in ways in which they actually know the two to be different. We have examined how such ‘picture-driven’ reasoning generated not only some influential philosophical intuitions which shaped the modern (post-Aristotelian) concept of the mind, but also some classical mind-body problems which still worry us today. In this chapter, we will systematically review the further effects picture-driven reasoning has at several stages of philosophical reflection.

Picture-driven inferences are easiest for us to spot in reasoning couched in conceptual frameworks in which we are not at home ourselves. Their novelty—to us—makes it less likely that non-intentional inferences are triggered, and the pertinent moves will not strike us as so natural that we just go along with them without realising that a substantive step is involved. In this chapter, we will therefore linger in the 17th century and follow up an important intellectual development which was facilitated by the concept of ‘the mind’ we have reconstructed and which was couched in the terminology of ‘substances’ and ‘accidents’ that was in general use until the mid-18th century but is entirely alien to us today. We shall follow up the early modern revival of the lastingly influential distinction between ‘primary’ and ‘secondary qualities’, and the evolution of the latter notion into the sense-datum doctrine of perception whose development, accommodation and refutation has been the core concern of modern philosophy of perception, for over three centuries. We will follow up this influential development in order to examine how picture-driven reasoning can shape philosophical reflection at several stages: We shall examine how philosophical pictures have shaped the formation of major conceptual frameworks of early modern philosophy (Section 1) as well as the formulation or development of crucial philosophical doctrines (Section 2) and arguments (Section 3), problems and theories (Section 4), and of speculative explanations (Section 5). At several points, our new explanation will let us solve puzzles that have perplexed modern commentators, and thus establish the explanatory potential of the novel cognitive reconstructions we are developing.





1. PICTURE-DRIVEN CONCEPTS:

‘SUBSTANCES’ AND ‘ACCIDENTS’




In the previous chapters, we have encountered the process of metaphorical extension and considered how the extension of perception- and manipulation-terms to more abstract, intellectual, activities and achievements provided ordinary English with a core part of its mental vocabulary. The process drives not only the development of natural language but also of philosophical terminology. A case in point is the ‘substance’/‘accident’-terminology of ultimately Aristotelian provenance which was in general use in Scholastic and 17th-century philosophy. Qualities (and some other things) are said to ‘exist’ or ‘be in’ the ‘substances’ (the things or stuffs) that possess them. The ‘substances’ are said to ‘stand under’ or ‘support’ those qualities (as pillars support a bridge), and these may ‘join’ or ‘leave’ them. These terms were initially applied literally to tangible things, in particular to material parts of whole physical objects.

The development of this terminology crucially involves the extension of all these terms from this concrete to more abstract fare: to qualities (etc.) of things. This new use endows these terms with new metaphorical senses, in which they are equivalent to our current everyday talk of things ‘having’, ‘acquiring’, and ‘losing’ qualities (used below to indicate the new senses “joins”, etc. have when extended to qualities, etc.):





Qualities as Parts

Parts/wholes Oualities/things (stuffs)

x joins y → y acquires x

x is in y → y has x

x leaves y → y loses x

y supports/stands under x → The thing made of y has X



This extension preserves the inferential relations between the terms involved: A physical part that joins a whole body will be in it until it leaves it; a quality that joins (i.e. is acquired by) an object will be in it (i.e. possessed by it) until it leaves it (i.e., until the object loses it). That a part leaves a whole implies that it was in it before; that a quality leaves an object (i.e., that the object loses the quality) implies that the quality was in it before (i.e. that the object possessed it before), etc. In general: Both in the initial sense in which they apply to parts and in the new sense in which they apply to qualities, these terms stand in the same inferential relations to each other. The above mapping, ‘Qualities as Parts’, hence preserves relations between the mapped elements; it is a conceptual metaphor (Chapter 1.1).

By preserving the inferential relations between the terms involved, this conceptual metaphor forges a structural analogy between a simple concrete model and a more abstract target, namely between tangible parts of physical objects, on the one hand, and qualities of things, on the other. Structural analogies between the concrete and the abstract facilitate non-intentional analogical inferences in reflection about the latter: When thinkers are not pursuing a practical goal and are unaware of relevant context or detail, they are prone to unwittingly fall back on the tangible model when thinking about the target, and to spontaneously project properties from the former onto the latter, without realising that they are doing this or are making any use of a model (Chapter 1.2). In this way they may excessively assimilate the target to the model, against their better knowledge: They may unwittingly project properties they know the target does not share with the model and presuppose that the two are alike in ways in which they know them to be different. In the previous chapters, we have seen how thinkers have unwittingly misapplied perceptual models in this way and presupposed, e.g., that to know or ‘see’ something is to perceive some thing that is literally located at some place, literally with an organ of sense. When misapplying the current model in this manner, they will presuppose:



(M) Qualities are things literally located at some place, namely in the objects to which they belong.



Let’s say that a thinker is under the spell of the part-whole or mereological picture of qualities iff he unwittingly but systematically makes inferences which presuppose M, i.e. inferences ‘driven’ by that picture.

We have seen that new philosophical concepts of ‘the mind’ and ‘ideas’ were introduced through inferences driven by perceptual pictures, which proceeded from truisms which reflect the metaphorical senses of perception-terms (Chapter 1.3). Similar inferences driven by the mereological pictures lead to definitions introducing the two principal technical senses of the term “accident”. The first definition was meant to capture a truism which arises from the conceptual fact that in saying that a quality ‘is in’ an object, in the new metaphorical sense of this expression, we are precisely not locating it in space, let alone referring to any object: A quality can be said to ‘be in’ objects, namely the objects to which it can be attributed, but cannot be said to ‘be anywhere’ else. That is:



(T1) A quality cannot ‘be anywhere’ except ‘in’ objects.



Aquinas meant to capture this conceptual truism by means of a definition that follows from it in—and only in—conjunction with M, viz. the proposition that qualities are objects which exist at some place or other:



(C1) A quality is a thing that can only exist in other objects and not ‘of itself’ or on its own, outside other objects.



In other words, qualities are existentially dependent things which necessarily require a ‘host’ object to exist in. Similar leaps led to analogous conclusions concerning quantities, relations and a few other things, so that this existential dependence was used to define not the notion of qualities, but a more general term:

(D1) An accident is a thing that by its very nature must exist in another thing. Accidens =def.: res cuius naturae debetur esse in alio. (Aquinas)



This defines the ‘wide’ sense of the term (‘accidens praedicamentale’), in which it marks the opposite of substances. Boyle explains:

As substance is commonly defined to be a thing that subsists of itself and is the subject of accidents . . . so an accident is said commonly to be id cuius esse est inesse [that whose being is in-being]. (OFQ 21)



The term “substance” then is used equivocally to refer to what makes up the object together with the accidents which inhere in it, and to the object itself. (Compare the use of the term “bridge” to refer both to what is supported by the pillars and to the whole of which also the pillars are a part.) In the wide sense in which it simply marks the opposite of ‘substance’, the term “accident” covers the remaining nine of the ten Aristotelian categories: qualities, quantities, relations, locations and times, actions and passions, disposition (the arrangement of parts) and ‘rainment’.

In its second, ‘narrow’ sense (‘accidens praedicabile’), the term applies to contingent, as opposed to essential qualities (which alone were called ‘properties’ at the time). In this sense,

an accident ‘is then defined [as] “that which may be present or absent without the destruction of the subject”—as a man may be sick or well, and a wall white or not white, and yet the one still a man, the other a wall’. (OFQ 21)





Like the previous definition, this one is derived from a colourful interpretation (‘Whiteness may be present or absent without the destruction of the wall’) of conceptual truisms it is evidently meant to capture (such as ‘A wall may be white or not white, and yet be a wall’). And, again, the interpretation of the truism is entailed by it in—and only in—conjunction with M. As this idea is not made explicit, we can conceptualize this move as a leap of thought which tacitly presupposes—a part of—M and proceeds from the truism T2 to be captured to the conclusion C2 conflated with it:



(T2) A contingent quality of an F is a quality which the F may have or fail to have, without ceasing to be an F.



And: The qualities of a thing of kind F exist somewhere in (‘are present in’) that F. Hence:



(C2) A contingent quality of an F is a quality which may be present in the F or absent from it, without it ceasing to be an F.



Thinking of qualities as parts of things then has thinkers interpret this conclusion as one about the non-essential parts of an object whose removal merely damages but does not destroy that object. This step takes us to the common formulation taken up by the above quote:



(D2) An accident is what may join or leave a thing without its destruction. Accidens =def.: quod accedit vel decedit absque rei corruptione. (Goclenius)

The idiom of qualities ‘joining’, ‘being in’ and ‘leaving’ objects is obtained by metaphorical extension motivated by the conceptual metaphor ‘Qualities as Parts’. Metaphorical extension of terms initially applied to concrete things is a major process equipping language to deal with the abstract. In many cases, it provides us with all the equipment we have to talk about an abstract phenomenon. The abstract relation of qualities to the things that have them is a case in point: If we don’t want to talk metaphorically of qualities ‘joining’ and ‘leaving’ things ‘in’ which they are, we have to speak, equally metaphorically, of things which ‘acquire’ and ‘lose’ the qualities they ‘possess’ in the meantime. When both sets of expressions are used in the metaphorical senses motivated by the respective conceptual metaphors, they can be used interchangeably: That a quality ‘is in’ an object simply means that the object ‘possesses’ it, and vice versa. Hence we can substitute one expression by another in a sentence, without changing its meaning, let alone its truth-value, wherever the present idiom is used with the metaphorical senses motivated by the conceptual metaphor ‘Qualities as Parts’.

But we cannot make such substitutions in the sentences that articulate the philosophical dichotomy of things that can ‘subsist of themselves’ and things which are existentially dependent upon such substances. Take, for instance, the sentence “A quality is a thing that can only exist in other things and not of itself, outside other objects”. It is clearly not intended to say that a quality is a thing that can only be possessed by other objects, i.e., to deny that qualities can themselves have qualities. And it is quite unclear how to render its second half (“ . . . and not [exist] of itself, outside other objects”) in the idiom of possession rather than existence, without changing the topic completely. We may conclude, therefore, that the dichotomy of substances and accidents cannot be obtained by mere metaphorical extension of “joins”, “leaves” and “exists in” but only by the overly literal application of the conceptual metaphor motivating this extension, that is, through inferences driven by the mereological picture of qualities, such as those we have spelled out.

Picture-driven inferences take thinkers to conclusions at odds with truisms they are unable or unwilling to give up. The conclusions of inferences driven by the mereological picture are at odds with the conceptual truism



(CT) Qualities (etc.) do not stand in any kind of spatial relations.



A common response to such conflicts is sublimation (Chapters 1.3 and 2.1): Thinkers who find both sides to the dispute compelling spontaneously reinterpret the key terms of the picture-driven conclusions in a way that appears to render the latter consistent with the pertinent truisms. Accordingly, definitions of the term “accident” are typically accompanied by a gloss which deprives the key phrases “is in” and “exists in” of all spatial implications and thus appears to render definitions like D1 consistent with truisms like CT:



(E) That is said to be in a subject which has these three conditions: that, however it (1) be in another thing, (2) is not in it as a part, and (3) cannot exist separately from the thing or subject wherein it is. (Boyle: OFQ 21)

This explanation amounts to what we called a ‘negative sublimation’, which explicitly tells us that the pertinent terms are not to be understood in a gross, literal sense, but in some other sense, which frequently remains unexplained. Thus, now we are merely told that qualities (1) are in, indeed, (3) must be in other things, and (2) are in them in another sense than their parts—and nothing is added to explain the other, non-literal, sense in which qualities can be said to ‘be in’ objects. Such purely negative explanations are frequently accompanied by positive reinterpretation which may remain tacit. In particular when discussing concrete examples many philosophers momentarily employ the key terms in the metaphorical senses motivated by the pertinent conceptual metaphors and thus use the expression “qualities in things” simply as equivalent of “qualities of things”. Where this practice is not consistent, but serves to reinterpret claims previously obtained only due to unduly literal interpretation of such talk, we are dealing with positive sublimation, which we can logically reconstruct as application of rules like



(R) Say “Quality Q is in object O” iff Q is a quality of O.



While negative sublimation tends to remain purely negative, positive explanations like R get swiftly ignored and are not applied consistently. As we shall see (in the next section), thinkers sometimes even apply them only to one part but not another, of one and the same sentence—striking cases of merely partial sublimation.

These defects of sublimation are, I think, not due to ineptitude, but to the fact that the expectations thinkers maintain in the grip of the philosophical picture are hard (or even impossible) to satisfy simultaneously: On the one hand, thinkers in the grip, e.g., of the mereological picture hanker after a ‘substantive’ sense of “Q exists in O”, which carries at least some of the spatial implications of the literal sense of this phrase. On the other hand, explanations like E are motivated by the reluctance to completely part with the established practice of attributing qualities, which does not provide for any such implications. So the sense in which “exists in” applies to qualities ‘in’ or of objects is to be both substantive and intellectually acceptable by the lights of the established practice. Depending upon how substantive a thinker wants this sense to be, on the one hand, and how attached to established practice he is, on the other, he may impose requirements which jointly rule out any positive explanation of “exists in” he can think of—if they are not outright inconsistent. Thus he may find himself reduced to purely negative explanations of the expression, while unwilling to consistently restrict himself to the metaphorical sense which is patently free of spatial implications. Thus the hankering after a substantive sense may prevent users of the substance/accident-terminology from just seizing on the Rule R they often speak in accord with, to explain the sense in which qualities rightly can be said to ‘be in’ objects, and may push them at many points to use this phrase in ways not licensed by that rule. The defects of sublimation are signs of a conflict between philosophical pictures and common sense, which settles us with requirements that are hard to square and makes us try to square the apparent circle through verbal tricks.

To sum up, we have reason to believe that the concepts of ‘substance’ and ‘accident’ were obtained through picture-driven inferences—like the equally important concepts of ‘mind’ and ‘idea’ we have examined in a previous chapter (Chapter 1.3). These fundamental concepts were commonly paired up in a straightforward manner: Picture-driven reasoning has us swiftly conclude that the things we perceive in the mind are or exist in the mind (Chapter 2.1). In positive sublimation, early modern philosophers explain that “exists in the mind” simply means ‘is perceived in the mind’ (ibid.). Ideas, the things we perceive in the mind, thus appear to be of such a kind as to ‘exist’ in, and only in, the sense that they are perceived, namely in the mind, with the mind. It appears, in other words, that ideas cannot exist independently from minds which perceive them or outside the minds in which they are perceived. Hence they satisfy the definition—D1—of ‘accidents’ as things which by their very nature cannot exist independently but only in other things. At the same time, minds were held to satisfy the definition of ‘substances’: First, accidents (namely ideas) exist in them. Second, they are generally thought, at the time, to ‘subsist independently’: Commonly employed metonymy treats these supposed organs as subjects of perception, while equally common sublimating explanations stress their immaterial character (Chapter 1.3). In the intensely religious 17th century, these immaterial subjects of perception were typically conflated with the ‘souls’ religious teaching posited ‘in’ us as immaterial subjects of perception and volition, 3 which can exist independently and actually do so once death has separated them from the mortal bodies to which they have been harnessed in life. Souls bequeathed their existential independence on minds. Thus the new (post-Aristotelian) ‘minds’ were introduced as substances (e.g. EHU II.xxvii.2) and ideas as accidents which exist in them.

In this section and the previous chapters, we have found that the two most fundamental pairs of concepts employed in early modern philosophy are generated by picture-driven reasoning. This finding provides the key to a series of puzzles about lastingly influential doctrines couched in these terms, which have notoriously perplexed commentators. To establish the explanatory power of our hypothesis that philosophical pictures drive philosophical reflection, we now turn to two puzzling doctrines that lie at the root of the lastingly influential distinction between ‘primary’ and ‘secondary qualities’ and, ultimately, of the major modern philosophical theories of perception.

The development of the terminology of “substantia” and “accidens“ took place when Western scholars rediscovered Aristotelian ways of thinking and enriched their Medieval Latin with the idioms and expressions required for taking them up. It is plausible to assume that throughout the reign of this terminology (roughly, from the 13th to the early-18th century) much philosophical reflection was driven by the mereological picture of qualities we have seen to shape this conceptual framework. We shall now consider what happened when, in the 17th century, these Aristotelian concepts outlived Aristotelian metaphysics and were used by the ‘natural philosophers’ who resurrected Democritean atomism: By interpreting their ‘new’ metaphysical vision in the light of the philosophical picture they had inherited from their immediate predecessors, they got to conceive of ‘primary’ and ‘secondary qualities’ and to endorse two striking doctrines about them.





2. PICTURE-DRIVEN DOCTRINES: PRIMARY QUALITIES




The most important of these natural philosophers are Galileo, who first revived these Democritean concepts, and Locke, who established them in the philosophical mainstream, along with Boyle, who is generally regarded as Locke’s main source of inspiration on this topic, and Descartes, who influenced Boyle. We shall consider the three thinkers at the root of the more lastingly influential empiricist tradition (Galileo, Boyle and Locke), with a focus first on Locke and then on Galileo.

The distinction between primary and secondary qualities is commonly regarded as one between determinable rather than determinate qualities, where several determinate qualities like ‘red’ and ‘white’ (or ‘square’ and ‘round’) fall under the same determinable quality, like colour (or shape, respectively). The precise content of the distinction is a matter of debate: A thorough survey reviewed no less than twenty-two different distinctions that have been drawn under this heading, attributed no fewer than fifteen to early modern authors, and suggested that individual thinkers may have been running together up to six different distinctions under these labels.4 I propose to focus on what I regard as the most fundamental of the distinctions that can be credibly attributed to all three protagonists mentioned, from which the other distinctions attributable to them can be derived. This is the metaphysical distinction between—primary—qualities which really exist in the physical bodies to which we commonly attribute them and— secondary—qualities which do not really exist in such bodies (or at any rate not as distinct accidents). The mechanical properties of size, shape, motion and texture (along with the accident of number) are assigned to the first category. Colours and tastes, smells and sound, heat and cold are placed into the second. For instance, ‘sweetness and whiteness are not really in manna [a sweetish dried tree exudate]’ (EHU II.viii.18). By contrast, the ‘real original, or primary’ (EHU II.viii.23), or ‘primary, and real qualities of bodies’ (EHU II.viii.22) ‘may be called real qualities, because they really exist in those bodies’ (EHU II.viii.17).

This apparently straightforward metaphysical distinction rests on doctrines about primary and secondary qualities, respectively, which are nothing less than mind-boggling. Primary qualities are ‘real’ because they really exist in bodies. And the qualities that really exist in bodies are the mechanical properties of the ‘parts’ or ‘particles’ that make them up (sic). Thus Boyle declares:

There is in the body to which . . . sensible qualities are attributed nothing of real and physical but the size, shape, and motion or rest, of its component particles, together with that texture of the whole which results from their [i.e. the particles’] being so contrived as they are. (OFQ 31, my italics)





Locke seems to agree (cp. EHU II.viii.10):

The particular bulk, number, figure, and motion of the parts of fire, or snow, are really in them, whether any one’s senses perceive them or no: and therefore may be called real qualities, because they really exist in those bodies. (EHU II.viii.17, my italics)





Galileo, finally, gives a causal account of taste- and smell-sensations, according to which these causally depend only on the sizes, shapes, number and velocities of certain insensible particles (SAG 29), and then declares:

[T]hat in external bodies, to excite in us the smells, the tastes, and the sounds, there are required other things than sizes, shapes, multitudes, and movements swift or slow, I do not believe. (SAG 30)





Clearly, the ‘sizes, shapes, multitudes, and movements’ situated ‘in external bodies’ are those of the insensible particles that make them up; these primary accidents are ‘in external bodies’—in contrast to the tastes and smells that merely ‘seem’ to us to ‘reside in’ those bodies (SAG 28). Presumably, Galileo too agrees with Boyle and believes that:



(PQ) The only qualities to ‘really exist’ (or ‘be something of real’) in a sensible body are the size, shape, and motion of the insensible particles that make it up.

This would seem to imply that the primary qualities of ordinary, medium-sized physical objects are the mechanical properties of the imperceptibly tiny particles that make them up—which is precisely what Locke asserts when introducing the distinction between ‘primary’ and ‘secondary qualities’:

[T]heir [i.e. the objects’] primary qualities . . . [are] the bulk, figure, texture, and motion, of their insensible parts. (EHU II.viii.10, my italics)





It is tempting to try to make sense of this by invoking the once popular distinction between determinable qualities like colour and shape, and the determinate qualities that ‘fall under’ them, as ‘green’ and ‘white’ fall under ‘colour’ and ‘round’ and ‘square’ fall under ‘shape’. The present sentence could express a claim only about the determinable qualities which physical objects share with the ever smaller parts into which they can be broken up (EHU II.viii.9). And of course both a visible physical object and an invisibly small molecule or atom have some size and some shape. But the claim PQ which would seem to imply the present conclusion is one about the determinate qualities of the parts or particles: ‘The particular bulk, number, figure, and motion of the parts of fire, or snow, are really in them’ (EHU II.viii.17, my italics).

Particles are held to move even when a body they make up is at rest; the atoms that make up a round silver coin presumably have the same ‘figure’ or shape as those that make up a slender silver hair pin; and there would seem to be all the difference in the world between the ‘bulk’ or extension of an atom and that of a coin or a pin. The apparent implication of PQ therefore is plainly mad. Even so, Boyle and Locke explicitly and repeatedly endorse PQ. The only at least prima facie pertinent argument they share, their ‘argument from science’, proceeds from the—different—hypothesis that colour-, smell-, taste- and heat-sensations are causally dependent upon nothing but the motions, shapes and sizes of tiny particles acting on our sense-organs, and is to establish the—different—conclusion that the ‘sensible qualities’ of colour and heat, etc., do not really exist in physical bodies (at any rate not as distinct accidents). But neither Boyle nor Locke (nor Galileo) states any argument to support his doctrine PQ that that ‘[t]he particular bulk, number, figure, and motion of the parts’ of physical things, and no other qualities, ‘are really in’ these objects. Unable to make any sense of this doctrine, modern commentators regularly resort to dismissing its statements as ‘slips’. But the supposed slips are repeated and, in the case of Locke, remained uncorrected through several thorough revisions of the text containing them. So persistent and crass a ‘slip’ would be little less puzzling than the explicitly championed view commentators are, even so, reluctant to attribute to our authors. We might as well accept the texts as they are and address the question they confront us with: Why did these eminent thinkers maintain this apparently mad view?

I submit that Galileo, Boyle and Locke all got to espouse their doctrines about primary and secondary qualities due to positive sublimation of a view they arrived at by interpreting the metaphysical vision they shared, in the light of the mereological picture. The metaphysical vision at the heart of their ‘Corpuscular philosophy’, taken up from Democritean atomism, is that of a universe (the created universe) as ultimately made up of nothing but insensible particles, corpuscles, or atoms, which have only certain basic—mechanical—qualities: size, shape and motion (plus whatever qualities things must necessarily possess in virtue of having these). This vision, explicitly spelled out by Boyle (OFQ 18–21), already informs the causal accounts of sensations which Galileo presents after introducing the distinction (SAG 29–31). It translates into this assumption about any particular sensible body:



(1) Nothing exists in a body in addition to the insensible particles that make it up.



Thinkers in the grip of the part-whole picture of qualities will be prone to interpret this metaphysical core tenet of the Corpuscular philosophy in its light: In their reasoning, they will be inclined to treat qualities of sensible bodies as body-parts which unsuccessfully compete for space with the bodies’ constituent particles and must therefore submit to entering the particles (if they are not to leave the body and thus cease to belong to it). Less poetically and more precisely, such thinkers will make a leap of thought presupposing the by-now-familiar assumption M, in a form that takes into account that sensible bodies are constituted of insensible physical particles:



(2) The qualities of a sensible body really exist somewhere in it: either in the insensible particles that make it up or in addition to these. By (1) & (2):



(3) If a quality really exists in a sensible body, it exists in the insensible particles that make up the body (and not independently from, outside of, these particles).

Since this conclusion is at odds with the conceptual truism that qualities do not stand in any spatial relations, philosophers who find (3) compelling will spontaneously reinterpret, or ‘sublimate’ it. Positive sublimation is by the rule R presented above (in Section1). Partial application of R, to the present conclusion, yields the puzzling doctrine PQ; repeated application yields the even more puzzling implication of the latter that Locke explicitly maintains:



(4) A quality ‘exists in’ a (sensible or insensible) body iff it is a quality of that body. (Rule R) Application to only the consequent of (3) yields:



(5) If a quality really exists in a sensible body, it is a quality of the insensible particles that make up that body.



In other words: (PQ) The only qualities that really exist in a sensible body are the qualities of the insensible particles that make it up. Another application of Rule R, to the antecedent of (5), then yields Locke’s apparently mad claim that the ‘primary or real qualities’ of sensible objects are the qualities of their insensible parts (EHU II.viii.10).

While deeply puzzling to us today, the more basic and popular idea (5)— a.k.a. PQ—in fact provides an attractive solution to the quandary we took to account for the characteristic defects of negative and positive sublimation (Section 1): We put these defects down to the conflict between, on the one hand, the hankering of thinkers in the grip of the mereological picture after a substantive sense in which qualities can be said to ‘exist in’ things and, on the other hand, their reluctance to lapse too far from what is intellectually respectable by the lights of the established practice of attributing qualities, which does not allow for any substantive spatial sense. This conflict is resolved neither by the negative sublimating explanation E—which remains too lofty—nor by the positive sublimation R—which removes all spatial implications. The present conclusion (5), by contrast, seems to provide the key to an innovative sublimation (a third kind of sublimation to be added to the two discussed above): The conclusion suggests a new sense of “exists in” which is both sufficiently substantive and intellectually respectable. The qualities of the insensible particles are of course not spatially in them. But these particles are spatially in the sensible bodies they make up. Hence some qualities ‘really exist’ in a body in the quasi-spatial sense that they are qualities of the particles that exist in that body, in the literal, spatial sense. This is, I think, one major motivation for the distinction between ‘primary and real qualities of bodies’ which ‘are really in them’ (EHU II.viii.17), and the ‘secondary and imputed qualities’ (EHU II.viii.22) which are imputed to bodies even though they do not really exist in them (and can be attributed to them only as ‘bare powers’) (see Section 4). At any rate, such innovative sublimation renders the present conclusion, which is so puzzling to us today, attractive to thinkers in the grip of the part-whole picture of qualities.

To sum up, Locke and Boyle explicitly maintain a paradoxical—indeed, an apparently mad—doctrine about ‘primary qualities’ and do so without any argument. The moves we have posited, namely picture-driven inference and sublimation, can explain the acceptance of this doctrine in the absence of argument: These non-intentional and spontaneous moves take thinkers from the core tenet of atomism to this paradoxical doctrine, which thus appears to follow directly from the core tenet of the ‘Corpuscular Philosophy’ that goes with the ‘New Science’. This creates the wrong impression that the latter implies the mad doctrine, and its apparent madness appears to bear witness to nothing but exhilarating scientific progress which once more corrects uneducated common sense.





3. PICTURE-DRIVEN ARGUMENTS:

SECONDARY QUALITIES




The core doctrine about what Boyle and Locke came to call ‘secondary’ or ‘sensible qualities’ is no less striking than their doctrine about primary qualities. As revived by Galileo, the ancient doctrine of secondary qualities states bluntly that these accidents do not really exist in external bodies but in us:



(SQ) Colours and tastes, smells and sounds, heat and cold, are sensations (sic).



Spelled out more fully, the claim is that in contrast with the ‘primary accidents’ of size, shape, motion or rest, number, location and contact (SAG 28), which really exist in the external bodies to which we commonly attribute them, the other ‘qualities’ mentioned merely seem to us to exist in the objects we perceive around us and in fact reside exclusively in us:

[T]astes, odours, colours, etc., so far as concerns the subject in which it seems to us they reside, are nothing but mere names for something which resides exclusively in our sensitive body, so that if the living animal was removed, all of these qualities would be annihilated and abolished from existence. (SAG 28)





Smells, tastes and sounds are subsequently said to be ‘excite[d] in us’ (SAG 30); sounds and heat are ‘produced in us’ and ‘ma[d]e felt in us’ (SAG 30, 31); in brief, the so-called sensible qualities are held to be sensations we feel in our sensitive bodies—which perish with the living animal.

Boyle and Locke concur that they are ‘perceptions of impressions we receive’ or, more simply, ‘perceptions in us’:

We teach . . . that . . . there being men in the world, whose organs of sense are contrived in such differing ways that some sensory is fitted to receive impressions from some, and another from other sorts of external objects . . . the perceptions of these impressions are by men called by several names, as heat, colour, sound, odour. (Boyle: OFQ 51).



[R]ightly considered, these qualities of light and warmth . . . are perceptions in me when I am warmed, or enlightened by the sun. (Locke: EHU II.viii.24)





And as with light and warmth, so with taste and colour: These ‘perceptions’ are sensations or ‘ideas’ caused in us by external objects (EHU II.i.3), like the sensations of pain and feelings of sickness we have when eating too much manna (a sweetish dried tree exudate formerly used as a laxative):

Sweetness and whiteness are not really in manna; [they] are but the effects of the operations of manna . . . on the eyes and palate; [just] as the pain and sickness caused by manna, are confessedly nothing, but the effects of its operations on the stomach and guts. (EHU II.viii.18)





Colours and tastes, smells and sounds, heat and cold are sensations or perceptions produced in us—and, perhaps, other living animals—when external objects act on our sense-organs.

This claim is bound to strike today’s reader as puzzling, if not outright mad. It has struck modern commentators as so unacceptable that they decided that Boyle and Locke must have maintained an entirely different claim, namely that colours and their ilk are not sensations in us but dispositions of bodies to cause such sensations. This decision, which has become the cornerstone of an almost unquestioned orthodoxy,5 obliged commentators to dismiss the numerous statements to the contrary as ‘slips’6 and deplorable ‘confusions’,7 to claim that Locke ‘forget[s] his official doctrine about secondary qualities’ within a few pages of stating it,8 or to explain that the supposedly confused passages really mean something entirely different.9 Even the most thorough study of the topic, which is in various ways critical of the orthodoxy, curtly dismisses ‘the view that says bluntly that, for Locke, secondary qualities are . . . ‘in the minds of perceivers’’, does so only a few lines after acknowledging that Locke ‘used such words as “colour” and “red” for ideas of secondary qualities’, and proceeds to propose an interpretation requiring the assumption that ‘in spite of appearances, Locke does not intend texture to be a primary quality’,10 where the ‘appearances’ in question are created by the repeated and entirely unambiguous classification of texture as a primary quality (EHU II.viii.10 & 14).

These moves are dissatisfactory. They also stand in marked contrast to the responses of early modern philosophers who were still more familiar with the philosophical concerns and the conceptual framework of the 17th century: Reid and Berkeley credit Locke and the champions of ‘secondary qualities’ with precisely the view they actually state: that ‘colour, sound, and heat, are not any thing in bodies, but sensations in the mind’ (Reid),11 that is, that ‘secondary qualities . . . are sensations existing in the mind alone’ (Berkeley: PHK 10).12 Let us therefore try to make sense of what appears mad to us (though evidently not to better placed philosophers): Let us try to explain why Galileo, Boyle and Locke maintained that colours and tastes, smells and sounds, heat and cold are sensations or perceptions in us.

In contrast with PQ, the present doctrine SQ is supported by explicit argument. But the apparently pertinent arguments merely wrap a puzzle in an enigma. The arguments ‘from science’ (given by Galileo, Boyle and Locke) and ‘from relativity’ (added by Locke) argue for the related but distinct doctrine that colours and their ilk do not really exist in physical bodies and are—as we shall see in the next section—almost circular in that they rely on the conclusion SQ which apparently follows from that doctrine (see below). Since our three protagonists all ignore two further—unsound— arguments advanced by Descartes, this leave us with just one argument for the present doctrine SQ which does not take for granted what it ought to show, namely the notorious ‘argument from conceivability’.

Galileo puts it as follows:

[a] Whenever I conceive of any piece of matter or corporeal substance, I feel myself necessarily compelled to conceive along with it, that it is bounded and shaped by this or that shape, that in relation to others it is big or small, that it is in this or that place at this or that time, that it is in motion or at rest, that it touches or does not touch another body, that it is one, few, or many—and by no stretch of the imagination can I separate it from these conditions. [b] But I do not at all feel myself compelled to conceive of it as necessarily accompanied by such further conditions as being red or white, bitter or sweet, having sound or being mute, or possessing a pleasant or unpleasant fragrance. [c] On the contrary, if the senses were not supplying us, perhaps reason or imagination on their own would never get there. [d] I think, therefore, that these tastes, odours, colours, etc., so far as concerns the subject in which it seems to us they reside, are nothing but mere names, and reside exclusively in our sensitive body . . . ’ (SAG 27–28)





The argument can be conveniently paraphrased by invoking the distinction between determinable qualities and the determinate qualities that fall under them:





Corporeal substances necessarily have some shape, size, location, motion, contact and number. I.e.: The determinable qualities of shape, size, etc. are necessary or essential qualities of such substances.

Corporeal substances need not have any colour, taste, smell or sound. I.e.: The determinable qualities of colour, taste, smell, and sound are not necessary or essential qualities of such substances.

We do not know a priori that corporeal substances possess such contingent or inessential qualities.

Therefore (sic) colour, taste, etc. are only sensations existing in our sensitive bodies, and do not exist outside such bodies.





The puzzling claim that these qualities only exist in us is thus treated as a ‘simple corollary’ of the observation that they are not conceptually inseparable from bodies.13

As commentators noted, the move from the three premises to the conclusion is a startlingly obvious non sequitur:

The fact that our very general concept of a material body is that of a space-occupant, and that this concept implies shape, size, spatio-temporal location, capacity for motion and contact with other bodies . . . does not imply that material bodies are not coloured, fragrant, noise-emitting or flavoured. At most it implies that we can conceive of a colourless, soundless, odourless, and tasteless material object.14





Even the (to my knowledge) most sympathetic commentator to date acknowledged:

So there is a sense in which Galileo’s conclusion is right as well: shapes are more real than colours in the sense that they are more immediately linked with our concept of reality. [But] Galileo is still wrong in concluding from the conceivability of colourless bodies that colours are not intrinsic features of material objects; they might in fact be intrinsic features without necessarily being so.15





More precisely, the non sequitur consists in the move from the premises (b) and (c) to the conclusion (d). While the present argument does not—like some of the arguments we will consider later—simply presuppose what it is meant to establish, its core move presupposes a tacit assumption that is frankly breathtaking:



(A) If a (determinable) quality is not an essential property of material bodies, or cannot be attributed to such bodies a priori, then it is a sensation or perception in us.



In other words: Material bodies have only essential properties which we can determine by a priori reflection on the concept or essence of ‘material bodies’; if you have to use your eyes, or any other organ of sense, to find out about it, the alleged quality of the body in fact is a sensation in us. This assumption patently is not one we may simply take for granted. In fact, it seems mad (indeed, so mad that no commentator to date bothered to seriously discuss it). This confronts us with a puzzling question: Why did three eminent thinkers, three of the fathers of the world-view of early modern science, go along with this breathtaking assumption—and the apparently mad conclusion to which it took them?

This problem becomes more tractable the moment A is broken up into two assumptions that jointly entail it:



(A1) Only such accidents really exist in external physical bodies as such bodies necessarily have and are a priori known to possess.



(A2) If an accident does not (really) exist in external physical bodies, then it exists in us (as a sensation).



At first sight, these two assumptions do not look less puzzling than the original. But we can obtain the first by following up the picture-driven line of thought we have just found to lead to the puzzling doctrines about primary qualities (Section 2). The second then follows by an inference to the best explanation in response to a problem thus engendered.

That brief line of thought consisted of an inference driven by the mereo-logical picture of qualities and its positive sublimation. These two steps took us from the core tenet of atomism to the conclusion



(5) If a quality really exists in a sensible body, it is a quality of the insensible particles that make up that body.



A natural assumption manifestly shared by Galileo, Boyle and Locke then leads from this conclusion to A1. At a time at which the latest technological breakthrough consisted not in Wilson cloud chambers but in telescopes, it was natural to assume that the only qualities we can reasonably attribute to insensible particles we can never get to observe are those essential qualities of physical bodies that we can determine through a priori reflection on what qualities a physical body must have simply in virtue of being a physical body. Accordingly, Galileo attributes to the ‘tiny particles’ he invokes in his mechanist explanations of smell, taste, sound and heat (SAG 29–31) only those qualities he had a moment earlier declared himself ‘compelled to conceive’ corporeal substances as having (SAG 27). And Boyle explicitly deduces the qualities of the insensible corpuscles that ultimately make up all bodies, in unabashedly a priori reflection (OFQ 18–21): He derives all of them through purely a priori reasoning from the two assumptions that ‘there is one catholic or universal matter common to all bodies, by which I mean a substance extended, divisible, and impenetrable’ (OFQ 18), and that ‘[we see] diversity . . . in bodies’ (ibid.). Locke, finally, introduces the primary qualities he goes on to equate with the bulk, figure, texture and motion of the sensible bodies’ insensible parts as qualities ‘such as . . . the mind finds inseparable from every particle of matter’ (EHU II.viii.9). Thus Galileo, Boyle and Locke all maintain:



(6) Insensible particles have precisely those qualities that are essential qualities physical bodies are a priori known to possess. By (5) & (6):



(A1) If a quality really exists in a sensible body, it is an essential quality physical bodies are a priori known to possess.

The second assumption, A2, is that if an accident does not really exist in physical bodies, it must exist in us—provided it exists at all. While this may strike modern readers as rather surprising, it actually is a rather trivial consequence of the conceptions of ‘substances’ and ‘accidents’, ‘minds’ and ‘ideas’ we have analysed earlier (in Section 1): If an accident exists at all, it must exist in some substance or other. Minds qualify as ‘substances’, leaving us with a dichotomy of two kinds of substances: bodies and minds—where Locke, with many of his contemporaries, further distinguishes between finite minds and the infinite mind of God: ‘We have the ideas but of three sorts of substances: 1. God. 2. Finite Intelligences [or Finite Spirits]. 3. Bodies’ (EHU II.xxvii.2). If an accident does not exist in the latter, it must therefore exist in one of the former. If we can perceive the accident, as we manifestly perceive colours and tastes, sounds and smells, the accident in question surely exists in our own mind (rather than that of a categorically different being, into which we cannot peer). It must be the sort of accident that exists, and is perceived, in our minds; it must be an idea of some sort, an idea of perception, or a sensation.16

We will encounter this kind of inference to the best explanation in many other arguments: If an accident we perceive does not exist in physical bodies that surround us, it must exist in our minds and be perceived within us. If colour does not exist in physical bodies, it must be an idea we perceive in our minds. If heat does not exist in physical bodies, then it must be a sensation located in our minds (or sensitive bodies). Etc. Galileo, for a start, makes an inference of this kind three pages later, in the course of his subsequent ‘argument from science’, subsequently taken up by Boyle and Locke, where he arguably leaps from PQ to SQ, presupposing A2:

[T]hat in external bodies, to excite in us the smells, the tastes, and the sounds, there are required other things than sizes, shapes, multitudes, and movements swift or slow, I do not believe. And I judge that if the ears, the tongues, and the noses be taken away, the shapes, numbers, and movements remain, but not the smells nor the tastes nor the sounds, which outside the living animal I do not believe they are other than names. (SAG 30)





We will encounter the same presupposition again and again in Berkeley’s defence of ‘perceptions’ (Chapter 5), and similar dichotomous thinking in classical arguments for sense-data popular until at least the mid-20th century (Chapters 6.1 and 8.2).

To sum up, there is textual evidence that Galileo, Boyle and Locke share all the assumptions that lead, through the picture-driven reasoning reconstructed, from the core tenet of atomism—(1) above (Section 2)—to A1, as well as the assumptions that lead to A2, which is presupposed in much philosophical argument, including the argument with which Galileo follows up the argument from conceivability. These two assumptions jointly entail the tacit assumption A that bridges the gap in this argument, between the explicit premises that colours and their ilk are no a priori attributable essential properties of physical bodies and the explicit conclusion that those accidents exist in us. We may infer the hypothesis that Galileo—and all other early modern thinkers who found the argument from conceivability compelling—went along with it because they found themselves unable to derive a priori that physical bodies should have colours and tastes, smells and temperature, in addition to size and shape and motion, found assumption A compelling due to the picture-driven reasoning rehearsed, and therefore leaped from their first finding to the conclusion that colours and their ilk must exist in our minds. We have thus obtained the (to my knowledge) first explanation of why perfectly competent thinkers provided or went along with the apparently wild argument from conceivability.

In the first chapter, we have developed the concept of ‘philosophical pictures’ with the help of findings about non-intentional analogical reasoning and conceptual metaphors, in such a way that adherence to such pictures can be attributed to thinkers on the basis of inferences to the best explanation which explain why those thinkers espouse apparently paradoxical claims either in the absence of all argument or on the basis of arguments which sport stunning gaps that cannot be filled by invoking views their champions state elsewhere (cp. Chapter 1.2). Our analysis of the doctrine PQ provided us with an explanation of the first kind, that of the argument from conceivability for the doctrine SQ yielded an explanation of the second kind.

Our explanations warrant the conclusion that Galileo, Boyle and Locke espoused the claims and the argument discussed due to non-intentional reasoning which is unsound. Where the claim or the conclusion of the argument are not subsequently supported by sound (further) argument, but are in conflict with common sense and therefore in need of such support, their champions lack warrant for them. This happened to Locke, who does not provide any argument for either PQ or SQ but, in a fine display of belief bias, presupposes the latter in the arguments ‘from science’ and ‘from relativity’ which he provides to support the related claim that colours and the other ‘secondary qualities’ do not really exist in physical objects (next section). In a nutshell, the two doctrines about primary and secondary qualities illustrate two ways in which picture-driven reasoning may lead a thinker to maintain unwarranted claims, namely either in the absence of warrant or on the basis of a patently unsound argument. Let’s now turn to the further consequences of such ultimately picture-driven claims: to the problems they appear to raise and the theories philosophers construct in response.





4. PICTURE-DRIVEN PROBLEMS AND THEORIES:

LOCKE ON SECONDARY QUALITIES




In picture-driven reasoning we assimilate targets to models of conceptual metaphors in ways in which we know the two to differ. Such reasoning systematically takes us to intuitively compelling conclusions at odds with other convictions. Such clashes confront us with the task of remedying an apparent inconsistency in our beliefs. We have either to refute and abandon one of the parties to the clash or show against first appearances that these parties are not inconsistent. In the latter case we address, implicitly or explicitly, what we dubbed a ‘reconciliation problem’ (Chapter 2.3). PQ and SQ give rise to several problems of this kind.

According to PQ, the only qualities to ‘really exist’ (or ‘really reside’ or ‘be something of real’) in a sensible body are the size, shape, and motion of its constituent particles. This confronts us with two problems. First, we ordinarily attribute these qualities—like so many others—to the whole sensible body. Being accidents, they only exist to the extent to which there are other things in which they exist. So where do these properties of the whole body exist, if only the properties of the insensible constituent parts really exist in it? This problem is not explicitly addressed by our protagonists. Presumably, they think that the mechanical properties of a body necessarily result from the sizes, shapes and motions of its constituent parts and thus ultimately of the particles that make it up—and infer that any quality that necessarily results from those that really exist in a body is bound to be in it, as well, even if it should not, perhaps, be counted as an additional or extra quality. Thus Boyle states that the size, shape and motion of the body’s component particles are something ‘of real and physical’ in the body, and then adds the afterthought that the same goes for the ‘texture of the whole which results from their [i.e. the particles’] being so contrived as they are’ (OFQ 31). This kind of reasoning places all the mechanical properties of the whole body ‘into’ it, without the need to count them as extras: All these qualities of the whole necessarily result from the qualities of its elementary parts (cp. EHU II.viii.9, 22).

A second problem arises from trivial observation: We only need to open our eyes or use any of our other senses to appreciate that there are not only sizes and shapes but also colours and tastes, smells and sounds, heat and cold in the world. PQ appears to imply that they do not exist in physical bodies. As accidents, they do have to exist in some kind of substance. So in what other kind of substance do they exist? Without being explicitly stated, this question is answered by SQ: The colours we see and the odours we smell, etc., exist in minds. This idea, however, merely gives rise to a fresh problem: We ordinarily attribute such accidents as qualities to physical objects, and are convinced that these attributions are meaningful and often correct. But how is it possible to speak of qualities ‘of’, or ‘in’, an object, when the relevant accidents exist only in our minds? All three problems are ill-motivated in the sense we have explained (in Chapter 2.3): The thinkers perplexed by them lack warrant for at least one of the claims to be reconciled. The picture-driven line of thought we have reconstructed confronts us with a whole series of ill-motivated reconciliation problems, where the ‘solution’ to one may well just raise another.

Locke’s response to the third problem is frequently regarded as his ‘theory of secondary qualities’, encapsulated in his first explanation of ‘secondary qualities’:

Secondary qualities ‘in truth are nothing in the objects themselves, but powers to produce various sensations in us by their primary qualities, i.e. by the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of their insensible parts, as colours, sounds, tastes, etc.’ (EHU II.viii.10, cp. 23)





So even though colours, sounds and tastes are sensations and do not really exist in physical objects, these can be said to have such qualities in case they have the power to produce the pertinent sensations in us.

The notion of ‘bare powers’ Locke employs here is radically different from the modern notion of disposition with which it is commonly conflated by modern readers:17 An object possesses a disposition also when it does not exercise it. (A lump of sugar is soluble in water even when it is not placed in water and therefore is not in the process of dissolving.) But Locke does not just explicitly deny that physical objects have a colour when it is too dark for them to cause any colour-sensations in us, but even finds this obvious. He does so in discussing an experiment on the phenomenon of inorganic luminescence which attracted much attention in the wake of the discovery of the ‘Bolognian Stone’ (barite) which glows in the dark. His experiment concerns porphyry, which proves less spectacular: ‘Hinder light but from striking on it, and its colours vanish’; they vanish the moment the light is gone so that the stone ‘no longer produces any such ideas in us’—whence ‘tis plain [!] it has no colour in the dark’ (EHU II.viii.19).18 But the ‘colours’ we can attribute to physical bodies are powers to produce ideas in us. In Locke’s sense of the term, an object clearly has the ‘power’ to cause certain colour-ideas in us as long, and only as long, as it actually produces such ideas in us.

Locke’s concept is part of a dichotomy long since forgotten, which divides all cases of causation into two classes: Causal effects are either ‘effect[s] of bare power’ or are caused through the ‘communication of a quality which was really in the efficient’ (EHU II.viii.25)—as when a billiard ball hits another and sets it into motion, by passing some of the accident of motion in it on to the other. According to Locke, common sense assumes such a ‘communication’ when we find both the ‘efficient’ and the ‘patient’ to change qualities in corresponding ways (one ball is set into quick motion while the other slows down). Indeed, he holds, common sense resorts to this sort of explanation, whenever we cannot make an observation that excludes it, namely, whenever we cannot observe a change in the patient, which conspicuously fails to be accompanied by a corresponding change in the efficient:

[W]hen we see wax or a fair face receive change of colour from the sun, we cannot imagine, that to be the reception . . . of any thing in the sun, because we find not those different colours in the sun itself. (EHU II.viii.25)





That is: Since we observe that only your face, but not the sun, changes in colour when you get sunburn, we do not put this change of colour in your face down to a communication of colour from the sun.

When trying to explain our own colour-, taste- or heat-sensations, by contrast, we cannot make any such observation which rules out causation through a communication of accidents (ibid.): In this case we cannot make such an observation because we can only perceive ideas and their changes in us but cannot observe independently any changes in external objects (next section). Therefore, and because there is no ‘conceivable connexion’ between bulk, figure and motion of bodies and those sensations or ideas, common sense, according to Locke, imagines that our colour-sensations are caused by communication of a colour-quality which really exists, in addition to those primary qualities, in the object which has the power of producing those ideas in us (EHU II.viii.25): According to such alleged common sense, the accident of colour is communicated from one substance in which it really exists, the external body, to another, our mind. One and the same accident then exists first in external bodies and subsequently in our minds—(a) below—without changing, so that having entered the mind the accident still ‘perfectly resembles’ its former self in the body—(b) below, where “idea” is throughout Locke’s cover-all term of art for whatever we perceive in our minds (including ‘perceptions’ and sensations) (EHU II.viii.8):

Flame is denominated hot and light; snow white and cold; and manna white and sweet, from the ideas they produce in us. [a] Which qualities are commonly thought to be the same in those bodies, that those ideas are in us, [b] the one the perfect resemblance of the other, as they are in a mirror; and it would by most men be judged very extravagant, if one should say otherwise. (EHU II.viii.16)



Against what he thus regards as the common-sense position, Locke rehashes the argument from science previously given by Galileo (SAG 28–29) and Boyle (e.g. OFQ 23–24). To understand the key passages, recall that Locke conceives of colours and their ilk as being sensations or perceptions or, in his cover-all sense, ideas: Colours and tastes are ideas caused in us (EHU II.viii.18, cp. II.viii.24). When Locke speaks of ‘ideas of colour’, etc. this is therefore to be understood as analogous to our talk of ‘sensations of pain’, where “of” means ‘namely’: We have certain ideas, namely colour-ideas, just as we have certain sensations, namely pain-sensations, and there is no necessary implication that the colour-idea has an intentional object distinct from it (i.e. that it is the idea of such an object), just as there is no necessary implication that the pain-sensation or—same thing—‘idea of pain’ is somehow of a pain distinct from it.

Sensations or ideas are accidents, and it is a legitimate question whether these accidents also inhere in corporeal substances. The present argument takes for granted that the heat we feel and the colours we see are sensations or ideas in us, and seeks to show that these accidents do not really exist in the bodies from which they supposedly get communicated to our minds:

[H]e, that will consider, that the same fire, that at one distance produces in us the sensation of warmth, does at a nearer approach, produce in us the far different sensation of pain, ought to bethink himself, what reason he has to say, that his idea of warmth, which was produced in him by the fire, is actually in the fire; and his idea of pain, which the same fire produced in him the same way, is not in the fire. Why is whiteness and coldness [being posited] in snow, and pain not, when it produces the one and the other idea in us; and can do neither, but by the bulk, figure, number, and motion of its solid parts? (EHU II.viii.16, further fleshed out in EHU II.viii.18)





The argument is this: To explain heat-sensations, common sense posits a distinct accident of heat in the bodies that cause them in us, and assumes this accident to be communicated to us from there (assumes that ‘the idea of warmth . . . is actually in the fire’). To explain our pain-sensations, however, common sense does not posit any distinct accident of pain or painfulness in the external bodies (pins or fires, etc.) that produce them in us. But science—supposedly—shows us that both kinds of sensation get caused in the same way, through the local motion of insensible particles, and depend upon the number, size and figure of these particles. Therefore, there is no more reason to posit a distinct quality of heat (or colour or cold) in bodies than there is to posit a distinct accident of pain or painfulness in them. We ought to conclude that the accidents of colour and heat, etc. do not really exist in bodies and only exist in minds.

Hence physical bodies do not cause such perceptions or sensations in us by ‘communicating’ to our minds accidents which really are in those ‘effi-cients’. But those bodies clearly cause these perceptions. Given the present dichotomy, these colour-ideas and tastes-sensations hence must be effects of bare power:

Tis true, the things producing in us these simple ideas [which we call whiteness and sweetness], are but few of them denominated by us, as if they were only the causes of them; but as if those ideas were real beings in them. For though fire be called painful to the touch, whereby is signified [meant] the power of producing in us the idea of pain; yet it is also denominated light [i.e. luminous] and hot, as if light [luminosity] and heat, were really something in the fire, more than a power to excite these ideas in us; and therefore are called qualities in, or of the fire. But these being nothing, in truth, but powers to excite such ideas in us, I must, in that sense, be understood, when I speak of secondary qualities, as being in things; or of their ideas, as being in the objects that excite them in us. (EHU II.xxxi.2)



In other words, when we call a fire ‘painful’, we mean to ‘denominate it only as the cause of the idea’ or sensation of pain it produces in us: We merely say that it actually causes pain. (Compare: No matter how strong, a blow is called ‘painful’ only if it actually hurts someone.) When we call fire ‘hot’ or ‘luminous’, by contrast, we do not mean to ‘denominate it only as the cause of the ideas’ of light and heat it produces in us; we do not mean to say merely that fire produces light-ideas or heat-sensations in us. Rather, common sense allegedly thinks the light and heat are ‘real beings’ in the fire and therefore calls them ‘qualities in, or of the fire’. But, in truth, these so-called qualities are nothing but powers to excite ideas in us, that is, they are ‘powers barely’ (EHU II.viii.24), namely bare powers like the fire’s power to produce in us the idea or sensation of pain: When calling a fire ‘hot’ we ought to mean no more than when we call contact with it ‘painful’, namely, that it actually produces the pertinent sensations or ideas in us. To sum up, a body has the bare power to produce, e.g., certain sensations when and only when it currently produces these effects. And this is how Locke wants to be understood when speaking of sensible qualities as being ‘in’ the things that produce those sensations or ideas in us. (Whence there are no colours in the porphyry when it is dark.)

Even though no accident of colour, etc., really exists in bodies, ‘secondary and imputed qualities’ (EHU II.viii.22, my underlining) can therefore be imputed to, or said to ‘be in’ bodies as bare powers, namely as a mere façon de parler, meaning neither more nor less than that the body currently produces pertinent sensations in sentient creatures, not through a communication of those qualities, but in some other way. The suggestion—the core part of Locke’s ‘theory of secondary qualities’—that secondary qualities ‘in truth are nothing in the objects themselves, but powers to produce various sensations in us . . . by the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of their insensible parts’ (EHU II.viii.10) therefore provides an elegant solution to the problem of reconciling the fact that we can attribute colours and tastes to physical bodies with the philosophical doctrine—SQ—that these accidents really exist only as sensations or ideas in our minds.

While an elegant solution to this problem, the claim that a physical body can be said to be red or hot only in the sense that it is currently causing certain sensations is completely at odds with common sense, as actually implicit in ordinary language. The argument for it is based on the ‘argument from science’ which takes for granted the best part of the claim that is to be reconciled with the attribution of ‘secondary qualities’ to physical bodies: The colours we see, the odours we smell, the heat we feel, etc., are sensations or ideas in us. The argument then tells us that these accidents do not exist in physical bodies as well and hence cannot be caused in us by ‘communication of real qualities’ but must be the effects of bare powers. The theory that solves the problem thus ultimately rests on the very picture-driven—and unwarranted—claim that raises the latter. Picture-driven reflection leads philosophers to raise ill-motivated problems and build unwarranted theories on the intuitively compelling claims that raise the problems.





5. PICTURE-DRIVEN EXPLANATIONS:

LOCKE ON PERCEPTION




Locke’s ‘theory of secondary qualities’ is an example of a philosophical theory meant to explain familiar facts in a peculiar way, namely to explain how these actual facts are as much as possible in view of an apparent conflict with intuitively compelling philosophical claims—which may be rendered compelling only by picture-driven inferences. His account of sense-perception or ‘external sensation’ exemplifies theories that are to explain merely supposed facts which we posit as the result of picture-driven inferences. This account is built on and around a seminal version of what came to be known as the ‘sense-datum doctrine of perception’.

This doctrine is a trivial consequence of the present theory of secondary qualities with its core claim—SQ—that colours, tastes, smells, etc., are sensations or ideas in our minds. Whenever we perceive them, we hence perceive ideas in the mind. In the first chapter, we reconstructed the intuition—I2—that to think of or about things is to perceive ideas in the mind, with the mind. The core doctrine about ‘secondary qualities’ implies an analogous claim that proved even more popular in the long run:



(I5) To see colours, hear sounds, smell odours, taste tastes and feel heat or cold is to perceive ideas in the mind, with the mind.



A few truisms then take us on to the seminal version of the sense-datum doctrine: Whenever we see anything at all, we see (at least) colours (if only the black of the night in which you cannot make out any objects). Whenever we hear or smell anything at all, we hear or smell (at least) sounds and odours, respectively (without, perhaps, knowing what emits them). Whenever we taste anything at all, we perceive (at least) a taste (if you do not, you can chew as much as you like and still cannot be said to taste the object you feel in your mouth). Hence, by (I5):



(SD*) Whenever we see, hear, smell, taste or feel anything, we perceive ideas in our minds.



Ideas perceived then and thus are called ‘perceptions’:

Perceptions are ideas we perceive (i) in the mind, (ii) through use of our five senses.





‘Perceptions’ are the 17th-century ancestors of the ‘subjective sense-data’ of the 20th century. The crucial difference between the two is that sense-data are regarded as bearers of various qualities like colour or shape: 20th-century philosophers speak of the ‘silvery elliptical sense-datum’ we perceive when looking at a coin from the side. By contrast, perceptions are colour or heat, and Locke speaks, e.g., of ‘these qualities of light and warmth, which are perceptions in me when I am warmed, or enlightened by the sun’ (EHU II.viii.24). Several such ‘simple ideas’ can be ‘combined’ into a ‘compound’ or ‘complex idea’ (EHU II.xii.1). Thus, colour-ideas can be combined with ideas of shape, which we perceive together when looking at a coin. So we can perceive in our minds a complex idea combining silver colour and elliptical shape. But such ideas are not, like sense-data, (mental) objects with qualities but compounds of colour- and shape-ideas, etc. This is due to the conception of ideas as accidents (as belonging to the same category as qualities) and minds as substances (as belonging to the same category as bodies) in which the ideas exist (as qualities exist in bodies): This allows only for accidents to exist in minds, and leaves no room for substances which support these accidents and are distinct from the mind. But only things distinct from the mind can exist in this internal container, or be perceived by that inner organ of sense. As Locke notes, ‘the understanding, like the eye, whilst it makes us see, and perceive all other things, takes no notice of itself’ (EHU I.i.1). Therefore the present conception leaves no room for things which have qualities and can be perceived in and by the mind. Accordingly, perceptions will evolve into sense-data only upon the demise of the conceptual framework of substances and accidents.

The intuition—I2 (Chapter 1.3)—that to think of or about things is to perceive ideas in the mind, with the mind, and the present intuition-based doctrine that whenever we see, hear, smell, taste or feel anything we perceive ideas in our minds, jointly give rise to a very wide notion of perception. Locke takes both cognition and sense-perception to involve the exercise of one and the same faculty, namely the ‘power’ of ‘Perception, or Thinking’ (EHU II.vi.2), which is a ‘faculty [i] of the mind, [ii] exercised about our ideas’ (EHU II.ix.1), that is, a faculty of [ii] perceiving ideas, [i] by means of that inner organ of sense. To get clear on what perception is, a man just has to observe ‘what passes in his own mind’, namely ‘when he sees, hears, feels, etc. or thinks’ (EHU II.ix.2, both italics mine). The use of one’s senses and the use of one’s wit involve the exercise of one and the same faculty: perception. And such ‘perception’ always is perception of ideas in one’s mind.

Since we employ our wits and our senses throughout our waking lives, there clearly are minds and ideas perceived in them—this was the very first intuition we considered (I1, Chapter 1.3) and have now accounted for more fully. In further reasoning about the minds thus posited in us, thinkers are then prone to unwittingly assimilate them to models from the realm of visual perception and its physical objects, in some fundamental respects in which they know models and targets to differ; once this has happened, they seize on ever more familiar facts about those models in reasoning about the mind (Chapter 2.1). When we seize, for example, on the familiar fact that a thing needs to be around to be perceived, so that if it is perceived somewhere, it must be there (at that place), we naturally infer that if an idea is perceived in the mind, it must be or exist there, in the mind (Chapter 2.1).

This inference takes us from the intuition that there are minds and ideas perceived in them to a guiding question of Locke’s Essay: How did the ideas which ‘tis past doubt, that men have in their minds’ (EHU II.i.1) get to be there? I.e.: ‘How comes [the mind] to be furnished [with ideas]?’ (EHU II.i.2) In Book I of his Essay, Locke argues that there are no innate ideas. Hence all ideas that are in the mind must have been produced within or come in from without. In Book II, Locke sets out to explain how this happens: His account of ‘reflection’ (EHU II.i.4) or ‘internal sensation’ (EHU II.xi.17) is to explain how ‘the mind [itself] furnishes the understanding with ideas’ (EHU II.i.5). The account of ‘sensation’ (EHU II.i.3) or, more specifically, ‘external sensation’ (EHU II.xi.17) is to explain how ‘perceptions of things’ (EHU II.i.3) are ‘received from foreign things’ (EHU II.vi.1). It is to explain the supposed fact that our minds contain ideas which have in some way or sense come in from without.

Surprisingly enough, this account builds on the kind of alleged commonsense explanation that Locke explicitly rejects at any rate for secondary qualities: Idea-accidents come into the mind-substance by being communicated to them from corporeal substances. Locke presents the first version of the account without arguing for it (EHU II.iii.1). It can be obtained through non-intentional analogical reasoning seizing on ever more familiar facts about the kind of medium-sized physical objects we typically perceive with our five senses (facts stated in italics below):

(1) Ideas that come from external objects enter the mind from without. (2) Objects can enter an enclosed space from without only through openings in its enclosure. Hence: (3) The ideas that enter our minds from without enter through openings in our bodies.





Obviously, we cease to see colours the moment our eyes are shut, no longer hear sounds the moment our ears are plugged, and no longer smell odours the moment our noses are clogged; the moment these openings are unobstructed, we perceive them all again. Since—(I5)—to see colours, etc., is to perceive ideas in the mind, this entails that we perceive colour-ideas in our minds when, and only when, our eyes are open, sound-sensations iff our ears are open, smells iff the openings of our noses are unobstructed. Given the previous conclusion, the most straightforward explanation of this ‘fact’ would seem to be that



(C1) The colour-, sound-, and smell-sensations we perceive through the senses come from foreign things which communicate them to us, through the openings of our eyes, ears, and noses, respectively, into the mind where we perceive them.

This is the core of an account slightly fleshed out by further analogical reasoning of the same kind:

(4) Openings in my body do not allow you to look into my mind. (5) Through openings you can see what lies directly behind them. Hence: (6) The mind does not lie directly behind openings in our bodies. (7) An object that, through openings, enters a container that does not lie directly behind those openings must pass through some sort of conduits that take them from the former to the latter. Hence: (8) If ideas enter the mind through openings in our bodies, they must pass through conduits connecting the openings with the mind.





By (C1), some ideas, namely the colours, sounds, tastes and smells we perceive through our senses do enter the mind through openings in our bodies, namely our sense-organs. In line with the present conclusion, Locke from the start likens the host of perceptions we ‘receive’ to a stream being channelled through pipes or ‘conduits’ from a source: Perceptions are ‘derived by [our senses] to the understanding’ (EHU II.i.3), where the verb is used in the then current sense of ‘conducting a fluid from a source or into a channel’ or conduit. (C1) and the present conclusion entail that



(C2) After passing through the openings constituted by our sense-organs, perceptions are conducted through conduits that link those organs to the mind in which they are perceived.



Some findings of early modern physiology then suggest what these conduits are, and where they lead: Our several sense-organs are linked by nerves to the same further organ: the brain. Since nerves and the brain are thus found to be linked to the sense-organs in the way in which the posited conduits and inner viewing space of perceptions are supposed to be, it seems reasonable to infer that—(C3)—those nerves must be the conduits of perceptions and the brain the space in which they are viewed.

Conclusions C1 to C3 add up to Locke’s first account of how the mind comes to be furnished with colour- and other ideas from without (external sensation):



(ES) Thus light and colours . . . come in only by the eyes: All kinds of noises, sounds, and tones only by the ears: The several tastes and smells, by the nose and palate. And if these organs, or the nerves which are the conduits, to convey them from without to their audience in the brain, the mind’s presence room (as I may so call it) are any of them so disordered, as not to perform their functions, they have no postern [i.e. small rear gate] to be admitted by; no other way to bring themselves into view, and be perceived by the understanding. (EHU II.iii.1)



In other words: External objects communicate to us various accidents, including colours, sounds, tastes and smells, as well as ‘those, belonging to the sense of touch’, namely ‘heat and cold, and solidity’, ‘smooth and rough’, ‘hard and soft, tough and brittle’ (as Locke adds in the very next sentence). All those accidents enter our body through the openings of our sense-organs and are guided through nerve-conduits into a place in our head, the brain or mind, where they can be perceived by our inner eye, the understanding. Thus one and the same accident is first in bodies and then in minds. Elsewhere, Locke distinguishes between ‘ideas . . . as they are . . . perceptions in our minds; and as they are modifications of matter in the bodies that cause perceptions in us’ (EHU II.viii.7). Here, he asserts that they come from these bodies, through the openings of specific sense-organs, into our minds, where we perceive them.

This is of course the very explanation of our ideas and sensations that the argument from science seeks to refute, as far as colours and sounds, tastes and smells and heat and cold are concerned. And it is clear from the start that—T1—the things we see and hear do not touch our minds, like billiard balls hitting each other, to pass on accidents, and—T2—that we do not see any accidents flying through the air, either (which is anyway tricky, since they have to inhere in substances). It is therefore clear from the start that those accidents cannot literally be ‘conveyed’ or ‘communicated’ from physical objects to our minds. Already when first introducing the notion of external ‘sensation’, Locke therefore explains:

[W]hen I say the senses convey [those ideas, we have of yellow, white, heat, cold, soft, hard, bitter, sweet] into the mind, I mean, they from external objects convey into the mind what produces there those perceptions. (EHU II.i.3)





This explanation amounts to a sublimating explanation (cp. Chapters 1.3 and 2.1): That an idea is ‘conveyed’ from an object to a mind simply means that something that produces the idea in the mind is conveyed to it from the object. This explanation removes the patent conflict between the apparently common-sensical account of ‘external sensation’, on the one hand, and two truisms—T1 and T2—and the Corpuscular philosophy of early modern science, on the other. It does not, however, provide Locke with any shred of evidence or justification for the account of external sensation we obtain when interpreting the first statement in the light of this explanation:



(ES+) When we perceive bodies through our senses, (as yet unspecified) things come from the bodies through specific openings into our bodies, where nerves convey them to the brain, where they produce ideas of colour and smell, etc. The things that produce colour-ideas come in only through our eyes; the things that produce odour-sensations come in only through our noses, etc.

Subsequently, Locke gives precisely one argument to support accounts along these lines (EHU II.viii.11–13). The argument proceeds from the assumption that the only way in which we can conceive bodies to cause effects is by impulse (EHU II.viii.11). The idea, widely shared at the time, that bodies cannot operate upon and affect other matter without mutual contact led many early modern thinkers to reject as unintelligible the notion that physical bodies (like planets) might exert gravitational or other forces on objects (like other planets) at a distance from them. While the reconstruction of this idea is beyond our present scope—it would require too long an excursion into the history of science—note that it can be obtained by a picture-driven inference from the idea that all genuine causation is by ‘communication of qualities which really exist in the efficient’. If we presuppose that—M—qualities are things that exist literally somewhere in space, we will infer that since qualities can only exist in substances, they cannot move from one corporeal substance to another through a void: The communication of accidents from one body to another requires their mutual contact. The one accident which mechanical explanations take bodies to communicate is motion. Hence the only way in which a body can cause effects is by touching another thing (substance) and communicating the accident of motion to it.

The argument then derives the sought account from the apparent implication that if bodies produce ideas in us, they must do so by impulse, by transferring motion to our minds, and from the two truisms mentioned previously: Since—T1—external objects do not touch our minds, are ‘not united with our minds, when they produce ideas in it’, but at most with our sense-organs (as food touches the palate), ‘tis evident that some motion must be thence continued by our nerves . . . to the brains or the seat of sensation, there to produce in our minds the particular ideas we have of them’ (EHU II.viii.12). ‘And since [T2] the extension, figure, number, and motion of objects of an observable bigness may be perceived at a distance by the sight’, when these objects do not touch any part of our body, ‘tis evident some singly imperceptible bodies must come from them to the eyes, and thereby convey to the brain some motion, which produces these ideas, which we have of them in us’ (ibid.). Thus Locke infers that ‘the ideas of . . . [primary and secondary] qualities are produced in us . . . by the operation of insensible particles on our senses’ (EHU II.viii.13) from a couple of truisms and the assumption that bodies can be conceived to cause effects only by impulse.

To sum up, Locke’s account of external sensation—ES—is to explain the supposed fact that the mind contains ideas which come in from without. Arguably, Locke accepts this explanandum as a fact only due to picture-driven inferences and initially obtains the explanatory account through picture-driven reasoning. He bases the one explicit argument he subsequently adduces for it on an assumption that can be obtained through such reasoning. Quite possibly, this account illustrates how picture-driven reasoning can shape speculative explanations from beginning to end: by providing a bogus explanandum, suggesting a wild explanation, and providing the premises of what argument is subsequently adduced in its support. At any rate, we have seen reason to conclude that picture-driven reflection drove Locke to take the first two of these three steps.

In this chapter, we have shown that, and considered how, philosophical pictures shape philosophical reflection at several stages: They shape the formation and development of philosophical concepts, doctrines, arguments, problems, theories and explanations. So far, we have focused on intuitively compelling claims advanced without much, if any argument. In the next chapter, we will focus specifically on sustained philosophical argument and consider how such pictures shape it at several levels: how they can determine the general argumentative strategy for establishing a certain claim, methods deployed in constructing pertinent arguments, and the arguments themselves. Both where we leap to conclusions without argument and where we take care to argue for our philosophical claims, we are driven by unsound processes of non-intentional reasoning which vitiate our best efforts as long as we fail to grow aware of them: They systematically have us espouse and maintain absurd doctrines based on the most specious of arguments—frequently as a matter of delusion. These findings will take us from the approach of problem-dissolution we have outlined in the previous chapter to the full-blown project of philosophy as therapy.





Part II

Philosophical Delusions





4 The Power of Pictures


Berkeley’s Approach




Under the spell of philosophical pictures, philosophers come to adopt paradoxical claims in the absence of warrant. Belief-bias effects have them maintain these claims in the continued absence of warrant. The clash of these claims with common sense, acknowledged facts, or among each other, gives rise to illusory problems. To solve them and resolve the apparent conflicts, thinkers construct unwarranted philosophical theories, in the grip of the same pictures that had them formulate their ‘problems’. This is, in the roughest of outlines, the account of nature and genesis of philosophical problems and theories which we have developed, so far, by reconstructing core claims and moves which led to the lastingly influential division of the world into a colourful realm of inner perception called ‘the mind’ and an austere external realm of physical objects devoid of colour and sound, taste and smell, heat and cold. We now turn to an equally influential doctrine about sense-perception which purports to explain how the chasm between these two realms can be bridged.

While the claims and moves we considered up to now were typically made on the basis of strikingly swift and rough argument or of no argument at all, we now turn to carefully crafted philosophical arguments. Having studied how non-intentional and automatic reasoning can lead us to espouse and maintain claims without much, if any, argument, we will now examine how such reasoning shapes the construction of philosophical arguments. To do so, we will consider the classic arguments for the sense-datum doctrine of perception. We shall consider its first systematic defence, due to Berkeley (Chapters 4–5), and its arguably most sophisticated development to date, due to A.J. Ayer (Chapter 6). We shall find that unsound processes of non-intentional and automatic reasoning, specifically, reasoning driven by philosophical pictures and belief-bias effects, can shape and vitiate philosophical argument at several levels (Chapter 4) and lead brilliant men to maintain doctrines which are absurd (Chapter 5), as a matter of delusion (Chapter 6). The findings will let us understand where and when, why and what for therapy is required in philosophy.

In the first of his Three Dialogues, Berkeley wants to show that all sensible things exist in the mind. On one reading he espouses from the very start to the very end, ‘sensible things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense’ (3D 175, cp. 3D 262). So we are dealing with a version of the sense-datum doctrine: All we ever immediately perceive when we employ our senses are ideas. To defend this doctrine, Berkeley pursues a comprehensive argumentative strategy and develops, in its pursuit, a series of arguments which includes what became classical arguments for the sense-datum doctrine (which we will consider in the next chapter). We shall now analyse how the ground was prepared for these classical arguments, by careful analysis of the pertinent parts of the first of Berkeley’s Three Dialogues (henceforward: 3D).1

After examining his ‘strict’ notion of sense-perception (Section 1), we shall analyse his general argumentative strategy (Section 2), an ‘introspective’ method he employed in some of his core arguments (Section 3), and some of these arguments, namely his preferred (but today forgotten) arguments for the sense-datum doctrine: his criticism of ‘abstract ideas’ (Section 4) and the arguments that build on it (Sections 5–6). We shall find that his strategy, method and arguments are motivated by the same pictures that drove Locke’s reflection about perception. Philosophical pictures may shape not only what philosophers intuitively think or to what conclusions they spontaneously leap but also the way they argue when carefully constructing arguments in support of the claims they find compelling—including the very methods for constructing and the strategies for deploying philosophical arguments. Unsound non-intentional reasoning may shape a thinker’s effort to support his claims by argument at every stage and level—and lead him to confidently maintain what he has no reason to believe. 2





1. UNWITTING LINGUISTIC INNOVATION:

BERKELEY’S ‘STRICT’ NOTION OF PERCEPTION




In abstract reflection, philosophers often unwittingly start to use familiar words in new ways. In particular, philosophers frequently want to argue at a very general level and need general or generic terms for this purpose. For example, philosophers who want to speak and reason at one go about seeing and hearing, tasting and smelling, and the achievements of the sense of touch, would like to employ one generic term to cover the exploits of all five senses. In such a situation, thinkers often resort to a familiar term. Thus, the verb “to perceive” came to be used to cover all five ‘modes of perception’, in a sense in which “x perceives y” is to mean neither more nor less than ‘x sees or hears or tastes or smells or feels y’.

We may think that this is an established and familiar sense of the verb. But this is not so. In its established use, “to perceive” has got (in some constructions) implications which “to see” or “to hear” do not share (in the same constructions). Thus, both “I perceived that Fred was in the crowd” and “I perceived Fred in the crowd” are ordinarily taken to imply that I recognised Fred in the crowd; the first implies that I knew that Fred was in the crowd, the second that I knew that it was Fred I perceived. Similarly, both “He perceives that a swallow is flying overhead” and “He perceives a swallow overhead” are ordinarily taken to imply that the subject recognises, and knows, that the thing overhead is a swallow. Accordingly, it is unidiomatic to say either ‘I perceived Fred right away but recognised him only later’ or ‘I perceived a swallow and later learned it was a swallow’. By contrast, only the constructions “x sees that p” and “x hears that p” imply such knowledge. If, failing to recognise Fred, I do not know he is in the crowd, I indeed cannot be said to ‘see that Fred is in the crowd’, even when looking straight at the man. But “x sees y” and “x hears y” carry no such implication: ‘I saw Fred straightaway but recognised him only later’ is as acceptable as ‘The explosion of the secret ammunitions depot could be heard by anyone within twenty miles’—including the vast majority who had no idea that that is what the loud bang was. The same goes, mutatis mutandis, for “x smells y”, “x tastes y”, and “x feels y”. Hence “x perceives y” ordinarily has implications, namely of recognition and knowledge, which “x sees or hears or tastes or smells or feels y” does not have. Ordinary language contains no general or generic use of the verb in which it is synonymous with this disjunction. Since ordinary language is geared towards specific practical pursuits, this is perhaps no surprise. At any rate, the introduction of the present generic use amounts to a linguistic innovation.

This innovation easily leads to unforeseen consequences. As we have just seen, we need to drop the implications of recognition and knowledge, if we want to use “x perceives y” as a mere shorthand for the disjunction of the five more specific ‘verbs of perception’. In particular, when we do not even realise that we are putting the familiar expression to a new use, we are, however, unaware of this necessity, fail to make the changes necessary to stay in line with the established use of these further terms, and end up unwittingly modifying their use instead. For example, many philosophers of perception continue to take “x perceives y” to imply recognition and knowledge, also when using the verb in the new ‘generic’ sense in which mere seeing or hearing imply perceiving. This transfers the ordinary implication of recognition and knowledge from perceiving to mere seeing and hearing. (If x sees y, then x perceives y. If x perceives y, then x recognises y. Therefore: If x sees y, then x recognises y.) Accordingly, many philosophers take “x sees y”, “x hears y” and the rest to imply recognition and knowledge, in their ordinary and established senses: You see Fred only if you recognise him, see the swallow only if you realise that it is a swallow you see, can be said to ‘hear’ the explosion only if you realise that such an explosion is what you hear, etc. Thus unwitting linguistic innovation is followed by spontaneous transfer of implications from the supposedly generic to the more specific terms and has us credit these with supposedly ordinary implications they do not in fact have.

By crediting them with these supposedly ordinary implications, we turn the achievements of seeing, smelling and tasting, hearing and feeling things into epistemic achievements, which involve a knowledge one could acquire by using either only one’s senses or also one’s reason: I may be able to tell by just looking, or may have to infer, that it is Fred or a swallow I see, that it is the explosion of a secret ammunitions depot I hear, etc. The moment we think that such knowledge is required for ‘seeing’ and ‘hearing’ Fred, the swallow, or the explosion, we may want to pin down the contribution our senses make to this achievement. We may then say that strictly speaking we see or hear or otherwise perceive by sense those things which we get to perceive by using only our senses and not our reason. Since inferences are drawn by reason, we strictly speaking see or hear only what we see or hear without making any inference. We thus come to conceive a supposedly strict or proper generic notion of sense-perception as ‘seeing or hearing, etc., without inference’. In actual fact, this notion is quite different from the ordinary English notion of ‘seeing’ or ‘hearing’: The present notion requires both that the subject who sees or hears something possesses certain knowledge and that he acquires this knowledge without inference. Ordinary English requires neither. We are dealing with a new notion, conceived only in philosophical reflection, and incorrectly regarded as merely rendering more precise the—supposedly—loose use ordinarily made of perception-terms.

We find Berkeley employing this new notion when explaining what we can be said to hear or see ‘in truth and strictness’ (3D 204) or in ‘strictness of speech’ (NTV 45). Berkeley thinks that we frequently make pertinent inferences automatically, as when we see or hear only one feature of a thing and immediately know what kind of thing it is, since we know from past experience that this feature is possessed by things of that kind (NTV 45-–46). To exclude all such automatic inference or ‘suggestion’ from past experience, he rules that ‘those things alone are actually and strictly perceived by any sense, which would have been perceived, in case that same sense had then been first conferred on us’ (3D 204). Berkeley clearly employs this supposedly strict (‘in truth and strictness’) or proper notion of ‘seeing or hearing, etc. without inference’—for a start, in the very first argument of the First Dialogue, where he responds to a question about which things may ‘properly be said to be sensible’, by inferring a conclusion about what the senses perceive ‘in truth’, from the fact that they ‘make no inferences’ (3D 174).





2. TACIT PRESUPPOSITIONS: THE STRATEGY OF BERKELEY’S FIRST DIALOGUE




In the first half of the dialogue (3D 175–191), Berkeley patiently pursues one general strategy to show that sensible things exist only in the mind. This argumentative strategy is motivated by an ‘opening argument’ that has perplexed commentators (3D 174-–175). The argument proceeds, first, from the truism that



(0) Sensible things are ‘those things which are perceived by the senses’



(though these need not be the houses, mountains and rivers common sense takes us to perceive). It proceeds, second, from a definition of the technical term “x immediately perceives y”:





Those things are perceived immediately which are perceived without the intervention of others.

The senses make no inferences. By (1) and (2) (sic):

In truth the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately. By (3) and (0):

Sensible things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense.

We do not immediately perceive by sight any thing beside light, and colours, and figures, nor by hearing any thing but sounds, nor by the palate any thing beside tastes, nor by the smell any thing beside odours, nor by the touch more than tangible qualities. In brief: We immediately perceive nothing beside sensible qualities. (un-argued assumption—sic) By (4) and (5):

Sensible things therefore are nothing else but so many sensible qualities or combinations of sensible qualities.





To show that sensible things exist only in the mind, Berkeley accordingly proceeds to discuss one determinable ‘sensible quality’ after the other, and seeks to show of each that it exists only in the mind. In a departure from Locke’s terminology, all immediately perceivable qualities, both secondary and primary, are ‘sensible’, and Berkeley’s discussion will conclude with the examination of extension, motion, and the tangible quality of solidity (3D 188–191).

Commentators have notoriously been puzzled by two—to us—patent shortcomings of the argument that motivates this strategy: the inference from apparently unrelated premises—(1) and (2)—to the first conclusion, and the assumption, without further argument, of an incredible claim: Pace (5), we would like to think, we do see something beside light, and colours and ‘figures’, namely physical objects which have those colours and shapes, and emit or reflect that light. Similarly, when a coach comes rattling by (Berkeley’s favourite example), we may see and hear the coach, and not merely its colour and shape, and the sound it makes. And usually there is nothing to ‘intervene’ between us and the physical objects (coaches, etc.) we see or hear. We shall see that at both points, in making his first inference and in taking for granted this incredible assumption, Berkeley presupposed what he sets out to show: His entire strategy for showing that the things we immediately perceive by sense exist in the mind presupposes from the start that the things we immediately perceive by sense are sensations or ideas. We are dealing with the phenomenon of belief bias (cp. Chapter 1.3), writ large: belief bias which vitiates both the general argumentative strategy and—as we shall subsequently see—the individual arguments that implement it.

Consider the argument’s first inference. When drawing a conclusion— (3)—about what the senses perceive ‘in truth’ from the premise—(2)—that they ‘make no inferences’, the argument is clearly employing the above notion of perception by sense ‘in truth and strictness’, that is, of ‘perception without inference’. But the conclusion derived is that in truth the senses perceive nothing they do not ‘perceive immediately’, that is, by the previous definition (1), ‘perceive without intervention’. These two notions of perception, ‘without inference’ and ‘without intervention’, are independent and the inference seems to be invalid.

Berkeley’s initial explanation of ‘immediate perception’ suggests how and why he takes the two notions to be related. He introduces the notion of ‘immediate perception’ by defining ‘mediate perception’ as perception ‘not without the intervention of other’ things, and explains this definition through examples (3D 174). In these, things we perceive either ‘signify or suggest to the mind’ things which are imperceptible—as when letters in a book suggest to my mind the notions of God, virtue, truth, etc.—or they allow us to infer the existence of some supposedly imperceptible cause—as when ‘I see one part of the sky red, and another blue, and . . . my reason does thence evidently conclude there must be some cause of that diversity of colours, yet that cause cannot be said to be . . . perceived by the sense of seeing’ but only by reason (ibid.).

These examples may leave us wondering why the letters we are said to perceive should ‘intervene’ between us and the notions they suggest. Nor is it clear why the ‘diversity of colours’ should ‘intervene’ between us and the rising morning sun that presumably causes it (cp. 3D 171). (If still below the horizon, the rising sun is obscured by the Earth, rather than by the colours of the sky; if above the horizon, it is clearly visible in the blue and red— and hence clear—sky.) An answer is suggested by the fact that the things we are said to perceive have precisely the features commonly attributed to ideas of perception: They ‘signify’ or represent other things and are thought to be caused by them. Furthermore, Berkeley will go on to argue that the colours, sounds and heat he here says we perceive without perceiving their causes are in fact ideas or sensations in us. In framing the present examples, Berkeley presumably takes for granted that

When using our senses we perceive ideas in our minds (qua spaces of inner perception), which intervene between the mind (qua organ of inner perception) and whatever physical things (if any) they are caused by and represent.



This version of the early sense-datum doctrine—SD* in Chapter 3.5— appears to render the notions of ‘perception without inference’ and ‘perception without intervention’ co-extensive: We infer the presence of the things we take to populate our environment, from the presence of the intervening ideas we take them to cause, in our minds. Physical objects thus are perceived ‘with the intervention’ of ideas (i.e. mediately) and ‘with an inference’ (i.e. by reason). Since the mind is a transparent medium (Chapter 2.2), the ideas in it, by contrast, are perceived both without the intervention of anything else (immediately) and without any inference (by sense, strictly speaking). Accordingly, Berkeley treats the two notions as co-extensive: ‘Whatever we perceive, is perceived either immediately or mediately: by sense, or by reason’ (3D 205).

Berkeley states or relies on the several elements of the present doctrine, both in the immediate sequel and when introducing the distinction between ‘immediate’ and ‘mediate perception’ in his first published work. In the latter, he regards it as obvious that we immediately perceive by sense (sight) ideas in our minds and assumes that by their intervention we mediately perceive other things:

We must bear in mind that there are two sorts of objects apprehended by the eye, the one primarily and immediately, the other secondarily and by intervention of the former. Those of the first sort neither are, nor appear to be [!], without the mind, or at any distance off’ but are obviously in the mind. (NTV 50)





In the First Dialogue, namely between Berkeley’s spokesman Philonous and the student of natural philosophy Hylas, the examples we have just considered are followed by the opening argument. In justifying its first step—from (1) and (2) to (3) above—Hylas assumes that the things we immediately perceive by sense are ideas, that these ideas are caused in the mind and that their causes are to be inferred:

[I]n truth the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately: for they make no inferences. The deducing therefore of causes or occasions from effects and appearances, which alone are perceived by sense, entirely relates to reason. (3D 174–175)





Hylas uses the term “occasion” in the then common technical sense, meaning ‘an inactive unthinking being [like a physical object], at the presence whereof God excites ideas in our minds’ (3D 219–220). The ‘effects and appearances’ in question are therefore ideas caused or excited in our minds (with or without Divine intervention). Already Locke uses the term “appearances” to refer to ideas perceived in minds: ‘By determinate, when applied to a simple idea, I mean that simple appearance, which the mind has in its view, or perceives in itself, when that idea is said to be in it’ (EHU p. 13). Locke uses “appearance” also in a more precise sense, to refer to the two-dimensional ‘variety of shadow or colour’ which he takes the senses to introduce into the mind, where the judgement or reason supposedly transforms them into three-dimensional representations (EHU II.ix.8). In the philosophical parlance of the time, ‘appearances’ are ideas.

On the basis of Hylas’ assumptions, the first conclusion of the opening argument—(3) above—can be inferred as follows, and arguably is inferred thus, in the present passage: Whenever we perceive anything at all by sense, we immediately perceive ideas in our minds. From these effects and appearances we deduce what objects in our environment cause or occasion them in our minds. So we only get to know about those external objects by making inferences. But, in truth and strictness, we perceive by sense just what we perceive without making any inferences. In truth, therefore, ideas ‘alone are perceived by sense’ (rather than by reason). In the transparent medium of the mind, ideas are perceived immediately: First, they are perceived immediately in Locke’s intuitive sense of being perceived in the mind, by the mind (EHU II.viii.8), which Hylas seems to use, for example, when contrasting the things ‘we immediately perceive, and that which exists without us’ (3D 182). Second, ideas are perceived immediately in Berkeley’s new sense of being perceived without the intervention of other things. ‘In truth’, therefore, ‘the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately’. Let’s retain: At bottom, the reason for which we are invited to agree that, strictly speaking, we perceive by sense only what we perceive immediately, is that whenever we perceive anything by sense, we immediately perceive ideas in our minds, and perceive these alone without inference. This much Berkeley himself is convinced of from the start and throughout—‘by our senses we perceive [immediately, of course] only the ideas existing in our minds’ (3D 247)—and takes to be common ground with his adversaries, ‘the materialists’ (3D 248). Arguably, this is his reason for maintaining the first conclusion of his opening argument.

The second major step of the argument proceeds from the puzzling assumption—(5) above—that we immediately perceive by sense only certain qualities, and not the things that have them. Later in the dialogue (3D 204), Berkeley tries to reconcile this assumption with our ordinary way of speaking of ‘seeing a red-hot bar of iron’ (and not merely its red colour) or of ‘hearing a coach’ (and not merely the sound it makes). In an earlier discussion of the latter example, Berkeley indicates why he finds it ‘evident, that in truth and strictness, nothing can be heard but sound’ (3D 204):

Sitting in my study, I hear a coach drive along the street; I look through the casement and see it; I walk out and enter into it; thus, common speech would incline one to think I heard, saw, and touched the same thing, to wit, the coach. It is nevertheless certain, the ideas intromitted by each sense are widely different and distinct from each other; but having been observed constantly to go together, they are spoken of as one and the same thing. (NTV 46)





The reason why I can only hear the sound of the coach but not the coach (as ‘common speech would incline one to think’) is that the ideas ‘intromitted’ by each sense, that is, the ideas allowed to enter, let in, or admitted by it, namely into the mind, are distinct from each other. In fact, whenever things are ‘being let into the mind [in] two ways’ (NTV 48), they are distinct objects of (inner) perception (NTV 49).

What Berkeley finds ‘certain’ here is the essence of Locke’s account of how the mind comes to be furnished with ideas from without (‘external sensation’, Chapter 3.5):

There are some ideas, which have admittance only through one sense, which is peculiarly adapted to receive them. Thus light and colours . . . come in only by the eyes: all kinds of noises, sounds, and tones only by the ears: the several tastes and smells, by the nose and palate. (EHU II.iii.1)





From this and the core claim that whenever we perceive anything at all by sense, we ‘immediately perceive by sense’ ideas in our minds, namely ideas coming in from without, Berkeley presumably infers that we immediately perceive by sight only those ideas that come into the mind by the eyes, that we immediately perceive by hearing only those ideas that come in by the ears, and so on and so forth. The present conclusion is the puzzling assumption at issue: ‘[W]e immediately perceive by sight’ nothing ‘beside light, and colours, and figures . . . by hearing [nothing] but sounds’ etc. (3D 175). Together with the conclusion that ‘in truth the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately’, this assumption entails the more succinct claim that ‘in truth and strictness, nothing can be heard but sound’ (3D 204, cp. 3D 174).

In the conceptual framework of the time, colours, figures, sounds, tastes and smells fall into place as accidents, things which can only exist in others (Chapter 3.1). These other things, which ‘subsist of themselves and are the subject of accidents’ are substances; physical objects and minds alike fall into this category. The objects of immediate perception, which alone qualify as ‘sensible things’, thus are distinct accidents which come into the mind through the various senses. One might call these things either ‘ideas’ or ‘qualities’, depending upon what substance—mind or matter—they are in, but Berkeley calls them ‘qualities’ also when asserting that they exist in the mind (e.g., in 3D 187–188). Several such accidents can combine in the mind to form a complex idea. Hence we can immediately perceive sensible qualities and their combinations. By (natural philosophers’) common opinion, accidents can also inhere in material or corporeal substances and thus make up a physical object. But the only things we can immediately perceive are sensible qualities. ‘It seems therefore, that if you take away all sensible qualities, there remains nothing sensible’ (3D 174). We can immediately perceive only these accidents but not the substances they supposedly exist in: ‘Sensible things therefore are nothing else but so many sensible qualities, or combinations of such qualities’ (3D 175)—and do not include substances.

Accordingly, Berkeley sets out to establish that sensible things exist only in the mind by showing that the ‘sensible qualities’ (i.e. the qualities we perceive immediately and by sense, strictly speaking) are in the mind:



(SD+) The qualities we perceive by sense (without inference) and immediately (without intervention of anything else) are ideas we immediately perceive in the mind.



This is the early sense-datum doctrine with a twist. The latter (SD* in Chapter 3.5) states that whenever we perceive by sense a quality (or anything else, for that matter), we immediately perceive an idea in the mind. The present twist is that the idea we immediately perceive is identified with the quality, as perceived immediately. As we have just seen, Berkeley takes for granted Locke’s ‘raw’ or ‘unsublimated’ account of sense-perception or ‘external sensation’: Whenever we perceive a quality by sense, this quality has come, through some sense, into our mind, where we perceive it (ES in Chapter 3.5). The idea we perceive in the mind thus is a quality that has come in from outside.

To establish that sensible things exist only in the mind, Berkeley seeks to show—SD+—that each kind of quality which ‘we immediately perceive by our senses’ (3D 180) is an idea in the mind. To show this, he ‘goes through all the qualities by name one after the other’ (3D 199) and ‘examine[s] them in order’ (3D 179): He considers, in turn, temperature, or heat and cold (3D 175–199), tastes (179–180), odours (180–181), sounds (181–183), colours (183–187), figure and extension (188–190), motion (190), and solidity, or hardness or resistance (191).

We have found that the argument that motivates this strategy tacitly presupposes, first, the early sense-datum doctrine—SD*—that whenever we perceive anything by sense, we immediately perceive ideas in our minds and, second, Locke’s account of external sensation—ES—which already comprises the conclusion—SD+—to be established by considering each quality in turn. We shall find that these doctrines are tacitly presupposed also by the several ‘quality-specific’ arguments that are to establish them. Berkeley takes these claims for granted, from the start and throughout.

We have seen (in Chapter 3.5) that these claims can be obtained through picture-driven lines of thought. We will see that Berkeley’s ‘quality-specific’ arguments rely on various old acquaintances: not only on the doctrines he seeks to justify but also on some of the picture-driven conclusions we have seen to lead up to them. We will thus have reason to believe that Berkeley was under the spell of the same philosophical pictures as Locke, was led to in many ways similar views about sense-perception, and found them so compelling that he unwittingly presupposed them in the very arguments he constructed in their support: adherence to philosophical pictures (Sections 3–4) culminating in belief bias (Sections 5–6). Indeed, his adherence to philosophical pictures has Berkeley employ, at key points of his argument, a patently unsound ‘introspective’ method to which we now turn.





3. PICTURE-MOTIVATED LINGUISTIC INNOVATION:

AN INTROSPECTIVE METHOD




Under the spell of philosophical pictures which include the perceptual pictures of knowledge and of reflection, we posit in us a space and organ of inner perception and take for granted that knowing, understanding, remembering, thinking-about and thinking-of all involve perceiving things in this ‘mind’, with this ‘mind’ (Chapter 1). The moment those important intellectual activities and achievements have thus been assimilated to each other, philosophers tend to press a supposedly suitable familiar term into service as a generic label for them. An early modern favourite is the term “thinking”: To ‘think’ is to perform any intellectual activity which essentially involves perceiving things in the mind, with the mind. In this new, supposedly generic, sense the verb then applied, without further reflection or other ado, to all activities which we ordinarily speak of as involving some kind of ‘thinking’. As a result, all these activities are then taken to essentially involve perceiving ideas in the mind, with the mind.

Thus Locke introduces the new generic sense when he declares ‘perception, or thinking’ to be one of the ‘two great and principal actions of the mind’ (EHU II.vi.2), then resolves to use the term “thinking” for ‘that sort of operation of the mind about its ideas, wherein the mind is active’—in contrast with ‘bare naked’ or sense-perception, which is purely passive (EHU II.ix.1)—and thus comes to treat remembrance, recollection and contemplation as well as reverie, dreaming and ‘ecstasy’ as ‘modes of thinking’ (EHU II.xix.1), adding that there are many further such modes besides (EHU II.xix.2). Locke thus seems to take for granted that the new generic label applies to all intellectual activities which we ordinarily speak of as involving some kind of ‘thinking’—and that all of them involve perceiving things in the mind. Above (Section 1), we have seen that the mere craving for generality can lead to unwitting linguistic innovation followed by spontaneous projection or transfer of ordinary implications. We now see that adherence to philosophical pictures can lead to equally unwitting linguistic innovation, followed by spontaneous projection of picture-driven implications. This extends the scope of the mind beyond the target-domains of perceptual metaphors.

Imagining is a case in point. It is a kind of ‘thinking’ in an ordinary sense: The feats of imagination include thinking that things might be thus-and-so under certain circumstances, thinking how things might then be, thinking of things that might be, and thinking of what might come, etc. The process outlined may lead thinkers under the spell of the perceptual pictures we have considered to take for granted that imagining essentially involves inner perception of things in the mind and ‘operations about ideas’ (PHK 2).

In particular once we have adopted them, picture-driven conclusions we find intuitively compelling get presupposed in the interpretation of talk about the topic at issue. Such biased interpretation has us populate the mind with various different familiar things: the thoughts we have when we think, the pains we feel, the memories we have, and the fancies of our imagination. Thus a motley crew gets subsumed under the technical term “idea” (qua what is perceived in the mind). This is nicely illustrated by Berkeley’s explanation of how to best follow his arguments, where he equates ‘attaining a train of thoughts’ with framing and considering a stream of ideas:

Whoever therefore designs to read the following sheets, I entreat him to make my words the occasion of his own thinking, and endeavour to attain the same train of thoughts in reading, that I had in writing them. By this means it will be easy for him to discover the truth or falsity of what I say. He will be out of all danger of being deceived by my words, and I do not see how he can be led into an error by considering his own naked, undisguised ideas. (PHK I25)



The reader is asked to frame and consider the same stream of ideas in his mind that Berkeley perceived in his, when writing down his thoughts. Given its prominent position—these are the closing words of the Introduction to the Principles of Human Knowledge (henceforward: PHK I)—we need to take this request seriously.

In further reflection about the mind, we tend to assimilate some of its contents to others, or all ‘ideas’ to some. In particular, when common sense, as implicit in ordinary language, appears to credit some of the things we have placed in the mind with features which an intuitive line of reasoning about the mind attributes to all its contents, we are prone to assimilate all these things to the former models, in ‘paradigmatic assimilation’. The most basic line of reasoning about the mind, which leads to the introduction of the early modern notion, has thinkers conclude that the things in the mind are perceived (i) at some location, (ii) with some organ of sense (Chapter 1.3). Ordinary language, current or early modern, takes none of the things commonly placed in the mind to be somehow ‘perceived’ both at some location and with some organ of sense. But it credits some of them at least with some sort of location: It credits corporeal sensations with a place in the body at which they are ‘felt’—though not ‘with’ any organ of sense. And it speaks of our ‘seeing’ or ‘having images’ ‘before’—though not with—‘the inner eye’ in some, though not all cases of remembering and imagining: When imagining what the consequences of higher inflation would be, we typically spell them out verbally and without visualising anything in any way; but when trying to imagine what she would look like in that dress, we will often frame such an ‘image’. Similarly, I do not visualise anything when remembering when the battle of Waterloo was fought, but can still ‘see’ my grandmother’s Christmas tree ‘before my inner eye’. Thus many philosophers assimilate all ‘ideas’ or things perceived in the mind, with the mind, either to corporeal sensations like pains (in some contexts) or to imagination- or memory-images (in others). The latter assimilation arguably informs already the choice of the label “idea”, which was still used in the literal sense of ‘image’ in the 17th century. The two different models are then frequently treated as if they amounted to pretty much the same, as Berkeley does in speaking of ‘ideas or sensations, call them which you will’ (3D 215).

In the present passages, where ‘pure’ philosophical reflection is at issue, Berkeley seems to think of ideas, first and foremost, as images: The ‘naked, undisguised ideas’ we are to ‘consider’ (PHK I25) are to be considered ‘divested of words’ and made an object of ‘attentive perception’ (PHK I22). Presumably, they are mental images. To avoid unnecessary misunderstandings and mistakes, Berkeley enjoins the reader to try, at several key points of his argument, to form the same mental images he, Berkeley, had in setting it down. This is to provide plain and incontrovertible proof for some of his philosophical claims:

[S]o long as I confine my thoughts to my own ideas, divested of words, I do not see how I can easily be mistaken. The objects I consider, I clearly and adequately know. I cannot be deceived in thinking I have an idea which I have not. It is not possible for me to imagine, that any of my own ideas are alike or unlike, that are not truly so. To [i] discern the agreements and disagreements there are between my ideas, to [ii] see what ideas are included in any compound idea and what not, there is nothing more requisite, than an attentive perception of what passes in my own understanding.’ (PHK I22)





The first lines rely on the picture-driven conclusion that the mind is a transparent medium (Chapter 2.2). The final lines refer to a method Berkeley employs at core points of his argument; repeatedly, Berkeley invites the reader to replicate thought-experiments: We are to frame certain ideas, so as to be able to simply see by considering them whether certain philosophical claims are true or false.

Some potentially pertinent moves fit Berkeley’s present words only in a metaphorical sense of the latter. For example: When, in the later Dialogues, Philonous asks Hylas how pleasure and pain can ‘agree to . . . unthinking [i.e., unperceiving] corporeal substances’ (3D 180), Hylas presumably is meant to ‘discern the disagreement’—(i) above—between the ideas of pleasure and pain and that of insensitive bodies. But it is hard to see what kind of image, mental or other, could make one aware of the mistake Berkeley takes to be involved in crediting such a body with pleasure or pain. By contrast, we shall see in the next section that when Philonous asks Hylas to ‘frame’ certain ‘ideas’ (e.g. 3D 177, 194), namely in order to determine— (ii) above—what is and what is not included in a given idea, Berkeley does want his reader to form certain mental images.

Unwitting picture-motivated linguistic innovation followed by spontaneous projection or transfer of picture-motivated implications leads thinkers who are under the spell of perceptual pictures of intellectual activities to assume that various kinds of ‘thinking’, including imagining and conceiving, essentially involve perceiving ideas in the mind. Paradigmatic assimilation then has them think of such ideas, first and foremost, as images: To conceive or imagine something is to form an image of that thing. Hence if we cannot form an image of some thing that satisfies the description “ . . .”, then a thing which is . . . is inconceivable (cp. PHK I13). The latter term usually carries the implication of impossibility. Hence, one may conclude, if we cannot form a certain image, then a certain kind of thing cannot possibly exist.

At some key points of his argument, Berkeley draws precisely this wild conclusion: He tries—and fails—to form certain mental images, invites the reader to try as well, expects him to do no better, and infers from our apparent inability to form such images that certain things cannot possibly exist. The process we have reconstructed in this section can explain why Berkeley proceeds in this manner and believes that these thought-experiments provide straightforward and compelling proof of substantive metaphysical claims. Let’s now consider how he employs this ‘method’ in arguing for two fundamental claims: first, the claim that all sensible qualities have to exist at the same place—so that if the secondary qualities exist only in the mind, as already Locke and others had maintained, then the primary qualities cannot exist anywhere else, either (Section 4); second, the claim that the secondary qualities of heat and cold, taste and smell, do indeed exist only in the mind (Sections 5–6).





4. FAMILIAR PICTURES:

BERKELEY AGAINST ABSTRACTION




Berkeley’s defence of these two claims relies on a demonstration that we cannot form ideas by ‘abstraction’. Berkeley presents this demonstration in the introduction to the Principles, as a prerequisite for understanding his subsequent arguments (PHK I6–I13). The demonstration is to refute an account Berkeley takes to ‘have occasioned innumerable errors and difficulties’ (PHK I6) and attributes to Locke (PHK I11, I13), presumably among many others. Berkeley agrees with its first statement but rejects the bulk of the account (introduced below with the words ‘But we are told’):

It is agreed on all hands, that the qualities or modes of things do never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from all others, but are mixed as it were, and blended together, several in the same object. But we are told, the mind being able to consider each quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with which it is united, does by that means form to itself abstract ideas. For example, there is perceived by sight an object extended, coloured, and moved: this mixed or compound idea the mind resolving into its simple, constituent parts, and viewing each by itself, exclusive of the rest, does frame the abstract ideas of extension, colour, and motion. (PHK I7)



This exposition is couched in the terminology of qualities and other accidents existing in objects or substances, whose development was driven by a philosophical picture we have become familiar with: the ‘part-whole’ or ‘mereological picture’ of qualities (Chapters 1.2 and 1.5). The first claim, which Berkeley endorses, arguably is so uncontroversial at the time because it is conflated with an actual truism, T1 below, interpreted in the light of the mereological picture:



(T1) Any sensible object has got several sensible qualities: colour, size, shape, motion, etc.



(M) Qualities are things literally located at some place, namely in the objects to which they belong (like parts). By (T1) and (M):



(C1) Several sensible qualities exist somewhere in the same sensible object.



This picture-driven conclusion is at odds with a conceptual truism we have already encountered (in Chapter 3.1):



(CT) Qualities do not stand in any kind of spatial relations: They have no location (neither in the object nor anywhere else) and do not stand in spatial relations to each other (or anything else).



The usual response to such conflicts is sublimation, for example in the shape of a gloss that indicates that something is not to be taken quite literally (Chapters 1.3 and 3.1). This backpedalling seems to occur here after a further conclusion is inferred from the conflicting parties, namely from the picture-driven conclusion and a truism reflecting (CT):



(T2) A quality is not here in an object and another over there (above or beside it). By (T2) and (C1):



(C2) Several sensible qualities exist not at specific but at diffuse locations in the same object, inextricably mixed and blended together.



The “as it were” in Berkeley’s statement of this conclusion indicates that something here (though it is not clear quite what) is not to be taken literally (while it is left unclear how we are to understand it instead). We are, it seems, dealing with a conclusion driven by the part-whole picture, which strikes its proponents, including Berkeley, as so compelling that they maintain it in the face of a conflict with conceptual truisms, upon negative sublimation.

This reasoning also leads to a related but distinct conclusion, a claim Berkeley regards as rather obvious:

I appeal to any man’s experience, whether the visible extension of any object does not appear as near to him as the colour of that object; nay, whether they do not both seem to be in the very same place. (NTV 43, cp. 3D 194)





What is in fact obvious is that objects which have a colour also have a visible extension. By (M) above, an object that looks to have two qualities, looks to have two qualities somewhere in it. Since—(CT) above— qualities do not stand in any spatial relations, we do not want to say that, say, the visible extension appears further away from (or closer to) us than the colour. And since—T2 above—a quality is not here in an object and another over there, the two visible qualities must be inextricably mixed and ‘coexist’ throughout the object (3D 194), the claim that they also look or seem to share ‘the very same place’ is intuitively more compelling than the suggestion that they look or seem to be at different places.

While Berkeley goes along with the opening sentence of the present passage—PHK I7—he denies that we can frame ideas by abstraction, in the proper sense of that term (PHK I10), that is by ‘precision or mental separation’ of ideas (PHK I9). Such ‘mental separation’ is meant to work in either of two ways: First, we are taken to perceive by sense an object with several qualities, then resolve the complex idea of it into its constituent parts, and thus obtain abstract ideas specifically of one quality and no other—even if this quality can never exist without others (PHK I7). Second, we are held to observe several determinate qualities (like red, blue or white), leave out all differences between them, retain ‘that only which is common to all’, and thus frame ‘an idea of [e.g.] colour in abstract which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate colour’ (PHK I8).

To show that we are not capable of either feat, Berkeley proceeds from a self-test of what he is able to imagine:

[F]or myself I find indeed I have a faculty of imagining or representing to myself the ideas of those particular things I have perceived and of variously compounding and dividing them [e.g. of dividing the idea of a man’s body and thus imagining individual parts like hands or eyes]. But then whatever hand or eye I imagine, it must have some particular shape or colour . . . And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and which is neither swift nor slow, [neither] curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. (PHK I10)





It is of course easy to imagine a hand without imagining it to be pale or tawny or any other particular colour: When, in making up a story, we say, ‘Suddenly a hand grabbed him’ and proceed without giving any further details about that hand, we are doing just that. Many commentators have— rightly, we shall argue—concluded that Berkeley takes for granted that to imagine something is to form an image ‘before the inner eye’. For of course an image of a hand or any other body must ‘give it some colour’ (PHK 10); even though we can in fact think of each quality by itself, we indeed cannot ‘view each quality by itself’ (cp. PHK I7). Similarly, the ordinary English concept of ‘motion’ allows us to say that a body moves without implying anything about what path it describes or how fast it moves; we clearly have, and hence can form, a general concept of motion which ‘leaves out . . . that which is peculiar to each’ particular motion and ‘retain[s] that only which is common to all’ motions (as the account to be refuted has it, PHK I9). By contrast, we cannot form an image of motion except by visualising an object which moves, and moves at a determinate speed, in a particular way (rotates, or falls, etc). In the first sentence quoted, Berkeley explicitly equates imagining something with ‘representing to oneself the idea of’ that thing. Arguably, he simultaneously assimilates such ideas to images, and forming ideas to forming mental images. I.e.: He explicitly makes the first, and probably also the second of the two moves we have reconstructed above (Section 3).

As a result, Berkeley concludes that at any rate he (‘I’) is incapable of the exploits at issue:

I deny that I can abstract one from another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible should exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion by abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid. (PHK I10)





In view of an exegetical controversy, note that Berkeley does not adduce the fact that certain qualities cannot exist separately as a reason why he cannot conceive them separately. In the first line Berkeley presumably means those qualities which cannot ‘really exist’ separately ‘in nature’ (cp. 3D 194, see below). What he denies is the view that even when qualities cannot be instantiated separately in nature, ideas of these qualities can be conceived separately in the mind, a view he previously put into the mouths of his opponents with the words: ‘Not that it is possible for colour or motion to exist without extension: but only that the mind can frame to it self by abstraction the idea of colour exclusive of extension, and of motion exclusive of both colour and extension’ (PHK I7). To show this mental feat impossible, Berkeley does not invoke the fact his opponents, he states, deem compatible with it, but performs a self-test which establishes precisely what he concludes: that he (‘I’) is incapable of this and a related feat. ‘Whether others have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas, they best can tell’ (PHK I10): Each reader has to replicate Berkeley’s self-test: to ‘look into his thoughts, and there try whether he has, or can attain to have, an idea that shall correspond with the description’ at issue (PHK I13). This is to reveal that we cannot frame anything that would qualify, for example, as an ‘idea of colour exclusive of extension’ (cp. PHK I7) or as an ‘idea of colour in abstract which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate colour’ (PHK I8). While it is not as obvious as Berkeley takes the present point to be that the general concept of ‘colour’ cannot be described thus (it is, after all, the concept not of any determinate colour but of colour in general), it does seem obvious that any image of colour must be of (something of) some determinate colour. Presumably, Berkeley’s—sole— support for his present conclusion consists in tests of what mental images can be formed.

From this conclusion and the conception of qualities as ‘coexisting parts’ we considered a moment ago, Berkeley proceeds to derive a metaphysical conclusion: The so-called ‘primary and original qualities’ must be where the ‘secondary qualities’ are, which already Locke had assumed exist only in the mind (Chapter 3). The argument is briefly sketched in the New Theory of Vision (NTV 43), concisely stated in the Principles (PHK 10), and developed at slightly more length in the First Dialogue, in this exchange between Philonous (P) and Hylas (H):

P: . . . try if you can frame the idea of any figure, abstracted from all particularities of size, or even from other sensible qualities. H: Let me think a little—I do not find that I can. P: And can you think it possible, that should really exist in nature, which implies a repugnancy in its conception? H: By no means. P: Since therefore it is impossible even for the mind to disunite the ideas of extension and motion from all other sensible qualities, does it not follow, that where the one exist, there necessarily the other exist likewise? H: It should seem so. (3D 194)





Inserting tacit assumptions (below, as throughout, in square brackets) until we have obtained a logically valid argument, and spelling out the implications merely hinted at, we obtain:

We cannot frame the idea of any [extended and moving] figure abstracted [i.e. separated] from all other sensible qualities [like colour].

When we cannot frame the idea of some thing, then this thing implies a repugnancy in its conception.

That which implies a repugnancy in its conception cannot possibly exist in nature. By [2] and (3):

When we cannot frame the idea of something, it cannot possibly exist in nature. By (1) and [4]:

Extension and motion cannot possibly exist in nature separately from other sensible qualities (like colour).

When we cannot frame the idea of an extended and moving figure separated from all other sensible qualities, then it is not only impossible that the qualities of extension and motion exist in nature separately from all other sensible qualities but impossible even for the mind to separate (disunite) the ideas of extension and motion from the ideas of colour, etc. By (1) and [6]:

It is impossible even for the mind to disunite the ideas of extension and motion from the other sensible qualities.

When it is impossible even for the mind to disunite some things from others, then the former necessarily exist where [at the same place as] the latter exist. By (7) and [8]:

Where the other sensible qualities exist, there necessarily also extension and motion exist.





The argument is to justify the strong conclusion that all sensible qualities, primary and secondary alike, must necessarily exist at the same place. The weaker conclusion that they actually exist at the same place is evident the moment we open our eyes: ‘Besides, if you will trust your senses, is it not plain all sensible qualities coexist, or to them [i.e. to your senses], appear as being in the same place?’ (3D 194, cp. NTV 43)

Recall the claim from which Galileo proceeded in arguing for ‘secondary qualities’ (Chapter 3.2): ‘When ever I conceive of any piece of matter . . . I feel myself necessarily compelled to conceive along with it, that it is bounded and shaped’ and has all the other primary qualities as well, but do not have to conceive of it as having colour, heat, smell, or taste’ (SAG 27–28). The physicist’s concept of a physical body implies that it has the primary qualities, but not that it has any others (which it may possess as a matter of empirical rather than of conceptual fact). So, already in Berkeley’s time, physicists had explicitly formulated a concept or notion of a body which can be ‘framed’ without ‘giving bodies some colour or other sensible quality’. By contrast, it is plausible to think that without giving a body some colour we cannot form an image of it, neither on paper nor in the mind. Here—in (1)—as before, Berkeley presumably employs the term “idea” in the then common sense of ‘image’ and proceeds from an experiment, whose results, he thinks, anyone can replicate, namely by trying whether he can form a mental image which answers to a particular description (here: ‘idea of a figure without any determinate size or other sensible quality’).

Our analysis of the reasoning that leads up to the present conclusions provides us with significant evidence of adherence to philosophical pictures. In this section, we have seen that the lines of thought leading to the weaker conclusion that primary and secondary qualities actually exist in the same place and the related conclusion that all sensible qualities are inextricably mingled together (C2 above, PHK I7) involve leaps of thought driven by the mereological picture of qualities. And also the argument for the stronger conclusion speaks of qualities as being ‘separated’ or ‘inseparably united’ (PHK 10) or impossible to ‘disunite’ (3D 194), and relies on presuppositions—like [8] above—which apply these terms to qualities in a quite literal sense, with the spatial implication that qualities which are ‘inseparably united’ or ‘impossible to disunite’ must exist in the same place, either in material bodies or in that space of inner perception, the mind. In the previous section, we have explained how adherence to perceptual pictures of intellectual activities may lead thinkers, first, to assimilate ideas to images—as Berkeley does again in (1) above—second, to assume that all imagining and conceiving involves the forming of images—as Berkeley assumes in his ‘refutation’ of abstract ideas (PHK I10)—and, third, to take for granted that if we cannot form certain images certain things are incon-ceivable—[ 2] above—and are so in a sense which implies that—(3) above— those things are impossible.

We have thus obtained further evidence that Berkeley, like Locke before him, adhered to the mereological picture of qualities and to perceptual pictures of intellectual activities and achievements. We have already seen (in Chapter 3.5) how lines of thought driven by these pictures lead to the early sense-datum doctrine and the account of ‘external sensation’ we then found Berkeley to rely on (Section 2). Such core beliefs tend to be justified, if at all, by arguments which presuppose either the conclusions to be established or crucial consequences derived from them (strong belief bias). We now turn to Berkeley’s preferred arguments for the sense-datum doctrine— and will find them a case in point.





5. BELIEF BIAS: THE PLEASURE/PAIN ARGUMENTS




Berkeley makes one brief (NTV 44) and one sustained effort to justify his fundamental doctrine—SD+—that the qualities we perceive by sense (without inference) and immediately (without intervention of anything else) are ideas we immediately perceive in the mind, and the conclusion that these objects of immediate perception exist only in the mind. He makes the sustained effort in the first half of the First Dialogue (3D 175–191), where he seeks to show this for one quality after another (Section 2)—and discusses both secondary and primary qualities, in spite of the ‘shortcut’ afforded by the arguments we have just considered. For most qualities he gives more than one argument to establish that the doctrine applies to it. Most arguments belong to one of three types: ‘arguments from science’, ‘arguments from relativity’, and ‘pleasure/pain arguments’ building on ‘anti-abstractionist arguments’ (for short: ‘PP/AA-arguments’).

The first two are descendants of the arguments for the claim that colour and the other secondary qualities do not exist in physical bodies, previously rehearsed by Galileo, Boyle or Locke (Chapter 3.4). Berkeley arguably rehearses them only due to their potential popularity, for persuasive effect rather than justification, and does not rely on them himself: At the beginning of the Second Dialogue, he viciously criticises the ‘arguments from science’ and the ‘scientific’ explanations of sensations these are based on (3D 209–210, cp. 3D 242). And elsewhere he states that the ‘arguments from relativity’ do not manage to establish that sensible qualities exist in the mind (PHK 15, cp. PC 265). By contrast, Berkeley does seem to have espoused arguments of the third type, on which we therefore now focus: They rely on the prominently presented considerations about abstraction we have considered a moment ago; and they are given pride of place in the Dialogues, where the first ‘quality-specific’ arguments are of the PP/ AA-variety.

Berkeley offers such arguments about intense heat (3D 176), intense cold (178), tastes (179–180), and smells (181). When present to an intense degree, these qualities are indeed associated with certain bodily sensations, namely ‘annexed to . . . pleasure and pain’ (3D 191): Think of the burning pain you may feel in your hand when you hold it close to a fire, of the unpleasant burning sensation you may feel in your nostrils when exposed to a strong acid smell, or of how a cheese with a strong taste may cause a stabbing or tingling sensation on your tongue. The pleasure/pain arguments consider qualities as ‘things we immediately perceive by our senses’ (3D 180). Also known as ‘arguments from identification’, they explicitly assume that the present qualities, as immediately perceived by sense, are ideas or sensations we perceive in ourselves, namely that they are identical with those actual bodily sensations: Those qualities ‘are so many pleasing or displeasing sensations’ (3D 181). The arguments then merely bring out the apparently trivial consequence that these qualities can exist only in the mind and not in an unperceiving being or material substance. Thus Hylas sums up the argument about heat (developed on 3D 176):

[B]ecause intense heat is nothing else but a particular kind of painful sensation; and pain cannot exist but in a perceiving being; it follows that no intense heat can really exist in an unperceiving corporeal substance. (3D 177)





The crucial initial assumption then is supported by the ‘anti-abstractionist argument’ we shall consider in the next section.

In the case of temperature, the assumption is supported also by another kind of pleasure/pain argument: By establishing that intense heat, as immediately perceived by sense, is a particular kind of painful sensation, this argument is to show that intense heat, as immediately perceived by sense, is a sensation or idea. The argument for this very specific instance of the ‘embellished sense-datum doctrine’—SD+ —is developed in an exchange which immediately follows the argument Hylas sums up in the passage we have just considered:

H: I fear I was out in yielding intense heat to be a pain. It should seem rather, that pain is something distinct from heat, and the consequence or effect of it. P: 1Upon putting your hand near the fire, do you perceive one simple sensation, or two distinct sensations? H: But one simple sensation. P: 2Is not the heat immediately perceived? H: It is. P: And the pain? H: True. P: Seeing therefore (2)they are both immediately perceived at the same time, and (1)the fire affects you only with one simple, or uncompounded idea, it follows 3that this same simple idea is both the intense heat immediately perceived, and the pain; and, consequently, 4that the intense heat immediately perceived, is nothing distinct from a particular sort of pain. (3D 176)



This argument presupposes what it is meant to show. When you put your unprotected hand near the fire, you perceive the heat outside your body immediately and by sense, strictly speaking: As we would ordinarily judge, you perceive that heat without the intervention of any other thing or quality; and you do not have to infer the presence of this heat from anything else (as you might have to infer the presence of a fire next door from the heat you feel through the wall). Provided the heat is intense, you feel, at the same time, a sensation of pain. This pain you are assumed to perceive in the transparent medium of your mind, whose contents you perceive immediately, without intervention of anything else. So you immediately perceive both a heat outside your body and a pain within yourself. In fact, this pain is the only sensation you then feel, and we may well regard it as ‘simple, or uncompounded’. But it does not follow from this that the heat is identical with this sensation. This only follows if we tacitly assume in addition that the heat we perceive by sense and without intervention of anything else is a sensation or idea. Which is of course what the argument is really meant to show. Only by presupposing an instance of the sense-datum doctrine—SD+—can we infer from the present premises the conclusion that is meant to support this doctrine:

When you put your hand near the fire, the fire affects you only with one simple, uncompounded sensation or idea. (1 above)

When you put the hand near the fire, the heat and the pain are both immediately perceived at the same time. (2 above)

The objects you then perceive immediately—both the pain and the heat—are sensations or ideas which something else—viz. the fire— affects you with. (tacit assumption) By (2) and [3]:

When you put the hand near the fire, the fire affects you at the same time with the sensations or ideas of heat and of pain. (tacitly inferred conclusion) By (1) and [4]:

The sensation of heat and the sensation of pain are the same simple, uncompounded sensation or idea. (3 above) Therefore:

The heat immediately perceived is nothing distinct from a particular sort of pain. (4 above)





With the tacit assumption [3], Berkeley presupposes that when we put the hand near the fire and perceive the heat through the pertinent sense, we perceive the heat immediately, without intervention, but do so only in the mind, where the heat perceived is present as an idea or sensation—the specific instance of the sense-datum doctrine SD+.

When we combine the two ‘pleasure/pain arguments’, we obtain one overall argument, which Hylas sums up nicely for the case of intense cold, of which ‘the same’ is said to be true as of intense heat (3D 178): ‘An intense degree of cold is a pain; for to feel a very great cold, is to perceive a great pain: it cannot therefore exist without the mind’ (3D 178). In proper order:





To feel a great cold is to perceive a pain. For this reason:

An intense cold is a pain. Therefore:

An intense cold cannot exist without the mind.





The first assumption, which is not supported by explicit argument, is entailed by the kind of observation we have just considered with respect to heat, and an instance of the early sense-datum doctrine (SD* in Chapter 3.5): To feel a cold is to (immediately) perceive a sensation or idea in the mind. But, we observe, when we feel a great cold we feel a pain, and this pain is the only sensation we then feel. Therefore this pain must be the sensation or idea to (immediately) perceive which in the mind is to feel that cold. That is: To feel a great cold is to perceive this pain. But even if perceiving a pain thus is constitutive of feeling a great cold, it does not follow that the sensation perceived within is the quality we ordinarily take to be perceived without. Presumably, therefore, Berkeley here proceeds from the tacit assumption of the ‘embellished’ sense-datum doctrine—SD+—that the cold we perceive by sense and immediately is a sensation or idea we immediately perceive in the mind. Having concluded that everything we perceive by sense is perceived immediately (Section 2), he thus assumes that the cold we feel is a sensation we perceive in the mind when we feel that temperature. Together with the present observation, this entails both that to feel a great cold is to perceive a pain and that an intense cold is a pain. Arguably, Berkeley again presupposes the very doctrine—SD+—he means to establish.

To sum up: Together, the pleasure/pain arguments are meant to support the doctrine—SD+—that the qualities we perceive immediately and by sense are sensations or ideas, and that they exist only in the mind. To establish this, these arguments seize on cases of sense-perception where the perception of certain qualities is indeed associated with characteristic sensations. By inferences which proceed from a trivial observation and the very doctrine to be established, the present arguments then conclude that certain qualities we perceive immediately and by sense must be these familiar sensations, that these familiar sensations are examples of the perceived qualities/ideas at issue. Biased reasoning thus provides us with bogus examples of ‘sensations immediately perceived by sense’, which in turn appear to bear out the doctrine at issue—a clear case of belief bias. To see whether it is pernicious in the present case and has Berkeley endorse conclusions for which he has no warrant, we need to turn to the ‘anti-abstractionist arguments’ on which Berkeley ultimately bases the present conclusions.





6. PERNICIOUS BELIEF BIAS:

THE ANTI-ABSTRACTIONIST ARGUMENTS




The pleasure/pain arguments about intense heat and cold (3D 176–178), tastes (179–180), and smells (181), all build on the same two ‘anti-abstractionist’ arguments, which immediately follow the exchange about intense heat quoted above:

P: 1Again, try in your thoughts, Hylas, if you can conceive a vehement sensation to be without pain, or pleasure. H: I cannot. P: 2Or can you frame to yourself an idea of sensible pain or pleasure in general, abstracted from every particular idea of heat, cold, tastes, smells, etc.? H: I do not find that I can. P: 3Does it not therefore follow, that sensible pain is nothing distinct from those sensations or ideas, in an intense degree? H: It is undeniable; and to speak the truth, I begin to suspect that 4a very great heat cannot exist but in a mind perceiving it . . . A very violent and painful heat cannot exist without [i.e. outside] the mind. (3D 176–177)



This conclusion—tacitly along with analogous conclusions about intense cold, tastes, and smells, etc.—is derived independently from two premises (1 and 2 above). Hylas satisfies himself of the truth of these two premises by ‘trying in his thoughts’ to engage in two kinds of ‘abstraction’. Arguably, these are the two ‘proper acceptations of abstraction’ of which Berkeley had declared himself incapable (PHK I10, cp. Section 4 above): Arguably, the present premises are to be established by trying, respectively, to ‘conceive separately’ two things—‘vehement sensations’ and ‘pain or pleasure’— ‘which it is impossible should exist so separated’ in nature and, second, to ‘frame a general notion by abstracting from particulars’ (cp. PHK I10). Let’s consider these two efforts in turn.

As we have seen, early modern philosophers are prone to think of ‘ideas’ as either images or corporeal sensations like pains (Section 3). In his most extensive discussion of abstraction (PHK I6–21), Berkeley thought of ideas, first and foremost, as mental images, and of ‘conceiving ideas’ as forming mental images (Section 4). Now he thinks of ideas as sensations, and of ‘conceiving ideas’ as imagining or calling up sensations: The ‘vehement sensations’ at issue (in sentence 1 of the above quote from 3D 176–177) are ‘those sensations or ideas’ which the conclusion refers to (in 3), namely ‘particular idea[s] of heat, cold, tastes, smells, in an intense degree’ (in 2). An ‘idea of heat, in an intense degree’ is a ‘vehement sensation’ of heat.

Just as Berkeley found himself unable to form an image that would satisfy the description of ‘idea of colour exclusive of extension’ (Section 4), I submit, Hylas is now made to find himself unable to call up a sensation that would qualify as ‘an idea of great heat (or intense smell, etc.) without pain, or pleasure’. A moment ago, Hylas had agreed that when putting his hand near the fire he is affected only with one simple idea or sensation. What Berkeley has him ‘try in his thoughts’ presumably is to imagine or call up such sensations, sensations of the sort we in fact usually have when exposed to things that are very hot or cold, or have an intense smell or taste. Since the only sensation we actually have in these cases is one of pain, or pleasure, he duly imagines only sensations which are painful or enjoyable and thus ‘finds’ that he cannot ‘conceive’ a pertinent sensation ‘to be without pain, or pleasure’. In other words, he cannot ‘separate’ these sensations from pain, ‘even in the mind’. He therefore concludes—(3) above— that the sensations he considered are nothing distinct from pleasure or pain and—(4) above—exist in the same place, the mind. Indeed, the conclusion sought—invoked by the initial “again” in (1)—is that ‘the intense heat immediately perceived is nothing distinct from a particular sort of pain’ (3D 176), and is paraphrased when attained—in (4) above—as: ‘A very violent and painful heat cannot exist without the mind’. The step from (3) to this conclusion presupposes a specific version of the doctrine—SD+—to be established: that the violent heat, the intense heat immediately perceived, is a sensation of the kind Hylas imagined, namely the painful sensation we in fact usually have when exposed to things that are very hot.

The second argument (the move from 2 to 3 above) relies on Berkeley’s denial ‘that I can frame a general notion by abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid’ (PHK I10), with which he rejects accounts like this: ‘[T]he mind by leaving out of the particular colours perceived by sense, that which distinguishes them one from another, and retaining that only which is common to all, makes an idea of colour in abstract which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate colour’ (PHK I8). Mutatis mutandis, the same goes for ‘abstract ideas of the more compounded beings’, say of man or animal (PHK I9). Since we are now dealing with ideas that are ‘simple, or uncompounded’ (3D 176), the case of ‘sensible pain or pleasure in general’ must be analogous to that of ‘colour in abstract’ (rather than that of ‘the complex idea of man’). Just as the particular colours perceived by sense are different determinate qualities (red, blue, white) falling under the same determinable (viz. colour), so heat, cold, tastes, smells are different members of the same genus. And just as one cannot form by abstraction ideas of ‘colour in abstract which is . . . no[t] any determinate colour’, one cannot, Berkeley now claims, form an idea of that genus, ‘abstracted from every particular idea of heat, cold, tastes, smells’ (3D 177).

He refers to that genus-idea as ‘an idea of sensible pain or pleasure in general’: The genus that heat, cold, tastes, and smells are presupposed to belong to is that of ‘sensible pain or pleasure’. Presumably, Berkeley uses the label “sensible pains and pleasures” to distinguish those pains and pleasures which we may have when employing our five senses from those corporeal sensations (like head- or stomach-aches) which we have irrespective of whether or not we use any of those senses. The present assumption—(2) above—thus presupposes that at any rate intense heat, cold, tastes and smells all are sensations of a specific sort: sensible pains or pleasures. The second ‘anti-abstractionist argument’ thus presupposes from the start that intense heat, cold, tastes and smells are sensations. Since the present discussion is throughout about ‘things we immediately perceive by our senses’ (3D 180), the claim presupposed is, more precisely, an instance of the ‘embellished sense-datum doctrine’ (SD+) to be established: that intense heat, cold, tastes and smells, as immediately perceived by sense, are sensations or ideas. Both the ‘pleasure/pain arguments’ and the ‘anti-abstractionist arguments’ they build on presuppose what they are to show; strong belief bias vitiates the entire strand of argument.

To sum up: Berkeley adheres to at least some of the same philosophical pictures as Locke, including the mereological picture of qualities and perceptual pictures of intellectual activities and achievements (Sections 3–4), which lead to the adoption of the sense-datum doctrine of perception; second, he maintains a version of this paradoxical doctrine as a matter of strong belief bias: He presupposes it in the ‘opening argument’ which motivates the general strategy he employs to marshal arguments in its support (Section 2) and in those of the individual arguments marshalled that he seems to have thought his best (Sections 5–6).

Philosophical pictures thus shape philosophical reflection more profoundly than we have previously noticed. In previous chapters, we considered what we may call ‘intuitive reasoning’: single leaps of thought which materialise in the shape of philosophical intuitions (where the premises remain tacit) or single-step arguments (where the premises are explicitly stated). We now see that picture-driven reasoning shapes not only such spontaneous leaps of thought but also the deliberate construction of arguments, and does so at several levels: Directly, through picture-driven inferences, and indirectly, through biased reasoning presupposing picture-driven conclusions, such reasoning shapes also deliberately constructed arguments of several steps (Sections 5–6) and can suggest methods for constructing such arguments or providing evidence (like Berkeley’s adoption of introspection as a supposedly error-free method for establishing truths, metaphysical and other, Sections 3–4) as well as strategies for marshalling arguments (like Berkeley’s grand strategy for establishing the sense-datum doctrine, Section 2). Philosophical pictures may influence not only what philosophers spontaneously or intuitively think but also how they reason deliberately, what they accept as reason or evidence, and how strong a reason they think it is.





5 Self-Perpetuating Absurdity


Berkeley Defends ‘Perceptions’




Our loyalty to our extant beliefs, warranted and unwarranted, is commonly reinforced by various belief-bias effects of which we are hardly ever aware: We tend to notice evidence that confirms our beliefs more readily than uncongenial evidence, attach more weight to the former than to the latter, and accept argument more readily when it leads to a conclusion we believe true. In deductive reasoning, people are significantly more likely to accept unsound arguments when they lead to conclusions they already believe true.1 They are also prone to unwittingly presuppose assumptions whose truth they take for granted. These two tendencies come together when we argue for a conclusion whose truth we take for granted all along: We may then presuppose the claim in the course of the very argument meant to support it and accept the argument thus rendered unsound.

We do not often adduce deductive arguments to support claims whose truth we take for granted. But, while otherwise uncommon, this situation does arise in philosophical reflection. It arises, for example, when we are under the spell of philosophical pictures: when non-intentional reasoning has us adopt paradoxical claims we find intuitively compelling and wish to defend in view of their conflict with further convictions, and when we resort for the purpose to the form of argument philosophers tend to favour, namely deductive argument. Once we have adopted picture-driven conclusions in the absence of warrant, we may thus come to maintain them in the continued absence of warrant, namely on the basis of arguments which presuppose, more or less subtly, what they are meant to show. In this way, the unwarranted claims we espouse under the spell of philosophical pictures can come to permeate our reasoning and perpetuate themselves by spawning arguments that tacitly presuppose them but lend them an air of intellectual respectability. Like mountaineers who manage to survive in the thinnest air on oxygen they carry themselves, these intuitively compelling claims manage to support themselves by the most specious of arguments which grow from those very roots.

The sense-datum doctrine of perception is one of these masters of self-sufficient survival. In his first systematic defence of the doctrine, Berkeley repeatedly employs three kinds of arguments. In the previous chapter, we considered Berkeley’s preferred first kind of arguments, his arguments from identity (a.k.a. ‘pleasure/pain arguments’ based on ‘anti-abstractionist arguments’). In this chapter, we will consider the other two arguments, which Berkeley had reservations about but which proved lastingly popular: arguments from science (Section 1) and arguments from relativity (Section 2), as well as the supposedly decisive ‘Master Argument’ Berkeley finally adds to this stock (Section 3). In the next chapter, we will examine the arguments from illusion which were the mainstay of sense-datum theorists in the 20th century. All these arguments presuppose, in one way or another, the very doctrine they are meant to establish. Berkeley is unable to reconcile this unwarranted doctrine with common sense (Section 4). This renders the doctrine absurd, in a strict sense of the frequently over-used term (Section 5). Picture-driven reasoning and belief bias thus contribute to a process— the ‘pictorial process’ (Chapter 1.3)—whereby the most competent thinkers systematically come to espouse and maintain philosophical doctrines which are plainly absurd.

By saying that we perceive things ‘immediately’ Berkeley means that we perceive them without the intervention of other things; that we perceive things strictly speaking ‘through our senses’ means that we perceive them without also using our reason, namely without making any inference (Chapter 4.1). For the reasons we have reconstructed (in Chapter 4.2), Berkeley takes for granted that the things we perceive, strictly speaking, through our five senses are immediately perceived, and that the only things thus perceived are various qualities. This shapes his strategy for showing that all the things we can perceive immediately or strictly speaking through our five senses are ideas we perceive in our mind: He considers in turn each of the ‘sensible qualities’ we immediately perceive by sense and shows that it exists only as an idea or sensation in the mind. For each quality, he offers one or more arguments of the three main kinds distinguished. We now turn from his ‘arguments from identity’, to the lastingly influential arguments from science and relativity.2





1. ARGUMENTS FROM SCIENCE:

ASSUMING THE CONCLUSION




The ‘arguments from science’ presented by Berkeley descend from the ‘argument from science’ employed by Locke (Chapter 3.4). Locke sought to refute a view he attributed to common sense, namely the view that sensations of heat and colour—in contrast with sensations of pain—are produced in us by a ‘communication’ or transfer of these accidents (heat and colour, but not pain) from physical objects or corporeal substances in which they really exist. Against this, Locke argued that science reveals pain- and heat-sensations to be produced in us in roughly the same way, namely through the local motion of insensible particles, so that there is no more reason to posit a distinct accident of heat in external bodies than there is to posit a distinct accident of pain or painfulness in them.

Berkeley’s arguments from science are of two kinds. The first, the argument from analogy, is very similar to the Lockean argument. It is developed in this exchange between Philonous (P) and Hylas (H), about heat and cold, in response to Hylas’ objection that it is ‘absurd . . . to say, there is no heat in the fire’:

P: To make the point still clearer; tell me, whether in two cases exactly alike, we ought not to make the same judgement? H: We ought. P: When a pin pricks your finger, does it not rend and divide the fibres of your flesh? H: It does. P: And when a coal burns your finger, does it any more? H: It does not. P: Since therefore you neither judge the sensation itself occasioned by the pin [viz. the pain], nor anything like it to be in the pin; [i] you should not, comfortably to what you have now granted, judge the sensation occasioned by the fire, or any thing like it, to be in the fire. H: Well, since it must be so, [ii] I am content to yield this point, and acknowledge, [iii] that heat and cold are only sensations existing in our minds. (3D 179)





In contrast with Locke, Berkeley here considers only a quite specific case of heat-perception in which the hot object causes us pain (a coal burns your finger). This sensation is ‘occasioned by the fire’ and one may indeed infer from the—false—assumption that both a pin that pricks us and a coal that burns us act on us in the same way (‘rend and divide the fibres of our flesh’) that the sensations of pain caused by them ought to be explained in roughly the same way, so that if we do not posit an accident of pain or painfulness in the pin occasioning pain in us, we also—[i]—ought not to posit an accident of pain or painfulness in a flame or piece of coal burning us. But Hylas draws a rather different conclusion in yielding the point—[ii]—that no such accident as heat is in the fire and acknowledging—[iii]—that heat and cold—at any rate as immediately perceived by sense (3D 180)—are only sensations existing in our minds.

There are two ways to advance from the first to the latter conclusions. If Hylas takes “the sensation occasioned by the fire”—in [i]—to refer to the one sensation actually caused by the fire burning us, namely the pain, his move to [ii] and [iii] is rendered valid only by the tacit assumption that heat, at any rate as immediately perceived by sense, is identical with that pain. This is of course the conclusion of the second pleasure-pain argument, which Hylas adopted two pages earlier (3D 177). This argument, in turn, presupposes that heat, as immediately perceived by sense, is a sensation or idea something else affects us with (chapters 4.5–4.6). Alternatively, one may interpret the present talk—[i]—of ‘the sensation occasioned by the fire’ in the light of this assumption, namely as referring to some not further specified ‘sensation of heat’ occasioned in us by the fire (which may or may not be a pain). In this case, the argument explicitly assumes without providing further reasons that heat, at any rate as immediately perceived by sense, is a sensation caused in us. (The argument then ‘merely’ brings out that this accident is not communicated from, and does not also exist in, external objects, just as the accident of pain is not communicated from, and does not exist in, external objects.) That is: On one reading, the argument tacitly relies on the assumption that heat, as immediately perceived by sense, is a sensation caused in us; on another reading it explicitly proceeds from this assumption.

The argument from analogy proceeds from cases in which another body is supposed to act mechanically on our body (to ‘rend and divide the fibres of our flesh’) and thereby to cause an exemplary sensation (pain) in us; the argument then assumes that the pertinent case of perception is analogous, namely in that when we perceive something in the pertinent sense-modality (i) another body acts on parts of ours, (ii) does so in ways which can be described and explained in mechanistic terms, and (iii) thereby causes us to have some sensation.

The second kind of argument from science, the causal argument, proceeds from a supposedly scientific ‘proto-theory’ of perception in the pertinent sense-modality. Such an account gives—minimal—content to the three elements of the present analogy and specifies which (parts of) external bodies act on which parts of ours, what kind of mechanical action is involved, and which sensations are thus brought about. Berkeley presents full-blown causal arguments concerning sound (3D 181–182) and colour (3D 186–187), and hints at such an argument for solidity (3D 191).

The argument about colour proceeds from the following ‘proto-theory’ of visual perception:

[E]xternal light is nothing but a thin, fluid substance, whose minute particles being agitated with a brisk motion, and in various manners reflected from the different surfaces of outward objects to the eyes, communicate different motions to the optic nerves; which being propagated to the brain, cause therein various impressions: and these are attended with the sensations of red, blue, yellow, etc. (3D 186)





Like the argument from analogy, the philosophical argument that proceeds from this account relies on the assumption that the pertinent sensible qualities are identical with the sensations external things affect us with: The present argument assumes that the ideas or ‘sensations of red, blue, yellow, etc.’ supposedly caused in us do not take these colours as their intentional objects but are identical with them. Together, and only together, with this assumption—(0) below—the final part of the present account entails the first explicit premise of the subsequent philosophical argument (3D 186–87):



[0] The sensations of red, blue, yellow, etc. are these particular colours, as immediately perceived by sight. I.e.: Colours, as immediately perceived by sight, are sensations.

The light does no more than shake the optic nerves, and consequent to each motion of the nerves the mind is affected with a sensation, which is some particular colour [as immediately perceived by sight].

These sensations [can] have no existence without the mind. By (1) and (2):

Colours, as immediately perceived by sight, cannot exist without the mind.

Colours in the vulgar [i.e. pre-philosophical] sense are immediate objects of sight. By (3) and (4):

Colours in the vulgar sense cannot exist in (‘agree to’) any but a perceiving substance.





Like Locke’s argument from science and Berkeley’s previous arguments, this argument assumes from the start that—(1)—the pertinent qualities, as immediately perceived by sense, are sensations, and ‘merely’ argues that those qualities cannot exist outside the mind. Indeed, like the first pleasure-pain argument (Chapter 4.5), it states this crucial assumption quite explicitly and merely adds the apparently trivial inference from it and the second assumption that sensations cannot exist outside a ‘perceiving being’ or ‘mind’.

Berkeley develops these arguments from science without believing in them, presumably for rhetorical effect. At any rate, he goes on to deliver the most scathing criticism of them. In the First Dialogue, the ‘scientific’ accounts of perception on which the causal arguments are based are only put into the mouth of Hylas and not of Berkeley’s own spokesperson Philonous. At the beginning of the Second Dialogue, Berkeley criticises them viciously (3D 209–210). In particular, he notes that those accounts do not render intelligible ‘the connexion . . . between a motion in the nerves, and the sensations of sound or colour in the mind . . . or how [it is] possible these should be the effect of that’ (3D 210, cp. 3D 242). This criticism is fair. Already Locke had found no ‘conceivable connexion’ between bulk, figure, and motion of bodies and colour-, taste- or heat-sensations in us (EHU II.viii.25) and resorted to invoking the help of the Lord, in his only ‘explanation’ of how the former can produce the latter in us:

Let us suppose at present, that the different motions and figures, bulk, and number of such particles, affecting the several organs of our senses, produce in us those different sensations, which we have from the colours and smells of bodies . . . [an example follows]. It being no more impossible, to conceive, that God should annex such ideas [i.e. colour- and smell-sensations] to such motions, with which they have no similitude; than that he should annex the idea [i.e. sensation] of pain to the motion of a piece of steel dividing our flesh, with which that idea [i.e. sensation] has no resemblance. (EHU II.viii.13)



Since ‘arguments from science’ have been rather popular among later champions of the sense-datum doctrine, it is worth keeping in mind that these arguments also suffer from an even more fundamental defect: They assume or presuppose this very doctrine from the start. As stated by Berkeley, they assume or presuppose it with its Berkeleyan twist: Whenever we perceive anything by sense we immediately perceive sensations or ideas occasioned in us—which are identical with the several ‘sensible qualities’.





2. ARGUMENTS FROM RELATIVITY:

RELYING ON THE CONCLUSION




Most of the arguments that implement Berkeley’s general strategy for showing that all the things we perceive immediately by sense are ideas in the mind are ‘arguments from relativity’. In the First Dialogue he develops one or more of these arguments for all but one of the qualities discussed: temperature (3D 178–179), taste (3D 180), odour (3D 181), colour (3D 185– 186), figure and extension (3D 188–189), motion (3D 190) and solidity (3D 191) (while sound is the odd one out). These arguments rely on a variant of the ‘Phenomenal Principle’ which later champions of the sense-datum doctrine continue to rely on:



(P’) If a sensible quality F can be attributed to or said to ‘inhere in’ it at all, then an external object has the quality F (inhering in it) if it looks F or smells F or tastes F or feels F or, in brief: ‘seems’ or ‘appears’ F, to some observer.



(If a coin, for example, can be credited with colour and shape at all, then it is silvery and elliptical if it looks silvery and elliptical.) Second, these arguments employ one of two ‘reality assumptions’:



(R1) If a quality really inheres in an object, the quality does not change without a change wrought in the body itself.



(R2) If a quality really inheres in an object, no other determinate quality falling under the same determinable is in the object at the same time. (E.g.: If an object really is silvery, no other colour is in it.)



The arguments then proceed from various uncontroversial premises: Objects feel different under different conditions (3D 178–179); they look different from different perspectives or distances (3D 185, 189), under different lighting (3D 186) or upon a change to a person’s eyes (3D 185); things may taste different to different people or upon a change to the palate (3D 180); they smell differently to different creatures (3D 181); objects look different upon the use of visual aids (3D 185, 189), etc. With the help of principle P’ the arguments then derive from these premises conclusions at odds with the ‘reality assumptions’ and conclude that the sensible quality at issue does not really inhere in external objects and can only exist in that other kind of substance: the mind.

This is nicely illustrated by the argument about colour. After pointing out, for instance, that ‘in the jaundice . . . all things seem yellow’ (3D 185), Philonous infers by P’ that if colours were really inherent in external bodies, their colours would change (viz. to yellow) upon the onset of the jaundice, that is, ‘upon a change happening in the humours of the eye’ which is not accompanied by any change in or to the bodies themselves, and this is incompatible with the first ‘reality assumption’:

[I]n case colours were real properties or affections inherent in external bodies, they could admit of no alteration, without some change wrought in the very bodies themselves: but is it not evident from what has been said, that . . . upon a change happening in the humours of the eye, or a variation of distance, without any manner of real alteration in the thing itself, the colours of any object are either changed, or totally disappear [!]? (3D 185–186)





In response, Hylas concedes that ‘there is no such thing as colour really inhering in external bodies’ and adopts the position that colour ‘is altogether in the light’ (3D 186).3 (The causal argument considered above then makes Hylas explicitly acknowledge the final conclusion that colours in the ordinary or vulgar sense are sensations which only exist in the mind.) Or consider the argument about taste, which relies on the second ‘reality assumption’:

P: [N]othing can be plainer than that divers persons perceive different tastes in the same food, since that which one man delights in, another abhors. And how could this be, if the taste was something really inherent in the food? H: I acknowledge I know not how. (3D 180)





The difficulty baffling Hylas is that a good and a bad taste cannot simultaneously inhere in the same stuff. But since the same food tastes good to one man and bad to another, Principle P’ has us conclude that both a good and a bad taste are in the food, if taste can be said to inhere in physical stuff at all. Hence taste cannot inhere in physical stuff but can only ‘exist in . . . a perceiving substance or mind’ (3D 181).

The principle P’ employed in these arguments is patently, strikingly unsound: Already small children learn to distinguish between how something looks from a certain distance or in a particular light, and the colour, shape or size it actually has, and know better than to always infer from the fact that something looks small to them that it actually is small. Of course a tall tree is tall even when it looks small from a mile’s distance (cp. NTV 44), and a white cloth looks blue but still is white when you shine a blue light on it (say, in ‘the experiment of the prism’ Berkeley refers to, in 3D 186). Pace Berkeley (3D 186) and Locke (EHU II.viii.19), the red and white colours of porphyry (Chapter 3.4) do not ‘totally disappear’ or ‘vanish’ the moment we extinguish the light; the stone still is red and white when everything looks dark. And as for colour so for taste: The wine still has its usual taste (its taste has not ‘totally disappeared’), when I have a cold strong enough to prevent me from discerning it, and food need not be sour when it tastes sour to me (e.g. when I still have a sour wine’s aftertaste in my mouth). (Apart from that, I may of course enjoy a taste that you ‘abhor’.) So why does Berkeley rely on the patently unsound principle P’ and, indeed, regard the conclusions thus reached as every bit as ‘evident’ as Locke had found them ‘plain’ (EHU II.viii.19)?

When offering the present arguments, Berkeley proceeds from the view that the sensible qualities he discusses are sensations or ideas we are affected with and perceive in the mind. The arguments from relativity about temperature, taste, and odour are all preceded by pleasure-pain arguments which make Hylas grant this point. Thus the above argument about taste is preceded by the concessions that ‘sweet taste [is] a particular kind of pleasure or pleasant sensation’ (3D 179), that ‘bitterness [is] some kind of uneasiness or pain’ (3D 180) and that ‘these qualities, as perceived by us, are pleasures or pains’ (3D 180). The argument from relativity is then developed in response to the protest that, all the same, ‘it sounds oddly, to say that sugar is not sweet’ (3D 180). That is: The protagonists have agreed that taste as perceived by us is a sensation we perceive in the mind when exercising our sense of taste. The issue between them is whether the same accident, the very taste ‘we immediately perceive by our senses’ (3D 180), namely as a sensation in our mind, whether this very accident can inhere in physical objects as well as in the mind in which we perceive it. The argument from relativity is to rule out this possibility. Similarly, Hylas holds all along the view that impressions in the brain ‘are attended with the sensations of red, blue, yellow, etc.’ in the mind (3D 186), that is, that colours are sensations the mind is affected with. Probably, the present argument from relativity, like the arguments from science, simply takes for granted that the colours we immediately perceive by sense are sensations or ideas perceived in the mind and is to settle the follow-up question of whether the accidents we perceive in the mind also inhere ‘in any outward object’ (3D 185).

Presumably, Berkeley individuates sensations or ideas of perception (‘perceptions’, cp. Chapter 3.5) by the pertinent qualitative properties (as they are often called), much as we commonly individuate corporeal sensations. Such sensations are individuated by reference to how they feel: When it feels piercing, it is one pain; when it feels dull, it is another. They are said to have disappeared and, perhaps, been replaced by others if nothing feels that way anymore: When we first have a piercing and then a dull pain, one pain vanishes and is replaced by another sensation. Berkeley’s argument about colour makes the analogous assumption that a colour ‘totally disappear[s]’ when nothing looks that way to you anymore. More generally, the idea is that when we would ordinarily say that an object or stuff looks or tastes different to us, we perceive different colour- or taste-sensations: When something looks white to you, you have one colour-sensation or -perception; when it looks yellow to you, you have another. When something tastes good to me, I have one taste-sensation; when it tastes bad to me, I have another. And so on.

Suppose the present arguments are to settle the question of whether the same accident I perceive in my mind also inheres in the outward object. By the present assumptions, this is the case if the same colour it looks to me also inheres in that object, if the same taste it has to me also inheres in that object, etc. In other words: If the same quality that I perceive immediately in my mind inheres in a physical body at all, then that body has that quality inhering in it that it looks or tastes or smells or feels to me to have. Thus we arrive at Principle P’. I therefore submit the hypothesis that Berkeley reasons in line with this otherwise patently unsound principle because he, first, takes for granted from the start that the qualities we immediately perceive by sense are immediately perceived in the mind, as an idea or sensation, and, second, individuates these sensations or ‘perceptions’ by reference to their qualitative properties.

We can confirm this hypothesis by turning to Berkeley’s slightly earlier New Theory of Vision. Here Berkeley presents two arguments which employ a more straightforward version of the Phenomenal Principle. In a nutshell: The things I see are small when they look small to me. More generally:



(P) A sensible (perceivable) object has a sensible quality F if it looks or otherwise appears F to an observer.



The previous variant is obtained by assuming that sensible qualities (qualities we perceive by sense, strictly speaking or immediately) can be attributed to, and only to, sensible objects (objects we perceive by sense, strictly speaking or immediately), and hypothesising that external objects may be sensible, that is (by the present assumption), that sensible qualities can be attributed to them: (P’) If a sensible quality F can be attributed to an external object at all, then it has that quality if it looks or otherwise appears F.

The arguments in the New Theory clearly are to establish not ‘merely’ that the accidents we perceive in the mind do not also inhere in external objects, but also the sense-datum doctrine those arguments take for granted: They are to show, first, that the ‘immediate objects of sight’ are not identical with the physical bodies we take to surround us but are ideas perceived in the mind (an instance of the sense-datum doctrine) and, second, that these ideas do not resemble anything ‘placed at a distance’ (the familiar conclusion that, if there are external physical bodies, they do not resemble our ideas and, in particular, do not have any such qualities inhering in them as we immediately perceive).

The first argument is this:

Suppose, e.g., that looking at the moon I should say it were fifty or sixty semi-diameters of the earth distant from me. Let us see what moon this is spoken of: it is plain it cannot be the visible moon, or anything like the visible moon, or that which I see, which is only a round, luminous plane of about thirty visible points in diameter. For in case I am carried from the place where I stand directly towards the moon, it is manifest the object varies, still as I go on; and by the time that I am advanced fifty or sixty semi-diameters of the earth, I shall be so far from being near a small, round, luminous flat that I shall perceive nothing like it; this object having long since disappeared, and if I would recover it, it must be by going back to the earth from whence I set out. (NTV 44)





The first conclusion is supported as follows: (1) The visible moon, or that which I see, is only a round, luminous plane of about thirty visible points in diameter. (2) There is no luminous flat object of this size at the position at which the moon is judged to be. Therefore: (3) That which I see cannot be any object rightly judged to be at that position.

The first premise is unsupported by any argument. Quite clearly, it is inferred in line with P from an obvious fact it is then conflated with: When we look at, and see, the moon in the sky, it looks small, round, luminous and flat. By P, the thing we perceive by sight, the ‘visible moon’ (as Berkeley calls it) actually is small, round, luminous and flat. Like the arguments from relativity in the Dialogues, the reasoning applying this phenomenal principle is preceded by argument to the effect that the pertinent objects of perception are sensations or ideas: ‘For at this time it seems agreed on all hands . . . that colours, which are the proper and immediate object of sight, are not without [but within] the mind’—and ‘visible extension’, figure, and motion are ‘in the very same place’ as colour (NTV 43, cp. Chapter 4.4). The present passage is to give ‘a fuller explication of this point’ (NTV 44). That is: Again, the Phenomenal Principle is applied only once it has been suggested that the qualities we immediately perceive by sense are immediately perceived in the mind. And, again, the objects of sense (now only: sight) are individuated, like sensations, by reference to their qualitative properties (here: by reference to how things look to someone) and, like sensations, are said to have ‘disappeared’ when nothing has those properties anymore (when nothing looks that way anymore). Presumably, the objects of perception to which Principle P is applied are all along taken to be ideas or sensations (‘call them which you will’, 3D 215).

Indeed, in the very next sentence the first premise of what is clearly intended to be an analogous argument explicitly assumes that what we perceive by sight are ideas:

Again, suppose that I perceive by sight the faint and obscure idea of something which I doubt whether it is a man, or a tree, or a tower, but judge it to be at the distance of about a mile. It is plain I cannot mean that what I see is a mile off, or that it is the image or likeness of anything which is a mile off, since that every step I take towards it the appearance alters, and from being obscure, small, and faint, grows clear, large, and vigorous. And when I come to the mile’s end, that which I saw first is quite lost, neither do I find anything in the likeness of it. (NTV 44).





The pertinent ideas are now individuated with reference not only to how things look but also to further ‘qualitative’ properties: how ‘faint and obscure’ or ‘clear’ and ‘vigorous’ they are. Such an idea is then called an ‘appearance’: Like Locke before him, Berkeley arguably comes to conflate ideas and appearances by assuming that ideas are what we see immediately in our minds whenever we use our eyes and individuating these ideas by reference to how things appear to us (cp. Chapter 4.2). And this leads him to apply the Phenomenal Principle to the objects of perception (strictly speaking or immediate) which he takes to be ideas in the mind, from the start. The present arguments thus confirm our hypothesis: The sense-datum doctrine that all we immediately perceive by sense are ideas in our minds motivates the adoption of the otherwise unsound Phenomenal Principle.

At any rate in the absence of independent argument for the sense-datum doctrine, the arguments which employ the Phenomenal Principle are hence unsound (see also Chapter 6.1). Where such arguments are employed to support the sense-datum doctrine of perception, they also suffer from the same fundamental defect as the ‘arguments from science’ we previously considered and rely from the start on the very doctrine they are to support. They do so in a subtle way. The arguments from science assumed what they are to show, explicitly or tacitly, by making inferences that are valid only if that claim is added to the premises. The present arguments rely on it in an even less conspicuous way: They employ principles of inference which appear sound to the arguments’ proponents only due to a line of thought proceeding from the claim at issue. When we find it intuitively compelling, a philosophical doctrine may permeate—and vitiate—the arguments adduced to support it, in profound ways that are not exposed by mere logical reconstruction of the argument but only by inquiring into the motivation for the inference-principles it is found to employ.





3. BERKELEY’S ‘MASTER ARGUMENT’:

STRONG BELIEF BIAS




The Phenomenal Principle is employed also by the ‘arguments from illusion’ which became the most popular arguments for the sense-datum doctrine of perception, within 20th-century analytic philosophy. We will consider these arguments in the next chapter, in a currently up-to-date form. For now, let’s turn to what Berkeley regarded as his most decisive argument, which he finally adds to the various arguments from science, relativity and identity (PP/AA) which he gives for one quality after another, without necessarily believing in all of them. This ‘Master Argument’ requires some stage-setting.

The sense-datum doctrine is usually presented as a doctrine about what we ‘immediately’ perceive by sense, sometimes as one about what we perceive ‘strictly speaking’ by sense, and occasionally as one about what we perceive by sense, tout court. Berkeley swiftly advances from the first, via the second, to the third version. Recall (from Chapter 4.1) that, arguably due to unwitting linguistic innovation and spontaneous transfer of ordinary implications, Berkeley attributed epistemic implications to the notions of ‘seeing’, ‘hearing’, ‘feeling’ etc., and thus came to distinguish between perception by sense, strictly speaking, where the relevant knowledge is acquired by using only the senses, and perception by reason, where also inferences are made. Recall also (from Chapter 4.2) that Berkeley presupposed from the start a version of the sense-datum doctrine, namely that whenever we employ our senses we perceive ideas in the mind, from which we need to infer their possible causes, and concluded that, ‘in truth and strictness’, we perceive by sense only ideas which intervene between us and whatever causes them; ‘in truth the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately’ (3D 174) or ‘without the intervention of others’ (cp. 3D 173). This conclusion then takes us from the ‘standard’ sense-datum doctrine that whenever we exercise our senses we immediately perceive ideas in the mind, to the conclusion that whenever we employ our senses all we strictly speaking see or feel or otherwise perceive by sense are ideas in the mind—from which the qualification ‘strictly speaking’ quickly gets dropped (after all, why should we bother about loose talk?):

You allow the things immediately perceived by sense to exist nowhere without the mind: but there is nothing perceived by sense, which is not perceived immediately: therefore there is nothing sensible that exists without the mind. (3D 215, cp. 3D 203)





Let’s call this conclusion the ‘strong sense-datum doctrine’: All sensible objects, all things we perceive by sense, are ideas or combinations of ideas, which exist in the mind (and nowhere else).

Such things as houses, mountains and rivers are perceived by sense. By the present doctrine, these things therefore are ideas in the mind: ‘For what are the forementioned objects but the things we perceive by sense, and what do we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations . . . ?’ (PHK 4) This implication of the strong sense-datum doctrine is not to be confused with the metaphysical doctrine of idealism, that there are only ideas and minds to harbour them and no such things as physical bodies which exist outside the mind. For the present claim leaves open the possibility that in addition to the houses and mountains we perceive by sense there are distinct objects we cannot perceive, which exist outside the mind. We can therefore regard the present trivial consequence of the strong sense-datum doctrine as a variant of this epistemological doctrine: The houses, mountains, rivers, etc. we perceive by sense are ideas which exist in the mind (and nowhere else).

As we have seen (in Chapter 4.2), a line of thought presupposing the ‘standard’ version of the sense-datum doctrine led Berkeley to the conclusion that we can perceive by sense only qualities but not the substances in which they inhere, so that the only sensible objects are (combinations of) sensible qualities (3D 175). So Berkeley maintains, more specifically, that houses, mountains, rivers, etc. are combinations of qualities which are ideas in the mind: ‘Thus, for example, a certain colour, taste, smell, figure and consistence having been observed to go together are accounted one distinct thing, signified by the name apple. Other collections of ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book and the like sensible things’ (PHK 1). He maintains the strong sense-datum doctrine as the claim that the houses and trees we perceive are combinations of ideas which exist only in the mind.

This claim motivates the main argument of the First Dialogue which is meant to establish it (Chapter 4.2): Berkeley shows for each sensible quality in turn that it is an idea and exists only in the mind (3D 175–191). Once he has patiently executed this strategy, Berkeley finally presents an argument which struck him as so overwhelmingly plausible that he was willing ‘to pass by all that has been hitherto said, and reckon it for nothing . . . and put the whole upon this issue’ (3D 200). As deployed in the Dialogues, his notorious ‘Master Argument’ supports the strong sense-datum doctrine, namely by arguing for the even stronger conclusion that it is inconceivable that ‘any mixture or combination of qualities, or any sensible object whatever, [should] exist without the mind’ (3D 200)—easy though it may seem to conceive or ‘imagine’ this (cp. PHK 23):

Hylas: What more easy than to conceive a tree or house existing by itself, independent of, and unperceived by any mind whatsoever? I do at this present time conceive them existing after that manner. [He is ‘thinking of a tree in a solitary place, where no one was present to see it’.] Philonous: How say you, Hylas, can you see a thing which is at the same time unseen? H: No, that were a contradiction. P: Is it not as great a contradiction to talk of conceiving a thing which is unconceived? H: It is. P: The tree or house therefore which you think of, is conceived by you. H: How should it be otherwise? P: And what is conceived, is surely in the mind. H: Without question, that which is conceived is in the mind. P: How then came you to say, you conceived a house or tree existing independent and out of all minds, whatsoever? H: That was I own an oversight . . . P: You acknowledge then that you cannot possibly conceive, how any one corporeal sensible thing should exist otherwise than in a mind. H: I do. (3D 200)





This argument has baffled commentators no less than Galileo’s puzzling argument from conceivability (though it received a lot more attention). To get started, we need to spell out properly the core argument (with tacit assumptions and conclusions in square brackets):

When you conceive or think of a sensible object like a tree or a house in a solitary place, the tree or house you think of is conceived by you.

That which is conceived is in the mind. By (1) and (2):

When you conceive or think of a sensible object like a tree or a house in a solitary place, this object (house or tree, etc.) exists in the mind. Hence:

When you conceive or think of a sensible object like a tree or a house in a solitary place, you do not [think of or] conceive a house or tree which exists independently and out of the mind.

You conceive it possible for a sensible object to exist without the mind only if you conceive a sensible object which exists out of the mind. By (4) and [5]:

When you conceive or think of a sensible object like a tree or a house in a solitary place, you do not conceive it possible for a sensible object to exist without the mind.





Thus we fail even when ‘we do our utmost to conceive the existence of external bodies’ (PHK 23) and are manifestly unable to conceive it possible for a sensible object to exist without the mind. It is inconceivable that the objects we perceive by sense exist without the mind.

The argument turns on two crucial assumptions, one explicit, one tacit. The tacit assumption—(5)—is that conceiving that a sensible object exists without the mind requires conceiving a sensible object that exists without the mind. Such ‘conceiving’ is tantamount to ‘imagining’ (PHK 23). In brief, the assumption is this: Imagining that some thing is thus-and-so requires imagining a thing that is thus-and-so. Previous explanations account for this assimilation of imagining-that to imagining an object: Once imagining was taken to consist in perceiving and operating with ideas in the mind, these ideas were assimilated to certain models which common sense appears to credit with a suitable location: the images we are commonly said to ‘see before the inner eye’ when imagining objects (Chapter 4.3). Thus all cases of imagining are assimilated to those cases where we form and see images ‘before the inner eye’. In all such cases (also when we picture, e.g., events) we have to picture objects (as well): When I imagine what she would look like in that dress, I picture her in that dress (turning around, perhaps), and hence have to picture both her and the dress. When imagining-that gets assimilated to those cases of imagining where we form mental images, it therefore appears to require visualising objects and, thereby, imagining objects. You imagine or conceive that a tree exists out of the mind only if you form the image of, and thus imagine, a tree which exists out of the mind.

The argument that this apparently trivial feat is beyond us turns on the explicit assumption—(2)—that the things we imagine or conceive are in the mind; therefore—(4)—you cannot imagine or conceive things which exist out of the mind. The key term here is ambiguous: On the one hand, ‘to conceive’ is ‘to think of’ something, presumably in the generic sense in which the latter covers all intellectual activities taken to essentially involve perceiving ideas in the mind (the picture-motivated generic sense explained in Chapter 4.3). In this sense, the verb takes the things (trees or houses, etc.) ‘thought of’ as objects: ‘As I was thinking of a tree in a solitary place, where no one was present to see it, methought that was to conceive a tree as existing unperceived or unthought of, not considering that I myself conceived it [viz. the tree] all the while’ (3D 200, my italics). On the other hand, we are taken to ‘conceive ideas’, which is to mean the same as ‘to frame ideas’: ‘But now I plainly see, that all I can do is to frame ideas in my own mind. I may indeed conceive in my own thoughts the idea of a tree, or a house, or a mountain, but this is all’ (3D 200, my italics). Accordingly, there are two different readings of the crucial assumption (2): ‘The things (trees, houses, etc.) of which we think are in the mind.’ Or: ‘The ideas we frame are in the mind.’

On the first reading, the assumption is about sensible things. On this reading, (2) therefore comes down to the assumption that the things we perceive by sense (houses, trees, mountains, etc.) are ideas in the mind— the strong sense-datum doctrine, i.e., the very claim the present argument ultimately is to support. On this reading, the Master Argument Berkeley champions explicitly assumes the strong doctrine it is to support, just as the more popular causal arguments which he rejects (for different reasons) explicitly assume the standard sense-datum doctrine they purport to establish (Section 1). If Berkeley gives the crucial assumption (2) the second reading, ‘The ideas we frame are in the mind’, the strong sense-datum doctrine is not explicitly asserted but tacitly presupposed in the move to the first conclusion: To get from the first premise, that when you conceive or think of a sensible object (house or tree, etc.) the object you think of is conceived by you, and the second premise, that the ideas we frame are in the mind, to the conclusion that—[3]—when you conceive or think of a sensible object (house or tree, etc.) this sensible object exists in the mind and—(4)—not independently and out of the mind, we have to presuppose that the sensible object (house or tree, etc.) you conceive or think of is an idea you frame in the mind. To sum up: Depending upon the reading Berkeley gives to a crucial assumption, his Master Argument either explicitly assumes or tacitly presupposes that sensible objects like houses and trees are ideas in the mind—the strong sense-datum doctrine the argument was adduced to support.

Such fallacies may be manifestations of strong belief bias, where a conviction a thinker firmly maintains all along ‘creeps into’ arguments he subsequently formulates to justify that conviction to others’ satisfaction. This requires that the thinker was all along convinced of the truth of the conclusion at issue. In the case of apparently paradoxical philosophical claims like the present doctrine, this in turn requires that some other, independent arguments or lines of thought led the thinker to adopt them already previously. We have seen that Berkeley was in the grip of pertinent philosophical pictures (Chapter 4), reconstructed how lines of thought motivated by these pictures lead to the standard sense-datum doctrine (Chapter 3.5), and considered a moment ago the oft-repeated explicit argument that took Berkeley from the standard to the strong doctrine.

Already earlier, we encountered another potentially pertinent line of thought, which proceeds from the kind of spontaneous reinterpretation philosophers are prone to place on picture-driven claims they find intuitively compelling in spite of open conflicts with facts or definitions they accept. Defective sublimation of the fundamental claim that ‘ideas’ of various sorts ‘exist in the mind’ may lead to the conclusion that the tangible things we see and think of are ideas (Chapter 2.1): Like Locke, Berkeley seeks to provide an innocuous interpretation of talk of things as ‘existing in the mind’ or ‘in the understanding’, which frees such talk from all spatial implications:

[W]hen I speak of objects as existing in the mind . . . I would not be understood in the gross literal sense, as when bodies are said to exist in a place . . . My meaning is only that the mind comprehends or perceives them. (3D 250)





To say that something ‘exists in the mind’ simply is to say that the mind—or, resolving the metonymy, that the subject, with the use of his mind— ‘perceives’ something, namely in the conventional metaphorical sense in which perception terms apply to intellectual activities and achievements including ‘comprehending’ or understanding things, and thinking about them. That something ‘exists in my mind’ simply means that I understand, remember, imagine or otherwise ‘think of’ it (cp. EHU I.ii.5). Hence the trees and houses we think of can be said to ‘exist in the mind’. When thinkers under the spell of perceptual pictures employ this explanation, they are prone to unwittingly continue all the same to presuppose in further reasoning that the things which ‘exist in the mind’ exist in some private and immaterial space of perception (Chapter 2.1). When a thinker does this, he will leap from the present conclusion that the trees and houses we think of exist in the mind to the further conclusion that those trees and houses exist in that private and immaterial space of inner perception whose population is by common philosophical custom referred to as ‘ideas’. In this way, houses and trees and other perfectly tangible objects of thought may come to be identified with ideas in people’s minds.

Berkeley’s further explanations are consistent with these steps. He takes his above explanation to be in line with the ‘common custom’ of philosophers who ‘speak of the immediate objects of the understanding as things existing in the mind’ (3D 250)—thus implying that the things understood or thought of are immediate objects of the understanding—and explains elsewhere that when he ‘speak[s] of tangible ideas, I take the word “idea” for any the immediate object of sense or understanding’ (NTV 45). Quite possibly, Berkeley first placed a ‘non-spatial’ interpretation on talk of things ‘existing in the mind’, then unwittingly lapsed from these good intentions, and thereby came to identify sensible objects like houses and trees with ideas in the mind.

To sum up: In the Master Argument, Berkeley either explicitly assumes or tacitly presupposes the strong sense-datum doctrine, the very doctrine the argument is meant to support. Different picture-driven lines of thought we may plausibly attribute to him independently lead to this doctrine. Presumably, therefore, Berkeley’s supposedly clinching argument represents a case of strong belief bias: Once intuitively compelling lines of thought had taken him to the core doctrine, he unwittingly assumed or presupposed it in an argument for it which struck him as most forceful. Even if Berkeley thought it clearly superior to all the classical arguments for the sense-datum doctrine, his Master Argument is every bit as unsound, for essentially the same reasons.





4. THE ROAD TO IDEALISM: RECONCILIATION-PROBLEMS AND THEIR ‘SOLUTIONS’




Picture-driven lines of thought lead thinkers to paradoxical claims they find compelling and adopt in the absence of warrant. Once found compelling, these claims are presupposed in further reasoning and in the interpretation of ordinary talk and familiar facts; as a result they may be firmly maintained on the basis of arguments that presuppose them and of bogus ‘evidence’ that appears to support them only when interpreted in their light. The conflicts, real or apparent, of such intuitively compelling but unwarranted claims and common sense, or among each other, create distinctive kinds of philosophical ‘problems’: philosophical paradoxes and reconciliation problems (Chapters 2.3 and 3.4). Philosophers try to solve such problems by constructing theories which are to refute or reconcile what appears to be at odds; typically, these theories are based on lines of thought motivated by the same pictures that created the ‘problems’ to which they respond (Chapter 3.5).

This account is further confirmed by Berkeley’s ascent to idealism. We have seen that Berkeley was in the grip of pertinent philosophical pictures and came to endorse the sense-datum doctrine in their grip (Chapter 4). We have also seen that Berkeley’s first strategy for establishing this doctrine (Chapter 4.2), the arguments implementing this strategy (Chapters 4.5–4.6 and 5.1–5.2), and the ‘Master Argument’ which supersedes these arguments all presuppose or assume what they are to establish. The doctrine Berkeley thus comes to firmly maintain on utterly specious grounds appears to conflict with various convictions he is unwilling or unable to shed. The struggle with the problems raised by such conflicts leads Berkeley to the metaphysical theory he is most famous for: his idealism.

Recall (from the previous section) the ‘easy reflection’ (cp. 3D 212) that takes us from the standard to the strong version of the sense-datum doctrine:

You allow the things immediately perceived by sense to exist nowhere without the mind: but there is nothing perceived by sense, which is not perceived immediately: therefore there is nothing sensible that exists without the mind. (3D 215, cp. 3D 203)





This apparent implication of the standard sense-datum doctrine appears to contradict flat-out our common-sense conviction that we see and feel houses and trees and other such real things in our environment. Those convinced of the truth of the philosophical doctrine will hence worry how the common-sense conviction can be maintained at the same time:

How is it possible for us to perceive real objects, given that all we can immediately perceive by sense are ideas in our minds?





In one shape or another, this has been the guiding problem of the philosophy or perception, at least from the 18th to the mid-20th century. The major philosophical theories of perception sought to address it in different ways: Different kinds of direct realism address the problem by refuting the sense-datum doctrine that raises it or at any rate arguing that we do perceive real physical objects immediately or directly. Different kinds of indirect realism, phenomenalism and idealism attempt in different ways to reconcile the doctrine with the conviction that we perceive real objects (if, perhaps, not directly).

The subsequently most popular position is a brand of indirect realism which later became known as ‘representationalism’. In Berkeley’s Dialogues, Hylas introduces it in response to the ‘easy reflection’ above and puts it thus: While ideas alone can be perceived immediately, ‘real things or external objects [are] perceived by the mediation of ideas, which are their images and representations’ (3D 203, cp. PHK 8). To spell it out more fully: We can perceive real or external objects ‘mediately’ by sense, in the sense that we can immediately perceive in our minds ideas which (i) are caused by, and (ii) resemble those objects. In this way we perceive by sense things we do not perceive immediately (so the second premise of the above argument is false), and these things are external objects.

Berkeley, however, thinks that we cannot make sense of either half—(i) or (ii)—of the crucial suggestion: The modern ‘way of accounting for our sensations or ideas’ by referring to the causal action of physical objects on our organs of sense and nerves (3D 208) does not even begin to render it intelligible how ‘sensations of sound or colour’ could possibly ‘be the effect’ of ‘a motion in the nerves’ (3D 210). Hence the suggestion that ideas are caused by external objects remains unintelligible. Second, Berkeley finds it impossible to ‘understand how anything but an idea can be like an idea’ (3D 206, cp. PHK 8), namely due to an argument which presupposes that only ideas in the mind can be ‘viewed’: ‘Two things cannot be said to be alike or unlike till they have been compared. Comparing is the viewing two ideas together and marking what they agree in and what they disagree in. The mind can compare nothing but its own ideas’ (PC 378, cp. PC 51). Hence an idea can be said to be like (or unlike) only another idea and the notion that ideas resemble external objects is unintelligible. Therefore it makes no sense to suggest that we see or feel real objects in our environment ‘by the mediation of ideas which are their images and representations’. So we still face the problem of reconciling the sense-datum doctrine with the common-sense conviction that we see and feel real objects.

In his Principles, Berkeley moots—though no more—the main idea of what later became known as ‘phenomenalism’ (PHK 3, 58): A proper analysis of their meaning is bound to reveal that statements about the sort of real objects we take ourselves to perceive actually boil down to statements about what ideas we do or would perceive in our minds if certain other conditions obtained (if we were at a different place or time, etc.). In the Dialogues, however, he offers another bold new solution, also already mooted in the Principles (PHK 6, cp. PHK 48). This solution is simple and elegant—and merely adds one step to the line of thought that appears to bring the doctrine into open conflict with common sense. He grants its conclusion, that ‘there is nothing sensible that exists without the mind’ (3D 215). On the other hand, he agrees with common sense that ‘the real things are those very things I see and feel, and perceive by my senses’ (3D 219, cp. 3D 210–211). Berkeley simply draws the conclusion these two apparently incompatible claims jointly entail: If the houses, mountains and rivers we perceive by sense are ideas in the mind, and the houses, mountains and rivers we see or feel are the real things that make up our world, then the real things that make up our world are ideas which exist in the mind. By ‘putting together’ the philosophical doctrine about perception with the common-sense conviction, one obtains the core of Berkeley’s position (cp. 3D 262). With those two premises, idealism is only a syllogism away: The real things are not represented by, but identical with ideas perceived in the mind.

This beautifully simple and apparently straightforward solution to the first problem raises another. Ideas can exist only in a mind (3D 214, 215). That something exists in a mind simply means that it is perceived there with or by a mind (3D 250, cp. Chapter 2.1). But the real things I see and feel ‘depend not on my thought, and have an existence distinct from being perceived by me’ (3D 212). The tree I see still stands in the garden when I close my eyes (cp. PHK 45). So:

How is it possible for the real things to be identical with ideas, if they exist regardless of whether I perceive them in my mind?



Berkeley’s solution again appears straightforward: If the real things are ideas, but have an existence distinct from being perceived by me, in my mind, then they must exist in some other mind; the real things are ideas which exist in ‘an infinite omnipresent spirit who contains and supports’ them (3D 212), presumably as a substance supports accidents (pace PHK 49), a ‘spirit’ being a ‘thinking substance’ (3D 231). Even where and when no finite spirit perceives them (cp. 3D 230–231), these ideas exist in the mind of God (3D 212), ‘whose will it is they should be exhibited to me’ (3D 214). This solution simultaneously appears to overcome the major obstacle to understanding how ideas can be produced in us: While the early modern ‘way of accounting for our sensations or ideas’ failed to render intelligible how physical bodies should cause ideas in our mind, ‘it is very conceivable that [ideas] should . . . be produced by a spirit; since this is no more than I daily experience myself, inasmuch as I . . . by an act of my will can form a great variety of them, and raise them up in my imagination’ (3D 214). In other words: ‘That a being endowed with knowledge and will, should produce or exhibit ideas, is easily understood’ (3D 242), quite simply because each of us produces ideas whenever we imagine something, call up a memory, or form a belief.

Alas, this response papers over the conflict between the pertinent claims and convictions without reconciling them. Consider the most careful statement of the solution in the Three Dialogues:

[T]he things I perceive are my own ideas . . . [T]hese ideas or things by me perceived, either themselves or their archetypes, exist independently of my mind . . . They must therefore exist in some other mind, whose will it is they should be exhibited to me. (3D 214, my italics)



The philosophical conclusion to be reconciled with common sense was that the things I perceive through my senses are ideas which I perceive, and which exist, in my mind: They are ‘my own ideas’. Hence these ideas do not exist independently of my mind. Therefore Berkeley has to re-introduce the notion of ‘archetypes’ of ideas, of things represented by ideas: Such archetypes, but not my own ideas can exist independently and out of my mind. Since only an idea can represent or resemble another idea, these archetypes are ideas which exist independently of my mind; being ideas, they must exist in some other mind. They exist in God’s mind. But then the things which exist independently of my mind are not the things I perceive by my senses. The latter are ideas in my mind; the former are ideas in God’s mind which are similar to but distinct from them.

The present suggestion also fails to bring us any closer to a solution to the problem about the production of ideas: The daily exercise of our powers of imagination, memory, and reflection may provide us with some sort of understanding of how a ‘being endowed with knowledge and will’ can ‘form ideas’ in his own mind. But it does not even begin to explain how one such being should produce ideas in the mind of another such being or ‘exhibit’ ideas to him. The model afforded by our daily experience may provide us with some sort of understanding of how God forms in His mind the ideas that are the archetypes of the ideas in our minds. But it does not even begin to let us understand how He should work the trick of ‘exhibiting’ to us the archetypes in His mind or producing ideas resembling them in our minds.

Berkeley’s metaphysical idealism comprises three main claims: The real things that make up our world are (combinations of) ideas. These ideas, or their archetypes, exist in the mind of God. And there is no other substance than mind or spirit, finite or infinite—there is no such thing as matter. We now need to turn to this third claim. It appears to follow from the conclusion that the sensible qualities are sensations or ideas and the decision to regard such qualities and their combinations as the real things: ‘In the common sense of the word matter’ it signifies ‘an extended, solid, figured, moveable substance existing without the mind’ (3D 225, cp. 3D 216). In other words: ‘matter’, in the standard philosophical sense of the period, is a substance distinct from the mind, in which the accidents of extension, solidity, shape, and motion exist or inhere. The arguments of the First Dialogue concluded that the sensible qualities of extension, solidity, figure and motion, that is, the extension, solidity, figure and motion we see or feel are ideas or sensations which exist only in the mind. If, then, ‘the real things are those very things I see and feel, and perceive by my senses’ (3D 219, cp. 3D 210–11), there is no real (invisible) extension different and distinct from the ‘visible extension’ we perceive by sight (cp. 3D 189) and no real (intangible) solidity in addition to the sensations of resistance we perceive by touch (cp. 3D 191): Extension, solidity, and the rest, only exist as sensations or ideas in the mind. Berkeley takes the Master Argument to have established the even stronger conclusion that the sensible things, which are combinations of these and further sensible qualities, cannot possibly exist without the mind. Hence there cannot possibly be a substance distinct from the mind in which extension, solidity, shape and motion exist or inhere, and it is ‘evident that no such substance can possibly exist’ (3D 216). There cannot be any such thing as ‘matter’ in the standard sense.

This does not exclude the existence of ‘matter’ in some other sense. Since ‘there is nothing sensible that exists without the mind’ however, this ‘matter’ will have to be ‘something that may be discovered by reason, and not by sense’ (3D 215). It will have to be something we need to posit outside our minds in order to explain how ideas of perception come to be produced in them. Accordingly, Berkley considers in turn the various roles matter could be assigned in different such explanations, in those that do not invoke Divine intervention and in such that do: He argues that we are unable to give consistent or substantive content to the notions of matter as efficient cause of ideas (3D 217), as God’s instrument in bringing about our ideas (3D 217–219), and as ‘occasion’ at ‘the presence whereof God excites ideas in our mind’ (3D 219–220). When we cannot assign it a role in the production of our ideas, however, we can only describe matter as some sort of ‘entity’ in general, and this description is utterly vacuous (3D 221–222). Finding us unable to form any conception of it, Berkeley concludes that ‘matter is impossible’ (3D 226).

All these arguments rest ultimately on the sense-datum doctrine, as defended by the unsound arguments of the First Dialogue: The crucial argument against the existence of ‘matter’ in the standard sense proceeds from the premise that the pertinent sensible qualities are ideas. So does the argument to refute the view that our ideas are produced ‘not by any act of will or spiritual efficiency, but by that kind of action which belongs to matter, viz. motion’ or impulse (3D 217, cp. Locke: EHU II.viii.11). The argument is this: Motion is a sensible quality. Sensible qualities are nothing but ideas. Ideas are ‘perfectly passive and inert, including nothing of action in them’. Therefore motion ‘is no action’ and we cannot ‘conceive any action besides volition’ (3D 217). Since my ideas of perception—in contrast to many of my other ideas—do not depend upon my own volition, they must be brought about by the will of some other, more powerful thinking being: God (3D 214). So the next arguments are to show that it is largely vacuous and incompatible with the attributes of God to suppose Him in need of any material or ‘unthinking’ substance to furnish instruments or occasions for the production of ideas in us.

To sum up: Berkeley’s idealism is a sustained attempt to reconcile the sense-datum doctrine of perception with various fundamental commonsense convictions (and with religious beliefs including his belief in Genesis, cp. 3D 250–256). This attempt assumes or presupposes the sense-datum doctrine at every major turn. The first core claim, that the real things making up our world are ideas, is to reconcile this doctrine with the commonsense conviction that we see and feel real things like houses and trees. The second core claim, that these ideas exist in the mind of God, is meant (but fails) to reconcile the previous claim with the fact that these things exist independently of my mind, when I do not perceive them. And the core arguments for the third claim, that there is no such thing as matter, proceed from the assumption that the elementary sensible objects, viz. sensible qualities, are ideas in the mind. Berkeley’s metaphysical theory is squarely based on the doctrine whose accommodation is its prime concern.

To put it in more general terms: Berkeley’s metaphysical theory is an attempt to solve reconciliation problems generated, first, by an ultimately picture-motivated philosophical doctrine and, second, by the ‘solution’ to that ‘problem’. Though most highly influential, the initial problem is ill-motivated: Berkeley supports the sense-datum doctrine that raises it only by unsound argument which presupposes the very claim it is meant to establish. The first core claim of idealism, which is to solve the ‘problem’ thus raised, is obtained by adding just one step to the reasoning that brought the latter to a head. This ‘solution’ raises new problems of the same sort, as it conflicts with other pieces of common sense. These further problems are papered over rather than solved by the further claims that make up Berkeley’s metaphysical theory. Berkeley’s guiding problems and main theory thus follow the same pattern as Locke’s problems and theories about ‘secondary qualities’ (Chapter 3.4): Where picture-motivated assumptions that raise ill-motivated problems are the basis of the theories that are to solve the ‘problems’, thinkers multiply their superfluous difficulties and end up endorsing merely apparent solutions to merely illusory problems.





5. ABSURD DOCTRINES




In this and the previous chapter, we went through all the arguments for the sense-datum doctrine—classical and more idiosyncratic—that make up its first systematic defence, and examined the consequences Berkeley derived from this influential doctrine. Again and again, we found that the arguments at issue tacitly presuppose or even explicitly assume this very doctrine. All of them are unsound. A consequence of this is that Berkeley (and all those who champion the same doctrine on the same grounds) lack all warrant for maintaining it. Indeed, Berkeley’s belief in all his core doctrines is absurd, in a strict sense of this occasionally over-used term, to which we shall now build up.

We are dealing here with a cluster of subject-relative notions of purely epistemic appraisal (the differences between which we may ignore for present purposes): You may have warrant to hold a belief which it is not reasonable for me to have; and you may be justified in assuming something it would be paranoid of me to even suspect when ignorant of all the relevant facts. What is warranted or unwarranted is not what a person believes but his believing it—or, in slightly misleading technical terms, not the proposition believed but a particular person’s propositional attitude towards it. Such warrant is independent of truth: Our belief that p may be very well founded (we may have excellent reasons to believe that p) and yet it needn’t be the case that p; conversely, it may be utterly unreasonable for me to believe that p even when it happens to be the case. These ‘purely epistemic’ terms apply quite generally to those of the so-called ‘propositional attitudes’ which (unlike, say, ‘wishing’) imply some sort and degree of belief: suspecting, fearing, expecting and hoping as well as stating, assuming and hypothesising, among others. Different attitudes require evidence or argument of different strength: What warrants a suspicion or a hypothesis need not warrant a belief or an assumption. And, whatever their object, warrant, justification and reasonableness are gradable notions: A suspicion, hypothesis or belief may be more or less warranted, justified or reasonable.

The notion of ‘absurdity’ is used to mark the bottom end of this scale: When we call a belief or claim ‘absurd’, we dismiss it as too unreasonable—for us—to merit even brief examination or discussion. We then ordinarily say that ‘everything speaks against and nothing speaks for’ the belief. But of course we do not consider ‘everything’ (all the potentially pertinent facts); rather, we say this when we take a significant number of known facts to be incompatible with the truth of the claim. If this is the case, we are justified in regarding the claim as false and it is utterly unreasonable for us to believe it true, unless we have at the same time some specific and at least prima facie sound reasons to do so. (If the reasons we can come up with fail to be even prima facie sound, we ought to have seen through them and our belief is absurd anyway.) We then say that ‘nothing speaks for’ the belief when we are unaware of any such reasons. So someone’s belief is absurd or, to be more precise,

it is absurd for a subject to believe that p iff he is actually entitled to regard p as false in the absence of specific and at least prima facie sound reasons but does not have any such reasons.



As a non-philosophical first example,4 consider a pathologically jealous wife who comes to believe that her affectionate and devoted husband has betrayed her, and does so on no other grounds than a transparently slanderous denunciation she sees through immediately: She knows perfectly well that her husband is affectionate and devoted to her, and this known fact renders it unlikely that her belief is true. Her belief is thus unreasonable unless supported by reasons that look sound at least at first sight. But her sole reason for it is a slanderous denunciation that she sees through immediately. So the belief she cannot help maintain even so is absurd.

How much evidence or how strong an argument a subject has to provide to render a belief justified depends to a large extent upon whether this belief is part of, compatible or inconsistent with what we may call ‘received wisdom’, namely the body of beliefs generally accepted as common knowledge. Where a belief goes beyond or even against such received wisdom, the proponent is required to produce significant or even extremely strong evidence or argument. But where a belief is part of received wisdom, a subject need not know any argument or evidence himself; it is enough for him to point out that he learned this at school, read it in a textbook, or that ‘everybody knows’, and his belief will be accepted as warranted. Such received wisdom is of course not immune to challenge. But until forcefully challenged the beliefs that make it up are accepted as warranted and a subject need not be able to provide any reasons supporting the belief to be entitled to hold it. The moment we realise a belief p is inconsistent with a body of such received wisdom, we are therefore entitled to conclude that it is not the case that p and it is unreasonable of us to believe that p—until we come to know at least prima facie sound reasons which support the conclusion that p.

The biggest body of received wisdom is common sense. Beliefs which are ‘paradoxical’ in the down-to-earth sense of being inconsistent with commonsense convictions are therefore candidates for absurdity: In the absence of at least prima facie sound specific reasons, we are entitled to regard them as false, and those who hold such a belief without having such reasons hold an absurd belief. We thus obtain a philosophically important sufficient condition:

It is absurd for a subject to believe that p if p is inconsistent with common-sense convictions and he has no specific and at least prima facie sound reasons to believe that p.





To defend a paradoxical belief against such a charge of absurdity, a thinker needs to provide such reasons—or to show, alternatively, that his belief is in fact compatible with the common-sense convictions with which it appeared to be inconsistent.

As Berkeley is aware, common sense maintains that ‘those things [we] immediately perceive are the real things’ (3D 262): Of course only philosophers use the term “immediate perception”, but we certainly believe that most of the time we perceive physical objects like houses and mountains, and do so without the intervention of any other thing (unless we look into a mirror or see a reflection in water or in a dark window). Similarly, it is common sense that when we use our eyes or fingers we see and feel, in as strict or loose a sense of “see” and “feel” as you please, physical things rather than mental images and sensations, respectively. On all of its versions, the sense-datum doctrine of perception is inconsistent with common-sense convictions.

We have just seen that Berkeley adopts the first two core claims of his idealism in an unsuccessful attempt to reconcile the two (Section 4). But adding these two claims to the sense-datum doctrine, we found, does not add up to a whole consistent with the common-sense convictions he wants to honour. Hence the sense-datum doctrine remains paradoxical, and his belief in it is absurd unless he has specific and at least prima facie sound reasons to support it. To render belief in this genuinely paradoxical doctrine reasonable, it is therefore not enough for Berkeley to point out advantageous consequences of his position (PHK 85ff., 3D 257–58), such as that idealism refutes scepticism—of a kind only generated by the sense-datum doctrine, as it happens (3D 227–230). Given the doctrine’s actual conflict with common sense, he has to adduce arguments which specifically support it. But none of his arguments specifically for this doctrine is even prima facie sound: They either explicitly assume the doctrine from the start (Chapters 4.5–4.6, 5.1, 5.3) or openly rely on a patently unsound principle of inference, the Phenomenal Principle, which only appears plausible to those already in the grip of the doctrine (Chapter 5.2). What gets stronger and stronger as argument gets piled on argument is not the case for maintaining the paradoxical doctrine—no such case is being built up—but the case for crediting its proponents with belief bias and dismissing their reasons. Berkeley’s belief in the sense-datum doctrine is absurd in the strict sense explained: It is absurd for him to maintain this doctrine. Of course he is not alone in this: Many champions of sense-data relied exclusively on some of the arguments Berkeley states, plus the ‘argument from illusion’ which we shall find to be no less unsound (Chapters 6.1 and 8.2). We can therefore conclude that this popular doctrine was as absurd for many of its proponents to maintain as for Berkeley. (In fact, it has, to the best of my knowledge, been absurd for any of its champions to date.)

The core claims of Berkeley’s idealism are no less absurd: First, Berkeley does not manage to render them consistent with the common-sense convictions he wants to honour (Section 4); they are at least as paradoxical as the sense-datum doctrine. Second, Berkeley derives them in a straightforward manner from this doctrine. That is, he bases them on arguments which openly assume an absurdity and therefore are not even prima facie sound. Both the popular sense-datum doctrine and the core claims of his less popular brand of idealism are absurd for him to maintain.

This is no coincidence but a characteristic result of non-intentional reasoning under the spell of philosophical pictures: When we excessively assimilate abstract phenomena to simple concrete models, against our better knowledge, we will typically obtain a claim that is inconsistent with the common sense of which this better knowledge is a part. The paradoxical claim will typically be supported by nothing but the non-intentional inference that, once spelled out, is patently unsound by the thinker’s own lights, since it presupposes an analogy or similarity which the thinker knows not to obtain. We have encountered some examples, including:





To think about something is to perceive some thing somewhere in us, through an inner sense. (Chapter 1.3)

The things perceived in the mind are in the mind. (Chapter 2.1)

A quality is a thing that can only exist in other objects. (Chapter 3.1)





All these picture-driven conclusions satisfy the philosophically important sufficient condition of absurdity: They are at odds with facts the thinkers acknowledge or with definitions they champion, i.e., with parts of the ‘received wisdom’. Through sublimating explanations and reconciliatory theorising, philosophers who find them attractive then address this apparent defect, like Berkeley, by trying to show that these conclusions and further conclusions derived from them are in fact consistent with common sense. Where these efforts fail and also no at least prima facie sound argument is forthcoming in the conclusions’ support, these conclusions are and remain absurd.

Sublimating explanations tend to fail: They either merely paper over the conflict with common sense (in particular when they remain purely metaphorical) or are but a fig leaf behind which sordid business is carried on as usual (when these explanations get ignored even by their own authors). When sublimation leads a thinker to explicitly maintain a paradoxical belief without further argument added to the initial non-intentional inference, this belief will hence be absurd. We have encountered several beliefs which were widely shared and arguably formed by picture-driven leaps and their sublimation. They include:





Locke’s belief that there are ideas perceived in minds (Chapter 1.3),

Locke’s belief, shared by Boyle and Galileo, that the only qualities to really exist in a sensible body are the qualities of the insensible particles that make it up (Chapter 3.2),

Berkeley’s belief that qualities do not exist each of them apart by itself but blended together, several in the same object (Chapter 4.4).



When such absurd claims are presupposed in further reasoning, the conclusions obtained will frequently—though not invariably—be as inconsistent with common sense as the presuppositions they rely on, while the reasoning relying on those presuppositions will be utterly unsound by the lights of the very thinker who engages in it. Examples encountered include:





the widely shared belief that the mind is a private realm (Chapter 2.1),

the belief shared by Galileo, Boyle and Locke that colour, taste, smell and sound are sensations in us (Chapter 3.3),

Locke’s and Berkeley’s belief that whenever we see or hear, taste or smell, anything, we perceive ideas that have come into our minds (Chapters 3.5 and 4.2).





These subsequent conclusions occasioned—unsuccessful—efforts to support them by further argument or show them consistent with common sense (or both). We have considered Locke’s theories of secondary qualities and of external sensation, as well as Berkeley’s idealism, and seen that all of them fail to reconcile the pertinent beliefs with the common-sense convictions with which they appear to be at odds (Chapters 3.4–3,5 and 5.4). The justificatory efforts fared no better, as the arguments adduced presupposed either the very doctrine they were meant to support or the absurd claims from which the doctrine had been inferred at an earlier stage of the inferential avalanche that is the pictorial process (Chapters 3.3–3.5, 4 and 5). This process systematically generates absurd beliefs. When under the spell of philosophical pictures, thinkers trade in absurdities and do so en gros, not en détail.





6 Philosophical Delusions


Ayer Reinvents ‘Perceptions’




Processes of non-intentional reasoning may lead even the most competent thinkers to adopt paradoxical philosophical claims, which belief-bias effects may lead them to maintain in the continued absence of warrant. The clash of these unwarranted—and typically absurd (Chapter 5.5)—claims with common sense or science then gives rise to ill-motivated problems, met with philosophical theories built on the very claims that conjured up the problems. Up to now, we have documented this development for two eminent early modern thinkers: Locke and Berkeley. Even when their importance is unreservedly acknowledged, there may be a temptation to think that centuries of intellectual progress separate us from those thinkers and protect us from their misfortunes. In particular, there may be a temptation to think that, if nothing else, the rigour and subtlety of 20th-century analytic philosophy will have neutralised the influences of non-intentional reasoning and belief bias. To find out whether this thought is true or overly complacent, we now advance from the 17th to the 20th century and turn from classical to logical empiricism, namely from the first systematic defence of the sense-datum doctrine, by Berkeley, to the doctrine’s most sophisticated development, by A.J. Ayer. We will find that plus ça change, plus c’est pareil: Just like the early modern defence, the sophisticated analytic development of the doctrine presupposes everything it is to show, and more.

In picture-driven reflection, as in belief bias, we encountered a curious persistence of assumptions that kept cropping up where they should not: picture-driven claims were tacitly presupposed even once they had been explicitly rejected, and thinkers unwittingly relied upon certain claims in the course of the very arguments adduced to support them. Ayer’s work is marked by a curious persistence of a similar kind: Ayer famously rejects the classical ‘factual’ version of the sense-datum doctrine and re-develops the doctrine as the recommendation of a new terminology (Section 1)—but keeps presupposing the doctrine’s rejected version in further reasoning, which leads him into a series of philosophical problems and to the theory of phenomenalism that is to solve them (Section 2). Indeed, he presupposes the classical version of the doctrine already in the course of the ‘linguistic’ re-evaluation that leads to its explicit rejection (Section 3). This makes for some striking parallels to a textbook case of delusion (Section 4). After taking on a tough problem from the philosophy of mental health and defining the concept of ‘delusion’ (Section 5), we will see that Ayer’s curious attachment to the classical sense-datum doctrine is constitutive of a delusion. Indeed, we will see that the processes of non-intentional reasoning analysed in the previous chapters systematically generate beliefs that satisfy a strict definition of ‘delusion’ and are constitutive of a kind of intellectual altitude sickness (Section 6). These findings imply the need for therapy in philosophy (Section 7).





1. INTRODUCING SENSE-DATA:

AYER’S LINGUISTIC EVALUATION




Ayer bases his case for the sense-datum doctrine exclusively on the argument from illusion, which builds on an intuition we can easily reproduce: Place a round silver coin on an otherwise empty table. Then view it from the side, three steps or so back. The round coin now looks elliptical to you. But you now see something that not merely looks elliptical but is elliptical: You see an elliptical silvery patch, a spot of colour that actually is elliptical. (Just look!) When you (as we would ordinarily say) stare at the round coin, this elliptical silvery spot is staring right back at you. Since it is elliptical, this spot cannot be identical with the physical coin, which of course remains round. The elliptical spot you see must be a non-physical object of perception, a ‘perception’ or ‘sense-datum’.

The arguments from illusion that proceed from this intuition descend from the ‘arguments from relativity’ we have considered earlier in their Berkeleyan guise (Chapter 5.2). However, they rely on stronger assumptions: Where Berkeley’s argument stopped short of assuming that when something looks small from a mile’s distance it actually is rather big, and merely asserted that the appearance grows larger and larger as you approach, the present arguments proceed from such assumptions as that the coin actually is round when it looks elliptical. Arguments from relativity merely assume that appearances are relative to the position and condition of the perceiver; arguments from illusion assume that some such appearances are an ‘illusion’ in the sense that things look or otherwise appear F while actually having the different property F’, namely another determinate property falling under the same determinable. At the same time the arguments from illusion are similar to those from relativity in employing a phenomenal principle like the Principle P Berkeley relied on (Chapter 5.2). But since we now explicitly assume the existence of material objects which fail to be F when they look F, we do not want to assume, as Principle P did, that all objects of perception have a sensible quality F when they look or otherwise appear F. Rather, we want to say more cautiously that there are such objects of perception (if in addition to others): Whenever we perceive something that looks or otherwise appears F to us, there are objects of perception which have the sensible quality F (the second premise below).

Properly spelled out, the present argument is this:1





In some cases of perception, physical objects appear to possess sensible qualities that they do not actually possess. (When you look at a round coin from the side, it looks elliptical.)

Whenever something appears to a subject to possess a sensible quality, there is something of which the subject is aware which does possess that quality. (When something looks elliptical to you, there is an elliptical spot of which you are aware.) Hence:

In some cases of perception there is something of which the subject is aware which possesses sensible qualities which the physical object the subject is purportedly perceiving does not possess. (There is a silvery spot which is elliptical, while the coin is not.)





Whence it follows, by Leibniz’s Law, that in perception we are sometimes aware of something other than physical objects, namely of immaterial ‘sense-data’. But in the ‘delusive’ cases the argument starts out from, our visual experience is qualitatively so similar to the experience we have in those ‘veridical’ cases in which things do appear to us the way they actually are, that we must be aware of the same kind of thing in both. Whence it is finally inferred that in perception we are always aware of immaterial sense-data.

This argument turns on the non-standard use of terms. As any dictionary reminds us, “aware of” is commonly used to mean ‘having knowledge or understanding of’. Like the claim that someone knows something, the claim that he is aware of something entails that certain facts obtain; and like the attribution of knowledge, it entails no claim about the ‘experience’ the subject ‘enjoys’: When aware of a problem, risk, opportunity, etc., we know that there is a problem or risk, etc., and may be aware of it throughout, even when we do not think of it the whole time. Similarly, when you assert that ‘Smith is aware of the noise Jones’ lawn-mower makes’, you imply that Jones’ lawn-mower is in fact noisy, and that Smith knows this; and your assertion need not even suggest that there is something to be heard at the time: ‘Well aware of the noise Jones’ lawn-mower makes, Smith closed the windows already the moment Jones approached his tool shed.’ Even when there is a noise to be heard, someone who does not hear it may be said to be aware of it: ‘The invigilator moved the examination to another hall, because he was aware of the distracting noise’ is true also in case the almost deaf invigilator was alerted to the noise only by a written note. Accordingly, ‘There is an elliptical patch of which you are aware’ would commonly be understood to express a claim not about any ‘experience’ you enjoy ‘in perception’, but about facts you know and became aware of ‘through perception’ or otherwise: There is in fact something elliptical lying around to be seen or felt, and you know this (because you see or feel it, or, e.g., someone tells you).

On this reading, the notorious Phenomenal Principle—(2) above—is clearly false: When the round coin looks elliptical, there is nothing elliptical lying around for me to be aware of. But, equally clearly, its proponents do not want to talk about our knowledge of things actually lying around, competing for space with coins or sticks. They give the term “aware” a new use, if they do not resort to the new phrases “directly aware” or “directly perceive” from the start. Typically, neither innovation is explained in any detail. What gives reason for concern is of course not the novelty as such, but the lack of explanation.

Unlike many other sense-datum theorists, Ayer is aware of the novelty, and seeks to remedy the lack, by means of his famous ‘linguistic evaluation’ of the argument from illusion, in the opening chapter of his Foundations of Empirical Knowledge (henceforward: FEK): Properly spelled out, the Phenomenal Principle emerges as a rule of language that introduces the new phrases. Ayer treats “x is directly aware of y” as synonymous with “x directly perceives y”, which he presents as a new, third, sense of perception-verbs that philosophers introduce in addition to two established senses of those verbs. Ayer infers the existence of these two senses from the fact that different perception-reports are equally legitimate: ‘For example, a man will say that he sees a distant star which has an extension greater than that of the earth; but if he is asked to describe what it is that he is actually seeing, he may say that it is a silvery speck no bigger than a sixpence’ (FEK 22). In this case, says Ayer, there need be no contradiction, as the man may use the verb “to see” in two different senses:

In one sense [A], the sense in which the man can say truly that he sees the star, it is [i] necessary that what is seen should really exist, but [ii] not necessary that it should have the qualities it appears to have. In another sense [B], which is that in which the man can say truly that what he sees is no bigger than a sixpence, it is [ii] not possible that anything should seem to have qualities that it does not really have, but [i] also not necessary that what is seen should really exist. (FEK 23)





‘What the advocates of the sense-datum theory have done’—namely, by upholding the Phenomenal Principle which is plainly false when interpreted in accordance with the rules of ordinary language—is ‘to decide’ to introduce a further, third sense of verbs of perception, which combines feature (i) of Sense A with feature (ii) of Sense B: They ‘define [“direct perception” or] “direct awareness” in such a way that if someone is directly aware of [or perceives] an object x, it follows that x exists and that it really has whatever properties it is appearing to have’ (FEK 61). ‘At the same time’, they thus ‘decide to apply’ these words in this sense ‘to delusive as well as to veridical experiences’ (FEK 24). ‘The word “sense-datum” [then] is to stand [quite simply] for any object of which it is conceivable that someone should [perceive it in this new sense, i.e.] be directly aware’ (FEK 59).

This new sense of perception terms is related to the two new notions we have seen Berkeley introduced (Chapter 4.1). According to an intuitive line of thought, everything that is ‘directly perceived’ in Ayer’s new sense, will be ‘perceived immediately’ and ‘strictly speaking by sense’, in Berkeley’s terms: That we ‘directly perceive’ something, in the present new sense, implies that the thing is F when it looks or otherwise appears F; and we are to apply this verb in all cases of perception. So whenever something looks silvery to me, at any rate the thing I directly perceive actually is silvery. I can just see that the object of direct perception has this colour and do not have to infer this; I can perceive it by sense, strictly speaking, without making any inference. Second, the things I can be said to ‘perceive directly’ are said to exist— and have the properties they appear to have—also when my experience is delusive and no object with the qualities things look to me to have exist in my physical environment. Presumably, the objects of direct perception then exist in my mind, instead, where I perceive them immediately. If we further assume that what we directly perceive are always objects of the same kind, we will conclude that what we perceive directly are always ideas which we immediately perceive in our minds—and through whose intervention we perhaps perceive objects outside our mind, whose properties we need to infer from those of our ideas.

At any rate at first glance, however, Ayer appears to deploy his new terms in a novel way which does not allow us to draw these classical conclusions. For a start, he accepts the argument from illusion only in this ‘linguistic’ form, which explicitly phrases the Phenomenal Principle—(2) below—as a rule introducing a new sense of perception-verbs (cp. FEK 24–25):





When we see [in sense A] a straight stick partially immersed in water (where it looks bent), the stick appears to us to have a property it does not really possess (as it appears bent rather than straight).

Let there be a sense of “to perceive” and its cognates in which, whenever a subject perceives anything in any sense [A or B], there actually is something that is being perceived, that really has the properties it appears to have.

By (1) and (2) and Leibniz’s Law: When we [in sense A] see the stick-in-water, there actually is something other than the stick, the physical object, that is being perceived (in the new sense of that verb).

Apply the term “sense-datum” to whatever objects are being perceived in the new sense of the verb.

By (3) and (4): When we [in sense A] see the stick in water, we perceive (in the new sense) a sense-datum but no physical object.





Once its first half is thus recast, the argument no longer presents a paradox. It no longer even appears to bring out a contradiction in our common beliefs: Between the conclusion that, in one (new) sense, we ‘perceive’ no physical object but a sense-datum and the assumption that we then ‘perceive’ a stick, in another (established) sense, there is no more of a contradiction than between the two statements of the star-watcher. Instead of establishing a paradoxical conclusion, the ‘argument’ merely illustrates the use of two new rules of language that introduce a new terminology:

The philosopher who says that he is seeing a sense-datum in a case where most people would say that they were seeing a material thing is not contradicting the received opinion on any question of fact . . . What he is doing is simply to recommend a new verbal usage. He is proposing to us that instead of speaking, for example, of seeing a straight stick which looks crooked . . . we should speak of seeing a sense-datum which really has the quality of being crooked, and which belongs to a straight stick. (FEK 25)



The generalisation from delusive to all cases of perception turns on the ‘contention that if [delusive and veridical] perceptions are not qualitatively distinguishable the objects perceived must be of the same kind’ (FEK 24–25). Crucially, Ayer accepts also this ‘contention’ only ‘as a rule of language’ (FEK 25): One and the same label should be applied to those objects. As the label “sense-datum” is to be applied to whatever is being ‘perceived’ in the new sense—(4) above—, the further rule actually is to use perception-verbs in this new sense, regardless of whether the perception is delusive or veridical. We may therefore note (even if Ayer does not) that, in the latter case, what we perceive in the new sense are physical objects, which then ‘really exist and have the properties they appear to have’. Thus, the new rules have us apply the label “sense-datum” also to physical objects: In some situations, the ‘sense-data’ we are said to ‘sense’ are material things. Therefore, Ayer is perfectly right to conclude his evaluation by stating that the final conclusion of the argument, ‘What we see, or otherwise directly experience, are never material things, but only sense-data’, does not express ‘a proposition about an empirical matter of fact’, viz., about which of two different kinds of thing we perceive, but rather a ‘resolution about the usage of words’ (FEK 28), viz., about which of two different sets of terms to use: To say what you perceive, always use the terminology of ‘direct perception’ and ‘sense-data’.

Thus properly understood, the so-called ‘argument from illusion’ is no argument at all: It is not even meant to establish the truth of any claim. Rather, it is a ‘procedure’ for introducing a new ‘terminology’ (FEK 25): ‘[T]he expressions “direct awareness” and “sense-datum” are to be regarded as correlative; and since each of them is being used in a special, technical sense, it is not satisfactory merely to define one in terms of the other. It is necessary first to employ some other method, such as the method of giving examples’ (FEK 61). Such examples are provided by the ‘delusive’ cases the ‘argument from illusion’ starts out from, where one is tempted to point in the direction of the (straight) stick or the (round) coin, and say, ‘Do you see the bent speck/the elliptical spot? That speck/ this spot is what I mean by a “sense-datum”, and your seeing it is a case of “direct perception”’. The first half of the ‘argument’ seeks to explain this in a less objectionable form; it explains the meaning of new technical terms by giving examples. The second half then motivates the recommendation that the new terms be applied in all cases of perception.

Ayer stresses that in endorsing the sense-datum ‘theory’ he endorses but this recommendation: ‘[T]he acceptance of this theory involves nothing more than a decision to use a technical language’ (FEK 57). Indeed, ‘this important point’ holds quite generally for ‘what philosophers call theories of perception’ (FEK 48). None of them puts into question anything we believe about matters of fact. Ayer’s evaluation thus illustrates a more general introductory remark of Ayer’s most acute critic, J.L. Austin: ‘[S]trange though the [sense-datum] doctrine looks, we are sometimes told to take it easy—really it’s just what we’ve all believed all along. (There’s the bit where you say it and the bit where you take it back.)’ (S&S 2). We now turn to the bit where Ayer reinstates what he here takes back.





2. THE PERSISTENCE OF IMPLICIT BELIEF:

AYER’S REAL VIEW




Ayer’s evaluation of the argument from illusion and the sense-datum ‘theory’ it seeks to establish appears, at first sight, to lend substance to the claims with which he introduces his own approach to ‘the problem of specifying the relationship of material things to sense-data’ (FEK 229):

There is, indeed, a sense in which it is correct to say that both sense-data and material things exist, inasmuch as sentences that are used to describe sense-data and sentences that are used to describe material things both very frequently express true propositions. But it would not be correct to infer from this that there really were both material things and sense-data, in the sense in which it can truly be said that there really are chairs as well as tables, or that there are tastes as well as sounds. For whereas, in these cases, the existential propositions refer to different empirical “facts”, this does not hold good in the case of sense-data and material things. (FEK 229)





Certainly—according to his evaluation, talk of sense-data was introduced to re-describe familiar facts about material things (e.g., that the straight stick looks crooked when immersed in water), indeed, introduced in such a way that material things sometimes are (being referred to as) ‘sense-data’. The empirical facts are exactly what we took them to be all along; the sense-datum theorists merely introduced a new way of talking about them that is useful ‘in philosophising about perception’ (FEK 26).

But, it quickly emerges, this is not at all what Ayer here means to claim: The reason why it is ‘not correct’ to say that ‘there really are both material things and sense-data’ is that, upon final analysis, ‘material things are nothing but collections of . . . sense-data’ (FEK 231)! Of course, Ayer assures the reader, material things are not literally constituted of immaterial sense-data ‘as a patchwork quilt consists of different coloured pieces of silk’ (FEK 232); rather, they are ‘logical constructions out of sense-data’ (FEK 237). Initially, ‘what is being claimed is simply that the propositions which are ordinarily expressed by sentences which refer to material things could also be expressed by sentences which referred exclusively to sense-data’ (FEK 232). But already in the two very next sentences Ayer sets out to show something far more ambitious:

As for the belief in the “unity” and “substantiality” of material things, I shall show that it may be correctly represented as involving no more than the attribution to visual and tactual sense-data of certain relations which do, in fact, obtain in our experience. And I shall show that it is only the contingent fact that there are these relations between sense-data that makes it profitable to describe the course of our experience in terms of the existence and behaviour of material things. (FEK 232)





I.e.: All we actually ‘describe’ when talking of material things is ‘the course of our experience’. And it is only due to the fortunate coincidence that the sense-data that make up this experience stand in certain relations, that it is even ‘possible for us successfully to employ the physical terminology that we do’ (FEK 243), i.e., to speak as if there were substantial things like sticks and stars—even though, in fact, our experiences are all there is.

Proceeding from an analysis of a much earlier part of the text (FEK 11–19), Austin arrived at the same conclusion, namely that ‘the apparent sophistication of Ayer’s ‘linguistic’ doctrine really rests squarely on the old Berkeleian . . . ontology of the ‘sensible manifold’’ (S&S 61). Ayer believes that all there is and all we can perceive (and talk about by means of our ‘physical terminology’) are sense-data. I.e.: Ayer upholds not only the very factual, paradoxical, claim about perception that, according to his evaluation, fails to be established by the ‘arguments’ philosophers typically adduce for their ‘theories of perception’. He also maintains an even stronger, ontological, claim that entails that doctrine about perception.

Far from lending the latter any support, however, the—rather quick-and- dirty—reasoning that leads Ayer to the ontological claim tacitly presupposes the sense-datum doctrine of perception. This reasoning turns on a semantic claim: Ayer believes that propositions that refer to material things are expressible in terms of sense-data. He does not provide what ‘would seem . . . the best way to justify’ this claim, namely ‘specimen translations’ of statements referring to material things into statements explicitly about sense-data (FEK 238). Indeed, he thinks that such translations are impossible, since ‘references to material things are vague in their application to phenomena and . . . the series of sense-data that they may be understood to specify are composed of infinite sets of terms’ (FEK 242). Even so, Ayer believes that ‘any proposition that refers to a material thing must somehow be expressible in terms of sense-data’, namely ‘if it is to be factually significant’ (FEK 231, my italics)—as it surely is. Ayer clearly assumes that propositions about material things have an ‘empirical’ or ‘factual significance’ precisely to the extent to which they are grounded in propositions about sense-data. Therefore the former somehow boil down to the latter, (facts about) material things really are (facts about) sense-data, and upon final analysis our experiences are all there actually is.

The crucial (semantic) assumption follows from a definition and an epistemological doctrine:

We say that a sentence is factually significant to any given person, if, and only if, he knows how to verify the proposition it purports to express—that is, if he knows what observations would lead him, under certain conditions, to accept the proposition as being true, or reject it as being false. 2





And the only observations that lead us to accept or reject propositions about material things are observations of sense-data; our evidence for those propositions ‘will always consist in the occurrence of . . . sense-data’ (FEK 231, cp. FEK 17).

The most influential motivation for accepting only ‘facts about our experience’ (FEK 17) as evidence is the quest for certainty. But, far from embracing it, Ayer explicitly rejects this quest, as based on a conceptual confusion: ‘The notion of certainty does not apply to propositions in which we express our perceptual judgements’ (FEK 45). So why does he maintain the epistemological doctrine, even so? The above passage continues: ‘Indeed, there is nothing else [but the occurrence of sense-data] in which one can legitimately suppose [our empirical evidence] to consist, once one has accepted the rule that the word “sense-datum” is to be used to stand for whatever is, in fact, observed’ (FEK 231). But of course Ayer had explicitly introduced the word “sense-datum” to stand for whatever is directly perceived. Thus, he manifestly makes a leap of thought that presupposes that only what is directly perceived is in fact observed. Failing to support his epistemological doctrine by any independent argument, Ayer here tacitly and (presumably) unwittingly relies on a ‘factual’ version of the sense-datum ‘theory’ of perception, of the sort he has explicitly rejected.

Arguably, the same thing happens again, e.g., when Ayer asserts without argument, as if it was entirely uncontroversial, that ‘facts about our experiences’ constitute ‘the evidence that is ordinarily thought [!] sufficient to establish’ assumptions about material things (FEK 17): Without noticing it, I submit, he conflates the standard explanation ‘Empirical evidence is the evidence accessible to our senses’ and his doctrine ‘Empirical evidence is the evidence constituted by facts about our experiences’. In unwittingly moving from the truism to the contentious doctrine, he presupposes that only facts about sense-data are accessible to our senses.

To sum up: In the end, Ayer sticks to everything he took back, and makes even stronger claims. He continues to rely on the ‘factual’ version of the sense-datum doctrine or ‘factual sense-datum doctrine’ for short, that is, on the very—paradoxical—doctrine that he knows full well not to be supported by the arguments he deems relevant. He presupposes this doctrine in leaping to an epistemological doctrine, from which he infers a semantic claim from which, in turn, he proceeds to an ontological conclusion. These are the three pillars of the philosophical theory known as ‘phenomenalism’: All empirical evidence is constituted by facts about sense-data; all claims about material things somehow boil down to claims about sense-data; upon final analysis, all there actually is are our experiences.

We credit people with beliefs not only on the basis of their statements (sincere or other) but, more generally, on the basis of their actions, verbal and other—where deeds may speak more loudly than words. These deeds include the inferences we make. Ayer thus continues to maintain the factual sense-datum doctrine as what we may call an ‘implicit belief’ and attribute to thinkers on the basis of sufficient conditions including this one:

A subject maintains the implicit belief that p if he presupposes that p in arguments or lines of thought he advances explicitly.





Once he has refuted the paradoxical factual version of the sense-datum doctrine as unwarranted, Ayer continues to maintain it as an implicit belief.

This belief is of the greatest consequence: It is not merely the foundation of Ayer’s phenomenalist theory but also generates the guiding problem this theory is to solve. Since all we actually perceive are immaterial sense-data, all our claims about the ‘stars’ and ‘sticks’, ‘coins’ and ‘tables’ we take to see around us must in fact boil down to a description of sense-data. But how is this possible?

[H]ow [is] it possible for us to describe our sense-data, which are conceived to be transitory and private, by the use of expressions which ostensibly refer to substances which are supposed to endure unperceived, to be endowed with causal properties, to be accessible to different senses and to different observers, and to stand to one another in the system of relations that constitutes their being in physical space? (FEK 244)





The bulk of Ayer’s Foundations is devoted to answering this question in a way that reconciles the doctrine that all we in fact perceive are transitory, private, and immaterial sense-data with the undeniable fact that we successfully communicate by means of terms which we take to refer to objects that are rather more stable, public, material and causally efficacious: After presenting his linguistic evaluation of the sense-datum doctrine (FEK Chapter 1), he explains the stability of physical things (in what sense things may be ‘supposed to endure unperceived’) (FEK Chapter 2), their publicity (how ‘the publicity of these material things . . . is compatible with the privacy of sense-data’) (FEK Chapter 3), their causal efficacy (‘what we mean by attributing causal properties to them’) (FEK Chapter 4), and their material or physical nature (how ‘we derive from successive sense-data the conception of a single, persistent material thing’) (FEK Chapter 5) (all quotes from Ayer’s own summary on FEK 244).

All of these problems are generated only by the sense-datum doctrine, and only on the factual reading Ayer initially sought to overcome: As long as we bear in mind that the initial definition of “sense-data” is frequently satisfied by material objects and that we can be said to ‘see’ or ‘feel’ such objects in the most familiar sense of these verbs even in the cases of delusive perception in which we ‘directly perceive’ no material object, there does not even appear to be a tension between the recommendation that we should always be said to ‘directly perceive’ only ‘sense-data’ and the common-sense convictions implicit in our ordinary talk of physical objects. So even after having ‘evaluated’ the sense-datum doctrine as amounting merely to the recommendation of a new terminology which puts none of our factual beliefs into question, Ayer continues to agonise about problems which the doctrine generates only on the factual reading he explicitly rejected—and proceeds to ‘solve’ them by means of a theory built on the same factual claim.





3. BELIEF BIAS: AYER’S EVALUATION REVISITED




In fact, Ayer takes the truth of the factual sense-datum doctrine for granted even in the course of the linguistic evaluation of the argument from illusion that has him reject this version or reading of the doctrine. As we have seen (in Section 1), Ayer’s reasoning proceeds from the distinction between two allegedly established uses of perception-verbs, which make for different descriptions of such cases of ‘qualitatively delusive perception’ as the ‘argument from illusion’ starts out from: Sense A, in which it is ‘[i] necessary that what is seen should really exist, but [ii] not necessary that it should have the qualities it appears to have’; and sense B, in which ‘it is [ii] not possible that anything should seem to have qualities that it does not really have, but [i] also not necessary that what is seen should really exist’ (FEK 23). This latter sense Ayer took the star-watcher to employ in saying ‘I see a small silvery speck’ when looking at a distant celestial body greater than the Earth (FEK 22).

But, first, Ayer explicitly assumes that there actually is a huge star to be seen and that the star-watcher sees it (in sense A). And, pace B(i), we would certainly not say that the man sees anything at all (in any sense), if nothing (no star, planet, satellite or plane etc.) was to be seen in the region of the sky he was looking at (cp. S&S 94-–95). Second, pace B(ii), we do not use the phrase “a small silvery speck” to describe anything as actually being small and silvery, when speaking of far-away things (rather than specks of grime or spots on a dress). In these situations, we use the idiom of ‘spots’, ‘specks’ and ‘patches’ to pick out or characterise the things we see in terms of how they look or appear to us, and of how well we can see them.

To return to Berkeley’s example (from NTV 44, Chapter 5.2), we might, on a country walk, ask our companion: ‘What is that faint, small, reddish spot over yonder? Is that the brick tower where our guidebook tells us to turn right?’ We resort to this idiom when we cannot discern of what kind the thing to be seen is; we say how it looks when we cannot (yet) tell what it is. We speak of a ‘small reddish spot’ when we cannot tell whether the thing we see over yonder is, say, a brick tower (or something else). What we refer to with those words is the thing we see (the tower, if that is what the spot turns out to be); we typically refer to it thus only as long as we cannot tell; and we then do not imply that the thing we see actually is small (instead of merely looking small to us, from here, now).

Accordingly, when gazing up at the night sky we say ‘I see a small silvery speck’ when we cannot tell whether what we see is a star, a planet or a satellite. But we do then claim that there really is some thing, made out of gas or silicone or whatnot, while we do not claim that this thing actually is small. Adhering, by assumption, to the established usage, the star-watcher uses “to see” in Ayer’s sense A, both when saying that he sees a huge star and when saying that he sees a small speck: He is using the expressions “a huge star” and “a small speck” to refer to one and the same, ‘really existing’, object of perception, viz., a celestial body. In one case, he says of what kind that object is, classifies it in terms of ‘qualities it really has’. In the other, he says how it looks to him. And in both cases it is, in Ayer’s slightly misleading words, ‘not necessary’ that the object ‘should have the qualities it appears to have’.

What matters for present purposes is not that Ayer’s analysis of our established usage is wrong, but that it is based on a leap of thought that presupposes a factual claim of the very kind Ayer’s ‘linguistic evaluation’ sought to overcome. Ayer takes the star-watcher to be using “to see” in two different senses, because he assumes that in saying ‘I see a silvery speck no bigger than a sixpence’ the man ‘say[s] truly that what he sees is no bigger than a sixpence’ (FEK 23). I.e.: Ayer thinks that the expression “small silvery speck” is being used to describe—correctly—something that is small (and silvery). Without any argument, he leaps to that idea from this description of the example: ‘a man will say that he sees a distant star . . . but if he is asked to describe what it is that he is actually seeing, he may say that it is a silvery speck no bigger than a sixpence’ (FEK 22). The latter assumption does not entail the conclusion by itself; in moving from the former to the latter, Ayer presupposes an immediate consequence of the Phenomenal Principle, understood as a factual claim:



(A) When he looks at a huge distant star which looks no bigger than a sixpence, the man says ‘I see a silvery speck no bigger than a sixpence’ to describe what it is that he is actually seeing.



(P*) When he looks at a huge distant star which looks no bigger than a sixpence, the man is actually seeing some thing (a speck or sense-datum) that really is no bigger than a sixpence. Hence:



(C) When he looks at a huge distant star which looks no bigger than a sixpence, the man says ‘I see a silvery speck no bigger than a sixpence’ to describe some thing that really is no bigger than a sixpence.



In declaring that the speaker here employs the perception-verb in sense B, Ayer leaps to the even stronger conclusion that the man means to describe some thing as really being no bigger than a sixpence. It is, Ayer seems to think, perfectly obvious to the man that what he is seeing is no bigger than a sixpence. But at the same time, Ayer seems to suppose, the—plain—man would say that the object of perception that fits the given description, the speck, merely ‘appears to exist’ or, at any rate, that it does ‘not really exist’ in the sky (where there is a huge star). For sense B is framed to accommodate precisely this verdict. To sum up: At the heart of the first step of Ayer’s reasoning lies a leap of thought that relies on the Phenomenal Principle, on the factual reading Ayer sought to overcome: Whenever we perceive anything that appears F to us, we actually perceive some thing (or: there is some object of perception) that really has that sensible quality.

The crucial next step, the introduction of the new sense of perception-verbs, proceeds from the re-combination of features taken from the two supposedly established senses of perception-verbs previously distinguished: Bii (where the object of perception ‘really has the qualities it appears to have’) and Ai (where it ‘really exists’). But it involves more than their mere combination. For the mere adoption of a perception-verb with these two features would have the plain man say that we ‘directly perceive’ something only in cases of veridical perception: Only in these, we would ordinarily say, does there ‘really exist’ some thing that ‘really has the qualities it seems to have’. It is therefore crucial for the argument that the sense-datum theorists also, second, ‘decide . . . to apply the word “see”’ and its cognates in this new sense ‘to delusive as well as to veridical experiences’ (FEK 24). But of course they do not believe that their ‘decision’ creates an object that really is bent, in addition to the stick-in-water that merely looks bent. Clearly, therefore, when they ‘decide to apply’ the word in the new sense in the cases from which, indeed, their reasoning starts out, they already assume that this object, which actually is crooked, ‘really exists’. This is of course the very assumption the plain man, a moment ago, was taken not to share. If, like Ayer, we go along with this ‘decision’ without further argument, we simply presuppose, tacitly, an admittedly controversial ontological assumption. Thus, Ayer relates with approval:

Having adopted it [the new sense of perception-verbs], they [the sense-datum theorists] cannot say, in the case of delusive perception, that what is experienced is a material thing; for [a] either the requisite material thing does not exist, or else it has not got the requisite property. And so they say that [b] it [the thing they can say is experienced or perceived, in the new sense] is a sense-datum. (FEK 24)





—and not one word is added to explain why they should then be able to say that anything is ‘experienced’, in the new sense. In thus moving, without further argument, from (a) on to (b), Ayer simply presupposes that there always exists a thing which ‘has got the requisite property’—an immaterial thing, when no material thing obliges. In other words, he presupposes the first conclusion the argument from illusion is meant to establish, and presupposes it on the factual reading he seeks to overcome: At any rate in the cases of delusive perception, we perceive immaterial objects which are what other things merely appeared to be, for short: ‘sense-data’.

The third and final step of the ‘linguistic evaluation’ is to provide reasons to adopt the new sense of perception-verbs that the sense-datum theorists have introduced with their ‘decision’:

[1] [S]ince in philosophising about perception our main object is to analyse the relationship of our sense-experiences to the propositions we put forward concerning material things, it is useful for us to have a terminology that enables us to refer to the contents of our experiences independently of the material things they are taken to present. And this the sense-datum language provides. [2] It also has the advantage of laying down an unambiguous convention for the use of words that stand for modes of perception, and so freeing us from the verbal problems that develop . . . out of the ambiguous use of such words in ordinary speech. (FEK 26)





Strikingly, these reasons—the only ones Ayer adduces—are defeated by his previous points: What sort of terminology does (1) request? Presumably, Ayer seeks a terminology which enables us to describe our experiences without implying any statement about material things. But such an ‘idiom’ we apparently have all along: the supposedly well-established sense B of “to see” and its cognates which Ayer explained just three pages before (FEK 23). Alternatively, he might want an idiom that enables us to describe our experiences without using any words by means of which we commonly take ourselves to refer to material things. But only one page up the sense- datum theorist had ‘recommended’ that ‘we should speak . . . of seeing a sense-datum which really has the qualities that are characteristic of the appearance of an oasis’ (FEK 25). And the noun “oasis” is commonly used to refer to material things (in Ayer’s loose sense of the latter term—and of “to refer”). So the new terminology is either superfluous or fails to meet the stated need.

The second reason seems no better. Just two pages up, Ayer noted that the ‘ambiguity’ he now wants to avoid ‘is not ordinarily a source of confusion to us, because we are able to tell from the context what is the sense in which such words are intended to be understood’ (FEK 24). The only people he points out as having been ‘misled’ by these ambiguities are ‘philosophers’ who have made ‘use of the argument from illusion’ (FEK 24), namely one or more of the ‘misuses’ (FEK 28) he goes on to discuss at length (FEK 28–57). But the proponents of this argument have willy-nilly introduced the new terminology. This terminology does not seem much of a help to the few people who, according to Ayer, were ‘misled’ by the different uses of perception verbs ‘in ordinary speech’. And, arguably, these few were misled into their ‘verbal problems’ rather by the new than by any well-established uses of perception verbs. What is more, Ayer had argued a mere three pages up that either of the two ‘established’ senses he distinguished is individually sufficient to describe all empirical facts (FEK 23). If the ambiguity is to be avoided, after all, we can restrict ourselves to one of these—to sense B, if we also want to steer clear of all implications about matters material. On Ayer’s own premises, the new sense is clearly not called for.

Ayer’s explicit reasons are, in other words, remarkably poor in the light of ‘important points’ he takes care to stress practically in the same breath. When sincere, people typically adduce reasons with this defect only when they took a decision for reasons they cannot identify or admit to themselves, and therefore start to confabulate when pressed for reasons.3 In the previous step, Ayer had presupposed that, at least sometimes, we actually perceive immaterial objects which really have the properties other things merely appear to have. I submit he now endorses the introduction of the terminology of ‘sense-data’ and ‘direct perception’ quite simply because it provides a handy way of referring to or picking out those immaterial objects and formulating true statements about them. Since this presupposes the truth of a factual claim Ayer explicitly rejects, he could not admit this reason to others or himself, and was reduced to confabulating.

To recap: Ayer’s famous ‘linguistic evaluation’ of the argument from illusion is to show that its crucial assumption and conclusion, the Phenomenal Principle and the sense-datum doctrine, are defensible merely as rules of language which introduce new terms or tell us to use a new terminology. But already in setting out the established usage, in introducing the new terminology and in arguing for its adoption Ayer presupposes the principle and the core part of the doctrine in all their traditional ‘factual’ splendour. Interpretation in line with the (factual) sense-datum doctrine renders the—otherwise patently wrong—Phenomenal Principle intuitively compelling (cp. Chapter 5.2). Arguably, therefore, Ayer cannot help tacitly presupposing the factual sense-datum doctrine throughout the three main steps of the ‘linguistic evaluation’ that leads him to explicitly reject this paradoxical claim.

Ayer’s ‘linguistic’ re-explication of the sense-datum doctrine and the Phenomenal Principle thus suffers the same fate as Locke’s and Berkeley’s sublimating explanations of how talk of ‘ideas existing in the mind’ is to be properly understood (Chapter 2.1): All these explanations are immediately ‘overridden’; that is, in their reasoning thinkers presuppose the claims that attract them, on the initial intuitive understanding that the explicit explanations repudiate, and cannot help doing so even in the very passages in which they develop or give those explanations.—Recall how Locke explains that “idea” simply stands for whatever one may think of (people, objects, events, problems, etc.) and then treats ideas as objects located in a private space of inner perception, in the very next sentence (EHU I.i.8, see Chapter 2.1).—Where a proposition is systematically presupposed in a thinker’s stated reasoning, he maintains an implicit belief in it (Section 2). Where a thinker seems to explicitly state this belief, then explains that these statements are to be understood differently, but cannot help overriding these explanations immediately and in the very passages in which he gives them, such an implicit belief manifestly biases the thinker’s reasoning with, and interpretation of statements in the same way in which we found firmly maintained explicit beliefs to bias reasoning and the interpretation of ordinary and philosophical statements in exemplary cases of belief bias (Chapters 4.5–4.6, 5.1–5.2).

Where all the arguments adduced to support a belief are marred by strong belief bias and rely from the start on the claim they are to establish, the adoption of this belief must be due to something other than the stated arguments which already take it for granted. All the familiar arguments for the sense-datum doctrine (Chapters 5.1–5.2, 6.1) and Ayer’s new ‘linguistic’ argument (which does not even purport to support this factual doctrine anyway) rely on it. At least two processes of non-intentional reasoning which are characteristic of philosophical reflection can account for the adoption of this doctrine independently of all stated argument. We have already examined pertinent picture-driven reasoning (Chapter 3.5). Later we will encounter an independent process which involves seductive verbal fallacies of a kind we are particularly prone to make in philosophical reflection and then are prone to make systematically (Chapter 8). This process can have us adopt the Phenomenal Principle (Chapter 8.2) and the sense-datum doctrine (Chapter 8.3), on their traditional factual readings and independently of all explicit argument.

Presumably, Ayer came to adopt these two propositions through one or more processes of non-intentional reasoning, and then, in a display of strong belief bias, presupposed these propositions in his interpretation of ordinary talk and further reasoning—even once he had explicitly rejected them. Arguably, non-intentional reasoning and strong belief bias are to be found not only in early modern thought but also in sophisticated contributions to 20th-century analytic philosophy.





4. HALLMARKS OF DELUSION:

AYER’S IMPLICIT BELIEF RECONSIDERED




These processes drive Ayer to adopt and maintain an implicit belief in the factual sense-datum doctrine. This belief is in two ways independent of all reasons stated in its support: Ayer adopts it independently of all stated arguments, which are either rejected by him or are meant to support a different claim, while all of them rely on the doctrine. He then continues to maintain his implicit belief, namely to presuppose this doctrine, even once he has rejected all arguments adduced for it and replaced them by a line of argument that does not even purport to support the paradoxical factual doctrine. In a nutshell, non-intentional reasoning and belief bias drive Ayer to maintain an implicit belief that is in two ways independent of all reasons stated in its support: It precedes their consideration and survives their rejection.

This implicit belief is absurd. This term, you recall (from Chapter 5.5), marks a great discrepancy between a proponent’s obligation, and his ability to provide evidence or argument in support of a claim or belief, a discrepancy that is so great that we dismiss his claim as too unreasonable—for us—to merit even brief examination or discussion. The unmet obligation may arise from an apparent conflict with bits of generally received wisdom or facts at least the proponent is familiar with and accepts. One case which is philosophically particularly pertinent is captured by this sufficient condition:

It is absurd for a subject to believe that p if p is inconsistent with common-sense convictions and he has no specific and at least prima facie sound reasons to believe that p.





Ayer’s implicit belief in the factual sense-datum doctrine is in the same epistemic boat as the explicit belief that our previous protagonist, Berkeley, maintained in it. Both beliefs satisfy the present condition: The doctrine at issue is paradoxical, and while Berkeley lacked pertinent reasons because all his arguments failed to be at least prima facie sound, Ayer endorses no reasons that purport to support the paradoxical factual doctrine.

But even so he continues to maintain, and act on, an implicit belief in this very doctrine, understood as a factual claim that is at odds with common sense (Section 2). Indeed, he even relies on this claim in the course of the very ‘evaluation’ that is meant to show it unwarranted (Section 3). From the very beginning to the very end of his endeavours, Ayer is completely in the grip of this absurd belief, which he is unable to shed; even once he has forcefully criticized his sole argument for it as supporting no such factual claim, he cannot help maintaining an implicit belief in its truth.

Persistent absurd beliefs—if on different topics—are quite familiar to practitioners of another subject. Here is a case related by Sigmund Freud:

I made the acquaintance of a well-preserved lady of fifty-three, friendly and simple in her nature, who told me the following story without any reluctance. She lived in the country, most happily married, with her husband, who was at the head of a large factory. She could not give enough praise to her husband’s affectionate solicitude. It had been a love-match thirty years ago, and since then there had never been any trouble, discord or cause for jealousy . . . A year before, she had received an anonymous letter accusing her excellent husband of a love affair with a young girl; and the incredible—and to herself unintelligible—result was that she immediately believed it, and since then her happiness has been destroyed. The course of events, in greater detail, was something like this. She had a housemaid with whom she used, perhaps too often, to have intimate talks. This girl pursued another one with a positively malicious hostility because she had done so much better for herself in life, though she was of no higher origin. Instead of going into service, this other girl had managed to get a commercial training, had entered the factory and . . . was promoted to a good position. The girl who had made less of a success in life was of course ready to repeat all kinds of bad things of her former schoolmate. One day our lady had a conversation with the housemaid about a gentleman who had been staying with them, who was well known not to be living with his wife but to be having an affair with another woman. She did not know how it happened, but she suddenly said: ‘The most dreadful thing that could happen to me would be if I were to learn that my dear husband was having an affair too.’ The next day she received an anonymous letter by post which, as though by magic, gave her this very information, written in a disguised hand. She decided, probably rightly, that the letter was the work of the malicious housemaid, since it specified as her husband’s mistress the girl whom the servant pursued with her hatred. But although she at once saw through the intrigue and had seen enough instances where she lived of how little credence such cowardly denunciations deserved, what happened was that the letter immediately prostrated her. She became terribly excited, sent for her husband at once and reproached him violently. Her husband laughed the accusation off and did the best possible thing. He brought the family doctor . . . who made efforts to soothe the unfortunate lady. The further conduct of both of them was also entirely sensible. The housemaid was dismissed, but the alleged rival was not. Since then the patient had repeatedly been pacified to the point of no longer believing the content of the anonymous letter, but never thoroughly and never for long. It was enough for her to hear the young lady’s name mentioned or to meet her in the street and a fresh attack of distrust, pain, and reproaches would burst out in her. This, then, is the case history of this excellent woman.4





Freud points out the following as the ‘essential characteristics’ of the case:

It does, indeed, happen that elderly gentlemen have love affairs with young girls. But there is something else about it which is absurd and hard to understand. [1] The patient had no other reason at all for believing that her affectionate and loyal husband belonged to this otherwise not so rare class of husbands except what was asserted in the anonymous letter. [2] She knew that this document had no evidential value and she was able to give a satisfying explanation of its origin. She ought therefore to have been able to tell herself that she had no ground whatever for her jealousy, [3] and she did tell herself so. [4] But in spite of this she suffered as much as if she regarded this jealousy as completely justified. Ideas of this kind, which are inaccessible to logical arguments based on reality, are by general agreement described as delusions. The good lady, then, was suffering from delusions of jealousy.5



Ayer’s case shares these four features. At the risk of belabouring the obvious:





Ayer has got no other reason than the argument from illusion in its various versions to believe that we perceive only immaterial sense-data.

Ayer knows that the argument does not warrant this conclusion, and he knows this because he can give a satisfying analysis of the argument which reveals that it establishes no such surprising matter of fact—just as Freud’s patient knows that her only evidence, the letter, does not warrant the conclusion that her affectionate husband is cheating on her, because she can give a satisfying account of its provenance which reveals that it warrants no such conclusion. So, just as the lady should be able to tell herself that she has got no reason for her jealous suspicion, Ayer should be able to tell himself that there is no reason to believe that we perceive only immaterial sense-data.

Actually, Ayer does tell himself (and his readers) quite explicitly, in evaluating the argument as establishing no unfamiliar matter of fact but merely introducing a new terminology.

But in spite of this he continues to implicitly believe that all we actually perceive are immaterial sense-data: He goes on to presuppose this claim in the most consequential reasoning, that is, he continues to reason as if he regarded this claim as completely justified—just as the lady continues to suffer as if she regarded her jealous suspicion as completely justified.





Later research into delusional thinking revealed that such suffering is the result of what we called implicit belief: Regardless of whether or not they explicitly accept their delusional belief as justified, subjects cannot help presupposing it in the interpretation of life situations and utterances, and responding to them accordingly, both emotionally and behaviourally.6 Arguably, the lady’s persistent belief is implicit like Ayer’s (as she is seized by pangs of jealousy and bursts out in reproaches against her husband whenever she meets her alleged rival in the street and takes herself to confront her husband’s lover—even though she herself rejected her belief in the allegation as ‘unintelligible’).

In view of features (1) and (2) and their conflict with facts or commonsense beliefs their proponents accept, the pertinent beliefs of the Austrian lady and the British philosopher, respectively, are absurd in the sense defined (in Chapter 5.5). But even once the insufficiency of their reasons has been pointed out, namely—(3)—by themselves, they—(4)—continue to implicitly maintain their beliefs. Both Ayer and the lady have an absurd belief that is strongly persistent.

A subject’s belief is strongly persistent iff the subject maintains it, or would maintain it, even in the face of criticism which shows that, even though the belief is in need of strong argumentative or evidential support, the subject has no sound reasons for it.





The degree of conviction with which a belief is thus maintained may change significantly over time, and may change swiftly. An implicit belief maintained in this manner may make itself felt only intermittently, as it gets presupposed in a subject’s reasoning, and thus affects his feelings and actions, only in specific situations. (Freud’s ‘patient had repeatedly been pacified to the point of no longer believing the content of the anonymous letter, but never thoroughly and never for long.’) We have thus encountered the two hallmarks of delusional beliefs, which definitions of “delusion” advert to directly or indirectly (see below): They are absurd and strongly persistent, in the senses explained.

A more fundamental property of delusions, which is hardly ever pinned down succinctly, emerges from a further similarity between Ayer and the Austrian lady. Freud asks his readers to note

that the patient herself positively provoked the anonymous letter, which now gave support to her delusion, by informing the scheming housemaid on the previous day that it would cause her the greatest unhappiness if her husband had a love affair with a young girl. In this way she first put the notion of sending the anonymous letter into the housemaid’s head. Thus the delusion acquires a certain independence of the letter; it had been present already in the patient as a fear—or . . . wish.7





If this conjecture is correct, the lady’s belief is in two ways independent from the pertinent evidence: Another propositional attitude with the same content precedes its consideration, and the belief survives its rejection, namely the insight that the evidence does not warrant the belief—point (3) above. We have found that Ayer’s belief in the factual sense-datum doctrine is two-way independent from argument, in an even more straightforward manner: The belief itself precedes all pertinent arguments (Section 3) and survives their rejection (Section 2)—or, more precisely, the insight that, properly re-developed, these arguments clearly fail to warrant the factual doctrine.

This forcefully brings out what we generally infer from the strong persistence of beliefs which are absurd: that they are not under the subjects’ rational control. Of course we cannot adopt or shed beliefs at will; we have only a limited kind of control over them. But we ought to actually believe that p (and not merely entertain, e.g., the fleeting thought or mild suspicion that p) only if we have some evidence or argument and are justified to believe that p: Ideally, we ought to adopt a belief when, and only when, we have warrant for doing so, and ought to shed a belief the moment we lack warrant for maintaining it. Our conception of an autonomous rational subject does not demand that we actually live up to this ideal all the time. But it requires that we be able to live up to it in each specific case, i.e., that we have ‘rational control’ over our beliefs, at least in this modest sense:





A subject has rational control over the belief that p iff

he is able to adopt the assumption that p and employ it in his reasoning, when he is justified in believing that p, and

he is able to reject the assumption that p and disregard it in his reasoning, when he lacks all warrant for believing that p.





Both Ayer and the Austrian lady continue to maintain their pertinent belief implicitly, even once they have realised—and said explicitly—that there is no justification whatsoever to adopt and maintain it. Clearly, they are unable to shed a belief they are not justified to maintain. To the extent to which the pertinent beliefs already precede the generation or construction of the—patently unsound—evidence or arguments subsequently adduced for them, our protagonists adopt these unreasonable beliefs already prior to having even the semblance of a justification for them, and manifest also an inability to resist these beliefs when having no warrant to adopt them. In two respects, they lack rational control over the particular beliefs at issue. We take people to be unable to shed an absurd belief when they continue to maintain such a belief even though they have told themselves that the pertinent reasons are specious and their belief unreasonable. We also attribute that inability to them when they stick to their beliefs even though others have pointed this out to them: Where I have no even prima facie sound reasons for a belief in need of strong evidential or argumentative support, I plainly ought to give it up the moment my attention is drawn to the need for such support—e.g. to the conflict of my belief with common sense or facts I accept—and to the flimsiness of my reasons. If I do not then abandon my belief, you will judge me unable to shed it. We thus infer lack of rational control over a particular belief from the facts that it is absurd and that the subject maintains it even once he has been shown to have no even prima facie sound reasons for this belief.

To sum up: We have encountered two hallmarks of delusion, viz. absurdity and strong persistence, and a fundamental property we may infer from these two hallmarks, viz. lack of rational control. And we have found that Ayer’s implicit belief in the factual sense-datum doctrine shares all three with a textbook case of delusion.





5. THE CONCEPT OF DELUSION




Contrary to common prejudice, people with delusional beliefs may be capable of reasoned argument and sensible behaviour. While some people who have delusions also suffer from deficits in cognitive skills, delusions are typically not associated with such deficits even in those exemplary cases that attract the attention of the mental health services: Experimental work on psychotic patients established a ‘paradoxical lack of association’8 between delusions and gross cognitive deficits.9 Less fundamental cognitive skills deficits10 were found only in association with some specific conditions involving delusions, such as the apparent inability to understand negative events as the result of situational features rather than personal actions, which was established for paranoid patients.11 The only deficit in cognitive skills that has been experimentally documented for a wide range of medical conditions involving delusions (viz. psychotic conditions) is a deficit in ‘theory of mind skills’, that is, in the ability to understand others and infer their beliefs, desires and attitudes in everyday situations;12 and this deficit was found to be limited to periods of acute illness and unrelated to IQ.13 For our purposes we may keep in mind that, even in the exemplary cases studied by medical researchers, delusions typically are not associated with deficits in cognitive skills which would be relevant in philosophical reflection, and that they are not necessarily associated with any cognitive skills deficit at all.

The fact that Ayer continues to display a high degree of intellectual competence in addressing the problems raised by the factual sense-datum doctrine therefore does not in any way exclude the hypothesis suggested by the important similarities between his belief in this doctrine and the jealous delusion of Freud’s patient: the hypothesis that Ayer’s belief might be a delusion. To explore this at first sight outlandish hypothesis, we need to tackle a major challenge in the philosophy of mental health: the problem of getting clear on meaning and import of this notoriously ill-understood term.14

For a start, we need to dispel common misconceptions, some of which are conveniently summed up by the rightly much-criticised ‘official definition’ in the most recent edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM):

delusion: A false belief based on incorrect inference about external reality that is firmly sustained despite what almost everyone else believes and despite what constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to the contrary.15





Almost every single element of this ‘definition’ is incompatible with the actual application of the term in diagnostic practice. Already a literature review from 1940 commented on how frequently it has been noticed that delusions may be true ‘accidentally’.16 If the Austrian lady’s devoted husband had, against all probability, been seduced by his wife’s alleged rival, succumbed under unusual circumstances known neither to his wife nor her scheming maid, and covered everything up perfectly, his wife would still have had only utterly unsound reasons for her jealousy and her belief would still have been unreasonable—and delusional.17 The term “delusion” implies an epistemic, not an alethic defect—utter lack of warrant, not lack of truth. Second, many delusions can indeed be understood as conclusions of ‘incorrect inferences’ proceeding, e.g., from everyday observations (‘That CIA spy keeps track of me’, referring to a man seen waiting each morning at the same bus stop); but the pertinent premises include observations of one’s own thoughts and feelings (as in delusions of thought insertion or withdrawal).18 Third, delusions need not be ‘firmly sustained’: Conviction in them may vary significantly from day to day19—like our patient’s belief in the denunciation, which abated intermittently. The point is, rather, that when they are being maintained, they are unresponsive even to sound criticism. Fourth, there often is no conflict between the delusional belief and the beliefs of ‘almost everyone else’, quite simply because most people have no opinion either way about whether, say, Mr. Smith is betraying his wife. And, fifth, psychiatrists and clinical psychologists are hardly ever in possession of ‘incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to the contrary’ (say, incontrovertibly establishing Mr. Smith’s loyalty or the non-existence of extra-terrestrials) when crediting someone with a delusion: Rather more frequently, they elicit what ‘proof or evidence’ the patient can provide to support his belief and regard it as delusional in case these reasons do not stand up to even cursory scrutiny.

If we prune the ‘official definition’ of these misconceptions, we are left with the two hallmarks we have already encountered: The first clause is false, and deleted. Upon correction, the second clause merely tells us that delusional beliefs are formed by inferences from truth-apt premises, and can therefore be assessed for truth, for soundness of the inferences leading to them and, therefore, for warrant.20 The remaining clauses imply a certain outcome of such assessment. Properly corrected, they imply absurdity and strong persistence: Where—(4)—other people do have an opinion on the matter at issue and ‘almost everyone else’ rejects the belief, this creates a strong need for argumentative or evidential support, which may also arise from patent tension with less widely known facts familiar to the subject. Where—(5)—the subject is unable to provide evidence or arguments that stand up at least to cursory scrutiny (all pertinent inferences are patently unsound), the belief is absurd. If—(3)—even once this point has been made, the subject maintains the belief continuously or intermittently, explicitly or implicitly, his belief is strongly persistent, in the sense explained (in the previous section).

The DSM attempts to give ‘operational definitions’ of the terms employed in psychiatric diagnosis. Such definitions are to specify operations which allow us to verify pertinent attributions (where both “operations” and “verify” are used in everyday, not behaviourist senses). The DSM defini-tion of “delusion” quoted above, for example, suggests the psychiatrist confront a subject with ‘incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence’ against his belief and determine whether the subject continues to maintain the belief despite this. Both ‘absurdity’ and ‘strong persistence’ are amenable to operational definition of this kind: By questioning the subject and ourselves, we can find out whether a belief he holds is at odds with facts he accepts or with a relevant body of ‘received wisdom’, and, if so, whether he is able to support the belief with specific and at least prima facie sound reasons. Once we have thus established that a belief is absurd, we can refute those flimsy reasons in discussion with the subject and verify through questioning and reasoning tasks whether he continues to explicitly maintain or implicitly presuppose the belief, in further reasoning.

‘Delusionality’ has come to be regarded as a gradable property:21 Beliefs are more or less delusional according to the extent to which they display various gradable characteristics.22 An operational definition of the notion should therefore invoke but gradable properties or characteristics. Absurdity (discrepancy between the strength of the argumentative or evidential support required and provided, respectively) and strong persistence both are such properties (where strong persistence can be graded in several dimensions: extent and stability of explicit maintenance and level of confidence, extent and stability of implicit presupposition, extent and strength of emotional and behavioural impact). We thus obtain a straightforward definition of “delusionality”, which is ‘operational’ in the sense the DSM definitions aspire to:

A belief is delusional to the extent to which it is absurd and strongly persistent.



Many operational definitions are to capture and ‘operationalise’ notions previously introduced by other explanations, and are adequate just in case they manage to do so. Definitions of ‘delusion’ are no exception. The term entered the technical vocabulary of psychiatry not from ordinary English but as a translation from German, the language of most of the founding fathers of that subject: It translates the term “Wahnidee”. Devoid of the gentler connotations of deception, this term unequivocally implies mental illness and stands for pathological ideas and beliefs. A ‘delusion’ is, quite simply a ‘pathological belief’.23 To get clear on the adequacy of the above definition, we need to spell out the latter notion.

In the most relevant sense of the word, “pathological” means ‘caused by or evidencing a mentally disturbed condition’ or, to be more accurate, ‘caused by a mental disease or evidencing mental illness’.24 In the fourth book of his Republic,25 Plato mooted a conception of mental health that still shapes our intuitive understanding of what it is to be ‘mentally ill’: Plato envisaged a state of mental balance in which the ‘rational part of the soul’ controls the ‘spirited’ and ‘appetitive’ parts, and suggested that this state is constitutive of a kind of ‘health’: the ‘well-being of the soul’. He thus mooted the ideal of a balanced, rational agent who can master his feelings and his impulses to act sufficiently well to be truly a ‘master of himself’ and autonomous in the sense, roughly, of not being a slave to unreasonable passions or impulses. On an intuitive understanding, a person is ‘mentally healthy’ to the extent to which he enjoys this kind of autonomy and ‘mentally ill’ to the extent to which he lacks it. I.e.:

To be mentally ill is to lack rational control over—some of—one’s feelings and actions.





Any action or emotion over which we lack rational control will ‘evidence mental illness’ and hence qualify as ‘pathological’; with the present defi- nition, we can immediately infer the pathology of an emotion or action from the subject’s lack of rational control over it. We shall presently see that within the currently dominant paradigm of psychotherapy only emotions and actions over which a subject lacks rational control are treated as ‘pathological’. We thus obtain a straightforward bi-conditional:

A subject’s feeling or action is pathological iff the subject lacks rational control over it.



Control is something we may but need not exercise when we have it. A subject has rational control over a feeling like the fear of failing an exam just in case he possesses a certain ability to resist or espouse it, which he may but need not exercise: just in case he is able to resist the feeling when it is clearly unwarranted, to shed it when it clearly is no longer warranted and—conversely—to espouse it when it is amply justified. Lack of such control may take different forms: the various exaggerated fears of failure and rejection frequently involved in depression, the aerophobic’s inability to resist the fear of flying that unfailingly seizes him the moment he sets out to travel (no matter with how reputable an airline), or—conversely— the inability to feel fear in objectively dangerous situations that may be displayed by psychopaths.

A subject has rational control over an action just in case he is able to resist the impulse to perform it when it is utterly unreasonable, to break it off the moment it becomes clearly unreasonable, and to perform it when it is clearly called for (and the requisite physical movements are possible). A person lacks such control, for example, when suffering from an obsessive-compulsive disorder or from depression: when he is overwhelmed by the urge to wash his hands all the time even when he is at work (and has a job—e.g. as a construction worker—where he can ill afford to do so) or when the lethargy characteristic of depression prevents him from launching the application for a much-needed and suitable job. Another kind of example is provided by the paranoid man who, when hearing a car horn in front of his house, leaps to the wild conclusion that killers have come for him and runs away.

More often than not, lack of rational control over feelings and actions involves no impairment of cognitive skills: The phobic usually has no trouble realising that his fear of flying is unreasonable, the depressed patient is typically able to appreciate the need to perform an action which he cannot get himself to do even so, and Freud’s deluded patient managed to determine— and explicitly tell herself—that her jealousy and reproaches were unfounded. In a further range of different cases (which include dementia), cognitive skills are impaired, and these cognitive deficits, in turn, impair rational control over a wide range of feelings and actions. (Dementia patients, e.g., tend to ‘act confused’ whenever confronted with unfamiliar surroundings or people.)

The understanding of ‘mental illness’ or ‘pathology’ we have thus obtained is implicit in a clinical criterion commonly used to assess whether a person is in need of psychotherapy: Clinicians seek to ‘ease severe emotional distress (depression, anxiety . . . ) and disturbed behaviour (self-harm, avoidance)’,26 that is, to solve what they call ‘emotional and behavioural problems’. A person is regarded as mentally ill if, and only if, he has such problems: ‘Mental illness [is] the psychological state of someone who has emotional or behavioural problems serious enough to require psychiatric intervention’.27 Emotions, actions, and omissions are treated as ‘pathological’ just in case they are constitutive of such problems.

In first approximation, a behavioural problem ‘may be either doing something that the individual strongly wants not to do . . . or not doing something that the person strongly wants to do.’28 This is to cover cases such as that of the paranoid man who hears the noise of a car horn, immediately leaps to the conclusion that ‘they have come for me, to kill me’ and runs from his flat.29 But of course the man does want to run away, given that he actually (if unreasonably) believes he is about to be attacked. The lack of autonomy from which he suffers does not consist in an inability to desist from doing something he does not want to do. Rather, it consists in his inability to resist a behavioural impulse—viz. to run away—which is utterly unreasonable, since it is motivated and justified solely by an utterly unwarranted thought (‘They have come for me, to kill me’) to which the subject unreasonably lends credence. His lack of autonomy consists in lack of rational control over this action (and others, motivated by similar thoughts).

The notion of emotional problems, too, is often used differently than it is explained: Psychotherapists frequently say they draw the distinction between pathological emotional disturbance requiring therapy and non-pathological distress in terms of severity.30 But non-pathological grief, for example, may be even more severely distressing than the emotions involved in depression, which are deemed pathological. Accordingly, clinicians actually consider whether the emotion at issue is excessive, that is, considerably stronger than warranted by events: ‘if an individual is not excessively upset by [e.g.] losing a job, then it is not in this sense a psychological problem.’31 And of course this psychological problem only amounts to a significant emotional problem in need of therapeutic treatment in case the subject is unable to shed or weaken this unwarranted or unwarrantedly strong emotion himself. The emotional problems psychotherapists seek to solve are constituted by emotions which are not under the rational control of the subject.

To sum up, we have defined ‘mental illness’ and explicated the ‘pathology’ of actions and emotions in terms of lack of rational control. These explanations capture the intuitive understanding of these notions that actually guides clinical practice. They also avoid the various problems besetting the major competing proposal, viz. the explication of mental pathology in terms of harmful dysfunction that has been a focus of debate.32 The explanation of ‘pathology’ we have obtained thus seems satisfactory. It can be straightforwardly extended from feelings like fear to other propositional attitudes. This yields some straightforward definitions:

A subject’s belief or other propositional attitude is pathological to the extent to which the subject lacks rational control over it.



A delusion is a pathological belief. A subject’s belief is delusional to the extent to which it is pathological. Hence:



A subject’s belief is delusional to the extent to which the subject lacks rational control over it.





Above (in Section 4), we have defined ‘rational control over beliefs’ and have seen that the absurdity and strong persistence of a belief jointly entail that the subject lacks such control over it. The operational definition of delusions as strongly persistent absurd beliefs can hence be used as a heuristic for identifying delusions in the initial sense of ‘pathological beliefs’.





6. AN INTELLECTUAL ALTITUDE SICKNESS




We found that Ayer’s implicit belief in the ‘factual’ sense-datum doctrine is absurd and strongly persistent; we provided significant evidence which warrants the conclusion that this belief of his is in two ways independent of his stated reasons and not under Ayer’s rational control (Sections 2–4). Ayer’s continued implicit belief in the sense-datum doctrine—the ‘factual’ original rather than the ‘linguistic’ version obtained by re-evaluation—provides us with the first example of a philosophical delusion.

The particular way in which Ayer comes to develop and maintain his present delusional belief is quite idiosyncratic. But the formation of a philosophical delusion as such is no freak occurrence; it is not, as it were, the intellectual equivalent to the birth of Siamese twins. Rather, the very process we have studied in this book, the pictorial process, systematically leads to the formation and implicit maintenance of delusional beliefs. The pictorial process has thinkers leap to picture-driven conclusions at odds with familiar facts, sublimate them and maintain them explicitly or implicitly in further reasoning, which presupposes them, in their ‘raw’ or sublimated shape, from the start and throughout (belief bias). Above (in Chapter 5.5), we have seen that picture-driven inferences and their sublimation systematically lead thinkers to form and maintain absurd beliefs. Whenever such a belief is also strongly persistent, the thinker lacks rational control over it and maintains it as a matter of delusion.

This will happen when strong belief bias has us maintain beliefs picture-driven reasoning had us adopt. We can infer lack of rational control over the pertinent beliefs in at least two cases. First, a thinker clearly is unable to disregard the absurd assumption that p in his further reasoning, when he unwittingly continues to presuppose that p even once he has explicitly rejected the absurd claim. Frequently, thinkers explicitly reject the absurd conclusions of picture-driven inferences, namely through the act of sublimation: They reject these conclusions out of hand when spontaneously explaining that their words are to be understood in some other sense. But, even so, thinkers go on to unwittingly presuppose those picture-driven claims precisely in the ‘raw’ initial shape they reject: The thinkers we examined continue to presuppose that to think something is to perceive something somewhere in us, through an inner sense, that the things perceived in the mind are located in the mind, that a quality is a thing that must exist somewhere in other objects, etc. (Chapters 2.1–2.2 and 3.2). The picture-driven claims that thus creep back into the thoughts of philosophers who explicitly reject them constitute implicit beliefs which are not under the rational control of the thinkers who have them. Precisely some of the most fundamental philosophical beliefs we have considered are maintained as a matter of delusion.

Second, we can infer more restricted lack of rational control when a belief is explicitly endorsed but keeps creeping in also in reasoning in which the thinker clearly does not want to rely on it, as in the arguments he adduces to support that very belief. Thus, when we find that all of Berkeley’s arguments for the sense-datum doctrine, including those he regarded as decisive, rely on that paradoxical doctrine directly or indirectly, we can infer not only that his belief in this doctrine is absurd but also that it is not entirely under his rational control and to that extent delusional. Like Ayer’s implicit belief in the sense-datum doctrine, also Berkeley’s explicit belief in this doctrine is constitutive of a delusion. We have seen that his belief is ultimately due to picture driven reasoning (Chapters 3.5 and 4.2–4.6) and can now conclude more generally: Wherever picture-driven reasoning culminates in strong belief bias that has us presuppose its paradoxical conclusions in all further reasoning, including the very arguments we adduce in their support, thinkers lack rational control over these conclusions and maintain them as a matter of delusion.

The conflict of such philosophical delusions with familiar facts, common-sense convictions or among each other gives rise to a wide range of philosophical problems. These in turn occasion much toil and some worry. Worries engendered by such ill-motivated problems are constitutive of ‘emotional problems’; pointless efforts to solve such problems and, e.g., to reconcile the pertinent facts with the delusions with which they appear to be at odds, are constitutive of ‘behavioural problems’:

A subject has emotional problems iff he experiences unwarranted and distressing or otherwise disabling emotions.33



An emotion is disabling iff it prevents the subject from doing things he would otherwise want to do or drives him to do things he would otherwise refrain from.



A subject has behavioural problems to the extent to which his behaviour is unreasonable (or unjustifiable) and fails to be autonomous.



A subject’s behaviour fails to be autonomous in case he does things he would not want to do if not in a certain disabling condition that is not under his direct control, and in case he refrains from doing things that he would want to do if not in such a condition.





Apparently Wittgenstein had emotional problems of this kind: He stressed again and again the disquiet or uneasiness ultimately engendered by wrong analogies and the resultant ‘disorder in our concepts’ and (misleading) expressions; indeed, he made it his chief aim to remove this kind of disquiet (Chapter 9.1). While few other philosophers find philosophical problems disquieting enough to qualify as having such emotional problems, many do have behavioural problems: Few of us want to waste precious research time on efforts to show otherwise unproblematic convictions consistent with utterly unwarranted claims with which they appear to be at odds. Where we make such efforts only because the unwarranted claims are rendered compelling by non-intentional inferences, and these are engendered by adherence to philosophical pictures, we thus do something we would not want to do, if not under the spell of philosophical pictures—the presently relevant ‘disabling condition’.

A subject counts as ‘mentally ill’ to the extent to which he lacks rational control over his beliefs or actions (Section 5). To the extent to which he has emotional or behavioural problems in the sense explained, a subject lacks such control. When thinkers are under the spell of philosophical pictures, thereby come to formulate ill-motivated philosophical problems, and find these ‘problems’ worrying or make otherwise pointless efforts to solve them, they hence qualify as ‘ill’. As we shall presently see, the autonomous cognitive processes that make us qualify by engendering such problems, are constitutive of a kind of disease: a ‘disease of the understanding’, to borrow Wittgenstein’s phrase (from CV 50), namely a kind of intellectual altitude sickness that can befall even the most competent thinkers the moment they try to scale the heights of abstract reflection with undue haste, and without due care or caution.

A disease is a condition of the individual that causes him to be ill. More precisely, it is a condition which the individual cannot control directly and which causes him to be ill or will cause him to be ill or to die, if untreated. The intuitive notion of a ‘disease’ is that of an ‘internal’ process causing ill health (or death), as opposed to rather more sudden causes like—external or internal—injuries. When we apply the notion in saying that someone suffers from a disease, we commonly assume that there is some underlying inner process that causes the complaints that make the person qualify as ill (complaints such as pain or physical disability, or serious emotional or behavioural problems); we posit, namely, a process that causes ‘signs’ and ‘symptoms’ which engender or include those complaints. The process in question can be either literally or metaphorically ‘internal’ or ‘inner’; it can be either a physiological or a mental process which the subject cannot directly control.34 Where such a process is known, a specific disease (e.g. what we commonly call ‘the flu’) gets defined in terms of the pertinent signs and symptoms (fever, weakness, etc.) and a particularly decisive condition of the individual that is an antecedent of those symptoms in that process (e.g. the presence of a virus in his body): Where the same symptoms are due to different such conditions, we are dealing with different diseases; in exemplary cases, both signs and symptoms and some causally decisive conditions serve to individuate the disease.

The distinction between ‘symptoms’ and ‘signs’ further structures the concept of ‘disease’. In clinicians’ terms, symptoms are ‘subjective evidence’ of the disease (such as pain or diarrhoea), to be discovered by questioning the patient, whereas signs are ‘objective evidence’ to be obtained independently (such as elevated glucose levels in urine, to be determined through lab tests). In the more technical sense of medical researchers, however, signs and symptoms are effects of an underlying causal process, where signs are more immediate effects than symptoms. In using these terms, researchers make three assumptions:35 The signs can be observed independently from the symptoms. While both signs and symptoms are over-determined in having many causal antecedents, signs have fewer antecedents than symptoms. Third, there are explanatory links between some of the signs and some of the symptoms. Ideally, as research progresses, ever more signs, ever further up an assumed causal-explanatory chain, are found to be correlated with and (partially) explanatory for the symptoms.36 The starting-point of such a research process may be the observation of a syndrome, that is, the observation of a cluster of symptoms which occur together significantly above chance level. Usually, they will be reliably correlated with antecedent signs, which further suggest that the co-occurrence of the symptoms is not by chance but due to one and the same underlying process.37 To the extent to which such a process is discovered, the definition of the syndrome in terms of co-occurring symptoms is developed into a ‘proper’ disease concept which defines the disease in terms both of symptoms and signs and of some causally decisive antecedent.

The currently most widely used classification of mental diseases or disorders, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, defines most such disorders as syndromes, though with reference only to symptoms and not to signs. The symptoms invoked include emotions and patterns of behaviour, having or displaying which amounts to having emotional or behavioural problems. Crucially for our present purposes, the symptoms also include beliefs which engender such problems. For example, delusional beliefs are the sole symptom of delusional disorder and qualify as symptoms of a disease because they may engender behavioural problems, for example when the subject acts on them and thereby does things he would have refrained from doing if not suffering from delusional disorder.38 (Upon hearing a car outside his house, a paranoid forms the belief ‘They have come to get me’ and runs to the garden, to hide from imaginary attackers.)39

In following up how philosophical pictures shape philosophical reflection, we have encountered, for each of the terms that enter into a proper disease concept, a phenomenon to which the term applies:





We have already seen that in philosophical reflection even the most competent thinkers may come to systematically adopt unwarranted beliefs (like the belief that only immaterial sense-data can be immediately perceived) or entertain unwarranted ideas (say, that thoughts must exist in an ethereal realm), that these beliefs and ideas apparently conflict with further convictions and thus give rise to ill-motivated problems (e.g. about the possibility of using terms purporting to refer to material object, or about the nature of thoughts and matters mental) and that pointless efforts to solve these ‘problems’ constitute— genuine—behavioural problems and may go with unwarranted disquiet amounting to an emotional problem.

Since they engender behavioural and emotional problems and thus make thinkers ‘ill’ in a strict sense of the term, these utterly unwarranted but intuitively compelling beliefs and ideas are symptoms of disease at least in the same sense as the delusional beliefs that are recognised as symptoms of delusional disorder.

These beliefs and ideas come to be espoused or entertained as the result of cognitive distortions, i.e., of recurrent (rather than one-off), characteristic (not idiosyncratic) and systematic (rather than unrelated) mistakes in non-intentional reasoning. The philosophical beliefs and ideas at issue are formed due to picture-driven leaps of thought (which presuppose the likes of R, K and M, cp. Chapters 1.3 and 3.1) and further leaps which presuppose conclusions thus inferred, directly or indirectly (cp. Chapters 2.1–2.2, 3.2–3.3 and 3.5). These systematic leaps are antecedents of the formation of the pertinent beliefs and ideas (symptoms). Whether a thinker makes leaps of this kind (i.e. leaps presupposing those assumptions) can be established without considering whether he holds one of the beliefs or entertains one of the ideas at issue, for example by testing what spontaneous inferences he makes from various related premises, to conclusions other than the particular belief to be explained. Like this belief, the leaps leading to it have antecedents in the shape of other leaps which lead, often from various different premises, to the tacit assumptions they presuppose; but as we advance towards the initial leaps—which presuppose only the likes of R and M—they rely on fewer and fewer leaps, whose presuppositions are obtained from fewer and fewer premises. Finally, reference to each of these antecedent leaps contributes to an explanation of the philosophical belief or idea at issue. To sum up, these systematic leaps of thought have the crucial characteristics of signs: They are independently ascertainable, have fewer explanatory antecedents than the ‘symptoms’ and are themselves (partially) explanatory antecedents of the latter.

These ‘sign-like’ cognitive distortions are part-and-parcel of a mental process which the subject cannot directly control, namely, of a cognitive process which occurs at the level of non-intentional reasoning and eventually leads to the formation of the ‘symptom-beliefs’: the pictorial process (Chapter 1.3). This autonomous process will drive the thinking at issue iff the thinker is under the spell of the pertinent philosophical pictures. This is the decisive condition of the individual that is an antecedent of those symptoms in that process. Being under the spell of, say, the perceptual picture of reflection is a condition of the kind used to individuate diseases. More generally, cognitive processes that are not under our direct control can be constitutive of diseases, when engendering emotional and behavioural problems.



That is, when, in the grip of philosophical pictures, we seriously worry about, or work on ill-motivated problems, we are ill. Certain philosophical beliefs and ideas which give rise to those problems are symptoms of a kind of disease; certain cognitive distortions are its signs; the pictorial process we have made out is pathological. Where it leads us to waste time and effort on ill-motivated problems, being under the spell of a philosophical picture is a disease, in the ‘proper’ sense explained. In fact, it thus qualifies as a disease in a stricter sense than the mental disorders defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, which specifies no signs (or equivalent) and suggests no inner process, mental or physical, to explain the symptoms. To be in the grip of a philosophical picture is to have a disease of the understanding, in a perfectly strict sense of the term ‘disease’.

The pertinent inner (or ‘inner’) processes are constitutive of diseases, and qualify as ‘pathological’, not in virtue of an abnormality in or of their course.40 Rather, they qualify in virtue of their effects or consequences: An inner process qualifies if it causes us pain or disability or related harms such as emotional or behavioural problems. Accordingly, this process may represent an actually quite normal response to certain environmental conditions, and some familiar diseases are such responses to extreme conditions to which people are not used. Take altitude sickness: It can befall even the most physically fit people when they are suddenly exposed to higher altitudes, without proper acclimatisation. It then is the more likely to befall us the higher we go (20% chance at 2000–2500 metres, 40–50% at 3000– 3500 metres, etc.).41 Its symptoms (headache, weakness, etc.) are caused by a process contingent on an environmental condition: on the shortage of oxygen at altitudes with ever lower atmospheric pressure. The resultant difficulties in coping with high altitudes reflect not so much individual shortcomings of particular climbers but limitations of our species, which has evolved in different habitats.

According to the analysis presented, being under the spell of philosophical pictures is a roughly analogous disease: a disease of the understanding which human thinkers are prone to develop when trying to scale the heights of abstract reflection, without proper precautions. We have hypothesised that thinkers are particularly prone to engage in non-intentional analogical reasoning which is unsound when they lack knowledge of relevant detail or context and when suitable (i.e. structurally analogous and familiar) models are available (Chapter 1.2). We further hypothesised that these conditions are often met in philosophical reflection, where thinkers frequently engage in general reasoning without sufficiently frequent reference to sufficiently well worked-out examples, use technical terms which are too coarsely defined, and often think about abstract phenomena for which structurally analogous familiar models are provided by the process of metaphorical extension (Chapter 1.2). If these hypotheses are correct, the cognitive process that causes the symptoms of the present disease of the understanding is contingent upon quasi-environmental conditions: upon the paucity of context and detail and upon the availability of suitable models, which are characteristic of much philosophical debate. When engaged in such debate, we then are the more likely to be in the grip of philosophical pictures the more, and the more swiftly, we ignore sufficiently concrete examples and contexts and ascend from the concrete and specific to the abstract and general. Being in the grip of philosophical pictures probably is, as it were, an intellectual altitude sickness.

As such, it reflects not individual cognitive deficits of particular thinkers but limitations of our species which has evolved in response to rather more practical challenges, addressed in rather richer contexts. The mistakes it has us make are natural in the contexts in which we are prone to make them. These natural mistakes then propagate and ramify at a later stage of the pertinent process, due to belief-bias effects which are well documented for the general population and a plethora of contexts: everyday, social, scientific etc.42 Arguably, the philosophical delusions generated at the several stages of the pictorial process reflect, quite simply, the cognitive endowment of human beings. They are a fact of our intellectual life, which we have to reckon with when we address challenges our species has not evolved to meet.





7. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK




The term “therapy” implies that there are diseases to be cured or symptoms of illness to be relieved. This implication cannot be cancelled simply by saying that the term is being used in a metaphorical sense. As we have seen (in Chapter 1.1), the metaphorical extension of terms escapes vacuity by preserving core inferential relations between several related terms. To escape vacuity, conceptions of therapy in philosophy hence have to identify a whole set of suitably related phenomena to which a whole set of related terms can be applied, metaphorically or literally: They have to identify a ‘disease’ which causes ‘signs’ or ‘symptoms’ which evidence ‘illness’, i.e., failure to meet a certain ideal of ‘health’. In this chapter, we have spelled out an influential ideal of mental health and spelled out when and in what ways philosophers may fall short of it and qualify as ‘ill’, in virtue of their professional pursuits. We have identified the symptoms that evidence this illness and traced their aetiology, via antecedent signs to the pathological condition constitutive of the pertinent disease: adherence to philosophical pictures. We have thus obtained a first substantive (non-vacuous) conception of therapeutic philosophy, that is, of a therapy which addresses problems arising specifically in and through philosophical reflection.

This substantive conception vindicates the call for something that is literally a therapy, in philosophy: The ideal of health of which we fall short when we agonise over picture-raised problems is the same ideal of rational autonomy of which people fall short when suffering from exemplary mental disorders: When falling short of it, philosophers are ill in a different way than, but in the same sense as people suffering from depression or psychosis. Their key symptoms are beliefs which literally qualify as delusions, and the autonomous cognitive process to which they are due satisfies a strict definition of the term “disease”.

In the next chapter, we will explain the need for therapy in philosophy and how we can meet it. But this much is clear already now: Therapy is required in philosophy in order to cure the disease we have made out, viz. our adherence to philosophical pictures, and to relieve us of its symptoms, namely of the philosophical delusions we form and maintain under the spell of philosophical pictures. Where these delusions are maintained explicitly, we have to reduce thinkers’ conviction in them; where they are maintained implicitly, we have to weaken the propensity unwittingly to presuppose them in further reasoning. To not only relieve the symptoms but cure the disease that causes them then is to weaken the underlying propensities to unwittingly assimilate various targets to particular models more closely than one knows to be appropriate (e.g. assimilate intellectual efforts to visual search in ways in which one knows the two to be different). Only once we have weakened the pertinent propensities are we able to give up the claims we have seen reason to reject, to abandon the ill-motivated but intuitively compelling ‘problems’ they raise, and to put an end to the kind of non-intentional reasoning that would otherwise have us conjure up new but equally bad ‘problems’ to take the place of the ones we managed to see through.





Part III

Therapeutic Philosophy





7 Two Turns


A New Vision of Philosophy




In the first part of this book we have explored how philosophical reflec-tion is shaped at several levels by philosophical pictures. More specifically, we have explored how such reflection is shaped by autonomous cognitive processes and effects that complement each other and make up what we called the ‘pictorial process’: We have seen that processes and effects of which we are hardly ever aware and which are not under our direct control may decisively shape the concepts philosophers use, the intuitions we feel compelled to honour, the swift arguments that take us from trite premises to earth-shaking conclusions (with—remarkably—few compelling steps) and the claims we confidently maintain as well as the problems thus raised and the theories proposed to solve these problems. In the second part of the book (chapters 4–6), we turned from intuitive reasoning to the deliberate and careful construction of philosophical arguments, and found that such arguments too may be shaped—and vitiated—by unsound non-intentional reasoning. We discovered that influential philosophical doctrines which are ‘supported’ by a familiar stock of carefully constructed arguments and which raise central philosophical problems have been maintained as a matter of delusion. Indeed, we found that the autonomous thought processes we have analysed systematically engender such philosophical delusions, whose clash with reality or among each other systematically gives rise to philosophical problems. We have thus established the need for therapy in philosophy, to liberate us from philosophical delusions and the bogus problems they have us imagine.

In this final part of the book, we will get clearer on the relevance of these findings, will try to gauge the extent of the need for such therapeutic philosophy, and will explore extant and fresh methods to put it into practice. In this chapter, we will see that the struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring is characteristic of philosophical work (Section 1) and still central to our subject today (Section 2). This warrants a twofold re-orientation of philosophical work: first, the ‘meta-philosophical turn’ which provides us with a fresh approach to philosophical problems belonging to that off-spring (Section 3) and, second, the ‘therapeutic turn’ which has us adopt new guiding aims for philosophical work (Section 4). Ideas borrowed from cognitive approaches in clinical psychology will finally let us see that these two ‘turns’ complement each other: The therapeutic aim is to put an end to the unwarranted toil and worry engendered by philosophical pictures and delusions. We can attain it by acquiring ‘meta-cognitive insight’ into the ways we think when doing philosophy: by coming to understand how philosophical reflection is shaped at several levels by philosophical pictures and, more generally, by autonomous cognitive processes which are unsound (Section 5). The kind of meta-philosophical analysis we have engaged in vindicates the project of therapeutic philosophy and provides the key to its successful practice. We will thus win through to a first therapeutic strategy (Section 6) and to a fresh vision of philosophy: the vision of philosophy as a therapeutic practice guided by the findings of a scientifically informed meta-philosophy, in something like the way in which the practice of cognitive psychotherapy is guided by the findings of clinical psychology.

Finally we will turn to extant paradigms of such therapeutic philosophy, due to J.L. Austin and Ludwig Wittgenstein. Their analysis will not only provide the vision with a pedigree but also lend it further substance: We will see that both thinkers took the two complementary turns we have vindicated. They adopted therapeutic aims and sought to attain them by coming to understand how philosophical doctrines and problems are shaped by autonomous thought processes of which we are largely unaware. Austin seeks to make us aware of ‘concealed motives’ for maintaining the sense-datum doctrine of perception. The analysis of the motives he exposes will lead us to identify a second autonomous cognitive process that is particularly likely to occur in philosophical reflection and may complement the pictorial process we have made out (Chapter 8). Wittgenstein seeks to grow aware of ‘urges to misunderstand’ which lead him to worry about problems that are bad by his own lights, and employs a subtle method of self-therapy that anticipates some guiding ideas of later cognitive therapy (Chapter 9). The analysis of his proceeding will provide us with a model of cognitive self-therapy that can guide us the moment we turn from the works of great dead men to our own philosophical worries, and try to apply the lessons we have learned by studying those works in efforts to dissolve and overcome the philosophical problems that worry us today.





1. DISTINCTIVELY PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS




The caricature of the development of our subject that we employed already in the Introduction can help us bring out the philosophical relevance of our main findings so far. It is not entirely wrong to see philosophy in its present form as the result of a process through which scientific disciplines have emerged from within the community of thinkers called ‘philosophers’. It is also not entirely wrong to regard this community as initially having been made up of all thinkers engaged in intellectual pursuits that are neither immediately directed at any practical, social or political goal nor entirely devoid of intellectual rigour. To the extent to which a range of notions and concepts, methods and techniques for formulating and addressing problems of a particular kind came to be developed and generally accepted by a certain number of such thinkers, communities of specialists emerged, and with many new intellectual communities new disciplines were born (from geometry as philosophy’s arguably first, to psychology and linguistics as its latest off-spring), so that the new methods and techniques left philosophy along with their users.

Accordingly, much (though certainly not all) of the work commonly classified as philosophical is ‘purely theoretical’ and largely ‘speculative’: It is not geared towards any practical goals and does not follow or employ any well-developed body of methods or techniques for formulating and addressing pertinent problems. To the extent to which we lack explicit methods or techniques we can deliberately use to guide our reflection, we will be particularly prone to unwittingly fall back on various kinds of non-intentional reasoning. If we also lack practical goals which would relate our efforts to sufficiently rich contexts, we are particularly prone to engage in non-intentional analogical reasoning with its characteristic mistakes. In much of the work commonly classified as ‘philosophical’, therefore, conditions obtain which favour the intellectual altitude sickness we have made out, viz. adherence to philosophical pictures, and thus facilitate the generation of absurd paradoxical beliefs which we cannot help presupposing in further such reasoning. The formation of such delusions in philosophy is no accident but due to characteristics that can be traced back to distinctive features of the subject.

There is no reason to believe that the process of the emergence of new disciplines has left philosophy now (or at any earlier point in time) with one homogeneous class of problems, all of one and the same kind. Arguably, we may encounter problems of very different kinds when joining philosophical debates. All the same, the conflict of paradoxical, and often delusional, claims with common-sense convictions, or among each other, generates problems of a characteristic kind, which are distinctively philosophical in character. We have analysed in detail how picture-raised paradoxes systematically give rise to philosophical problems (Chapters 2.3, 3.4 and 5.4). The problems thus raised include the core problems of the modern philosophies of mind and perception, respectively, and many problems whose roots in paradox have hitherto escaped notice. These paradoxes and the problems they engender can claim to be seminal and distinctive for philosophy: As we shall now see, they provide a distinctive pre-scientific (and self-reinforcing) motivation for engaging in philosophical reflection at all (and persisting with it), and are commonly not claimed as their business by new disciplines which emerge from philosophy and deal with the topic the problem or paradox is about.

There tends to be an apparent ‘tension’ between the conclusions we leap to in the grip of philosophical pictures and common-sense convictions and perfectly familiar facts: Together with the latter, those conclusions— delusions and consequences inferred from them—appear to entail a contradiction or to have otherwise unacceptable implications. To those in the grip of the pertinent pictures, who do not question the picture-motivated conclusions, it will therefore seem that the common-sense convictions just cannot be true and that the familiar facts simply cannot obtain. Without necessarily being able to spell out the tension, they then wonder how what is plainly the case is as much as possible. In each of the three problem-clusters we considered, the first problems (that engendered others) were of this kind.

In the grip of the part-whole picture of qualities, thinkers inferred from the delusional idea that qualities must exist somewhere in the bodies to which they belong that colours and tastes, smells and warmth do not really inhere in physical bodies (Chapter 3.2). This conclusion appears to fly in the face of the most obvious and familiar facts, confronting thinkers with a conflict they cannot gloss over through sublimation: Just move about without closing your eyes and holding your nose or ears, and you come across a myriad of things that look red or white, are silver or gold, feel warm or are cold, smell sweet or sound loud. So how is this possible? That is (Chapter 3.4): Where are the colours we see and the heat we feel, if they do not really inhere in the bodies that make up our physical environment? And how can we attribute them to such bodies?

Similarly, in the grip of perceptual pictures we form and maintain the— delusional—belief that to think about or remember something or feel a pain is to perceive something somewhere in us, and infer that thoughts, memory images and pains must exist somewhere in us, for us to see or feel or otherwise have them (Chapters 1.3 and 2.1–2.3). So where are, say, the memory images we call up every day? They are not in our physical environment, surely not in our bodies either (competing for space with lumps of grey matter), and we do not countenance the idea of some ethereal realm (and how could we look into that, even if it existed?). So how is it possible for me to see the memory image I now call up—or to feel pains (which do not compete for space with any part of our body, either)?

Some such problems have intuitively compelling solutions which engender, in turn, problems of the same kind. Take the idea—which at any rate Berkeley (arguably along with Galileo, Boyle and Locke) maintains as a matter of delusion (Chapters 4–5)—that the colours we see and the heat we feel, the sounds we hear, the odours we smell and the tastes we enjoy all exist—only—in our minds: They are sensations or perceptions in us; and such ‘inner’ and private entities are all we can ever perceive directly or immediately (chapters 4.1–4.2). But, surely, the table I see and feel when I sit at it and the beef stew I smell and taste as I bite into chunks of meat are perfectly public and physical objects and stuffs. Hence the question (Chapter 5.4): How is it possible for me to see, feel, smell and taste such real things?

In all these cases, a philosophical claim we find intuitively compelling appears to imply that a certain familiar fact cannot obtain: that it cannot be the case that p (that physical things cannot really be coloured in the way we ordinarily judge them to be, that we cannot have the memory images or pains we clearly enjoy or suffer, or that we cannot perceive by sense the things in our physical environment). When we are unable or unwilling to give up either our conviction that p or our philosophical claim, we are disquieted by the apparent inconsistency in our beliefs. We may then think of specific examples: that the coin I now look at is silver, that I can still see grandmother’s Christmas tree ‘before my inner eye’, or that I see and smell the lunch on my plate. The moment we forcefully remind ourselves in this—or any other—way that it plainly is a fact that p, disquiet may give way to a characteristic sense of wonder: On the one hand, we find the fact peculiarly remarkable (and marvel, e.g., at the fact that I now have a memory image ‘before my inner eye’); on the other hand, we are puzzled how what is plainly the case is as much as possible, and ask: ‘How is it (possible) that . . . ?’1

According to Plato, such a sense of wonder in the face of familiar facts is the initial motivation for engaging in philosophical reflection.2 It certainly constitutes a distinctive motivation, different from that of exemplary scientific (or proto-scientific) explanations of familiar facts: Efforts to explain, e.g., why apples fall from trees are not motivated by lines of thought which suggest that apples cannot fall from trees. Rather, we observe that some things (including apples) fall straight to the ground when nothing supports them, whereas others (like pollen) do not, and want to know ‘how it is’ that apples fall (and pollen does not)—though it may take a man of genius not to remain content with the platitudinous answer that apples fall straight because they are heavy (and pollen does not because they are light). Even when they lead us to ask questions using the same form of words, we can hence distinguish scientific curiosity about why things happen the way they do from a characteristic sense of wonder in the face of the mere fact that certain things happen or are the way they are (that I have this memory image, etc.), a sense of wonder fuelled by the impression of a tension between these facts and intuitive insights. This sense of wonder and the disquieting impression that fuels it constitute a distinctively philosophical motivation for asking questions of the ‘How is it that . . . ?’-variety. Since few academic philosophers today share Plato’s sense of wonder, let’s focus on the underlying impression of a tension, which we shall presently see drives crucial philosophical efforts to the present day. Let’s call it the ‘proto-Platonic motivation’.

Due to the phenomena we have examined in this book, this motivation arises systematically and is self-reinforcing: In purely theoretical and largely speculative reflection, human thinkers are prone to unwittingly lapse into non-intentional analogical reasoning. Such reasoning systematically takes us to paradoxical conclusions we are unaware of inferring but find intuitively compelling. They are at odds with familiar facts which thus appear impossible or somehow problematic. This impression and the potentially resulting sense of wonder in the face of what we full well know to be the case constitute a powerful motivation for engaging in more deliberate reflection about familiar facts. This pre-scientific motivation for intellectual endeavours may drive us also when we are otherwise content with platitudinous answers to the question of why familiar things are the way they are or happen the way they do (‘Apples fall because they are heavy’). It has thinkers engage in further reflection which is purely theoretical and largely speculative and thus favours more non-intentional reasoning, generating further paradoxical intuitions. These produce further tensions, with other intuitions, facts and common sense, and ever more specific challenges to the consistency of thinkers’ beliefs. Processes of non-intentional reasoning thus provide us with a distinctive pre-scientific and self-reinforcing motivation for intellectual efforts, stirred by these challenges and aimed at defusing the tensions in our beliefs.

These efforts are more commonly made by philosophers than scientists. To understand why, let’s return to our caricature of philosophy’s development (at the beginning of this section): We can think of the philosophical community as a mixed bunch, comprising thinkers with different motivations, including the scientific and proto-Platonic motivations we considered. At various points in history, thinkers with primarily scientific motivations develop new concepts and methods and apply them to frame and address specific problems of a sort of particular interest to them. To the extent to which they deliberately employ their increasingly refined new methods and to the extent to which they relate theoretical problems to specific cases and ever more contexts of application, they are less than before subject to conditions favouring non-intentional analogical reasoning. Accordingly, these practitioners of an emerging new discipline will be less prone to lapse into such reasoning than the remaining members of the community they are leaving. Also, thinkers with a primarily scientific motivation accord less importance to what intuitions they do have: Those who first and foremost want to find out how things are and why they are so, or what happens and why it does, will at some point simply give up even the most intuitive idea if it is inconsistent with important facts and findings, without feeling the need to make further efforts to ‘explain it away’, let alone to show that it is, after all, compatible with the facts and findings with which it appears to be odds. Briefly: The more a scientific discipline emerging from philosophy goes on to mature in its methods and application, its practitioners will become less prone to picture-motivated intuitions and less willing to address reconciliation- or accommodation-problems raised by what intuitions of this sort they might still have. In this sense, these problems are distinctively philosophical in character.

To sum up, philosophical pictures systematically engender distinctively philosophical problems which provide a distinctive pre-scientific—and self-reinforcing—motivation for intellectual efforts. In this book, we have analysed efforts made in early modern times and in pre-war analytic philosophy. Let’s now have at least a brief look at more recent work from postwar analytic philosophy, to see whether it is reasonable to hypothesise that the struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring is an enterprise which continues to the present day.





2. THE ONGOING STRUGGLE WITH PICTURES: FUNCTIONALISM




The peculiar pre-scientific motivation we have identified is not incompatible with but is independent of scientific curiosity: A researcher may be moved by both but can have one motivation without the other. Few philosophers explicitly state the motivation of their work. But we can frequently infer what moves a thinker to address a ‘How is it that . . . ?’-question or related problems, namely from the kind of efforts he makes in response. While few modern academic philosophers share much of Plato’s sense of wonder, we can infer that much philosophical theorising to this day addresses the underlying impression of a tension and is primarily or even exclusively motivated by the desire to restore consistency to the theorists’ beliefs, in the face of specific intuitive challenges. This proto-Platonic motivation usually takes the shape of wanting to integrate the pertinent philosophical intuitions (which thinkers often cleave to tenaciously) into one’s further convictions (which get modified more readily), in view of disquieting tensions apparent between them. Occasionally it leads to efforts to explain away those intuitions. (Scientific theories explain things, philosophical theories explain things away. They explain away either certain intuitions or common-sense convictions or the impression of a tension between them.)

Whether the proto-Platonic eclipses the scientific motivation can be inferred from the extent to which the theory gets developed. Scientists build theories on or around theoretical assumptions, try to accommodate various empirical observations and experimental findings, and often find it quite puzzling how all of them fit together. Precisely because their paramount aim is to explain why certain things happen or are the way they are, however, scientists do not merely puzzle about how their theoretical assumptions can be rendered consistent with the known facts but make sustained efforts to develop those assumptions to a point where they can be employed to derive predictive and explanatory hypotheses, and to derive and test these hypotheses. To the extent to which thinkers are driven only by the proto-Platonic motivation, by contrast, they will remain content with either explaining away problematic intuitions or arguing that they are consistent with each other and with familiar facts and ways of speaking; that is, they will develop their theory no further than necessary to render plausible either the rejection of certain intuitions or the assumption that they are consistent with the rest.

This is exactly what we find in the case of many philosophical theories (including those we have examined in this book): Frequently they are developed no further than their proponents think necessary to render plausible the assumption that the pertinent facts and intuitions are consistent (or, alternatively, the rejection of intuitions which are inconsistent with the rest); in particular, nothing further is done to show that the theories are actually correct. Where this happens, we can either condemn philosophers as slackers who fail to do a proper job—or follow up an intriguing hypothesis: Regardless of the self-image they explicitly maintain, many philosophers are perhaps less interested in finding out how things actually are (or why they are so) than in doing exactly what they are doing; arguably, they primarily seek to restore consistency to their beliefs, in view of disquieting tensions apparent between them. In other words: Where philosophical theories persistently remain underdeveloped, it is plausible to infer that their proponents have the proto-Platonic motivation and that this motivation is so dominant that the thinkers lose interest in the development of the theory the moment this motivation has been met to their satisfaction.

As a case in point, consider analytic functionalism, a major version of the currently dominant philosophical theory of the mind. With slight simplification, we can say that this theory is built around two apparently incompatible intuitions and owes its persuasive force largely to the impression that it reconciles them with each other and with the materialist world-view. The first intuition already motivated J.J.C. Smart’s move from behaviourism to the psycho-physical identity theory (objections to which gave rise to analytic functionalism):

[I]t does seem to me as though, when a person says ‘I have an afterimage’, he is making a genuine report, and that when he says ‘I have a pain’, he is doing more than ‘replace pain-behaviour’, and that ‘this more’ is not just to say that he is in distress.3





This paraphrases a time-honoured philosophical intuition about sensations and occurrent ‘mental states’ as one about their verbal expressions: A ‘genuine report’ is one that reports what we actually perceive, and the intuition is that



(I1) When we have an after-image, pain or thought, we perceive something, namely somewhere in us (cp. conclusion C1 in Chapter 1.3).



Since our materialist world-view does not leave any space for nonphysical correlates of brain events, we would then like to think—like Smart—that the after-images, pains, etc. are events in our brains. This conclusion, however, appears to be inconsistent with various conceptual facts (like T2 in chapter 1.3) and linguistic intuitions which reflect them: We attribute sensations like pain to many different kinds of creatures, with radically different brains, in which we cannot reasonably assume the same events to go on when those creatures have pain. Indeed, an influential thought-experiment made popular by Hillary Putnam4 reveals even on its most cautious analysis that



(I2) We are prepared to attribute pains, thoughts, beliefs and other mental states to alien creatures which we suppose to be physically rather different from us (and, in particular, to have so completely different brains that they cannot be in the same brain-states as us).

Analytic functionalism accommodates intuitions I1 and I2 by suggesting that when we credit people (or animals) with a pain, thought, belief, etc., we refer to an inner state (presumably a brain state), which we characterise, however, purely in terms of its ‘functional’ or causal relations:



(AF) That someone is in a certain mental state (pain, belief, etc.) is to say that he is in a state which, given various other mental states, is caused by certain sensory or environmental input and which, together with various other mental states, causes certain behaviour.



In different kinds of organisms, with different kinds of brains, different physical states may stand in the requisite relations and ‘realize’ the same, say, pain-state. When we feel a pain, we are aware of a state literally ‘in’ us (a state of a part of our brain), and when the Martian feels a pain he feels a state literally ‘in’ him, but there need be no physiological similarity whatsoever between human and Martian brains.

At the heart of this theory is the claim (AF) about the meaning of our ordinary mental terms. The proof of this pudding lies in the eating: To show that the claim is true, we need to actually spell out analyses of particular mental terms, which define them by reference to the causal relations of the mental states at issue. In 1972 David Lewis proposed a method for constructing such definitions of mental kinds, which soon became—and still is—accepted as ‘canonical’:5 We have to assemble the sort of generalisations about causes and effects of mental states that common sense accepts as platitudinous, and thus spell out a ‘folk theory’ of the mind. Then we have to conjoin all these generalisations, replace all mental terms (“belief”, “desire”, “pain”, etc.) in them with variables and bind these with existential quantifiers. The result is a very long sentence which constitutes an implicit definition of all our mental terms (i.e., of the ‘theoretical terms’ of our folk theory). To show that analytic functionalism is correct, we need to construct such a definition and show it consistent with the linguistic intuitions of competent speakers about how to describe particular cases. Once philosophers have obtained valid definitions, neuroscientists can ascertain whether states of our brain stand in the right causal relations to ‘realize’ the mental states we ordinarily attribute to each other. If they do, the existence of beliefs and their ilk has been shown compatible with our materialist world-view.

Even though issues of the greatest philosophical importance thus hang on it, none of this work—none of it, not even a preparatory compilation of potentially pertinent generalisations about selected mental states—has been done even today, more than thirty-five years after Lewis proposed the ‘canonical’ method. Whereas cognitive linguists started to compile substantive metaphor databases to facilitate further work on conceptual metaphors, within a few years of that research programme’s inception, there are still no databases of folk-theoretical generalisations of the sort analytic functionalism takes us to employ every day. Since these generalisations are regarded as parts of implicit definitions of our ordinary mental terms, whose use we master, and since most analytic philosophers have regarded such conceptual analysis as a central part of their brief, this is highly remarkable. (The popular idea that the functional characterisation of one mental state has to refer to all others—and is therefore too daunting an enterprise to even attempt—is obviously false, and should equally obviously lead those who even so regard it as true to abandon analytic functionalism as an unfeasible research programme; it is clearly more of an excuse than an explanation for this curious inaction.)

In fact, this replicates the attitude of the previous generation of philosophers to the then dominant theory of the mind. Logical behaviourism addressed the intuitively compelling ideas we obtain by sublimating picture-driven intuitions—like I1—to the effect that having sensations, thoughts, beliefs, etc. involves perceiving something immaterial, in a nonphysical space (cp. C2 in Chapter 1.3). It did not seek to accommodate these intuitions but to explain them away, to show that the so-called ‘mental phenomena’ are or involve nothing above and beyond such physical phenomena as a materialist world-view can recognise. To this end, logical behaviourists proposed analyses of the meaning of our mental vocabulary, according to which attributions of mental states boil down to attributions of behavioural dispositions. The most defensible analysis maintains that when we say, e.g., that a subject has a headache, we are saying how he would behave under various circumstances (if offered an aspirin, if subjected to loud music, etc.). Indefinitely many counter-factual conditionals are true of a subject in a particular mental state, and it is not possible to give a comprehensive list of them. But this need not prevent one from defending the proposed analysis of meaning by actually spelling out at least a few dozen such conditionals each, for at least a few dozen sensations, beliefs, desires, etc., and showing that competent speakers are willing to countenance their attribution to a subject just in case various such (counter-factual) conditionals are true of him. But during the thirty (!) years in which this theory of the mind was dominant in analytic philosophy, no theorist made any sustained effort to produce such model analyses. Like the analytical functionalists who followed them, logical behaviourists remained throughout content with avowedly simplistic examples merely meant to ‘convey the rough idea’.

Not only philosophers of mind remain forever content with rough outlines and mere projects. Consider philosophers of language who appeared to pursue a straightforwardly explanatory programme: who tried to explain speakers’ competence with new sentences they have never encountered before by hypothesising that they have ‘tacit knowledge’ of a compositional theory of meaning for their language.6 Such ‘knowledge’ is to be attributed to speakers just in case a successful causal-explanatory account of the psychological or neurological processes involved in the exercise of their linguistic competence has a structure that ‘mirrors’ the structure of the theory of meaning at issue. Philosophy’s contribution to this explanatory endeavour was to consist in the construction of suitable compositional theories of meaning. None of the philosophers who thus explained ‘how the theory of meaning can be a philosophical project’ went on to actually execute this project and develop a compositional semantic theory, say, for their mother tongue or any significant part of it.7 This attitude is strikingly different from that of researchers in artificial intelligence like, say, Terry Winograd, who actually provided workable language comprehension pro-grammes for well-defined parts of our language, in little over ten years of their research programme’s inception.8

At least to some extent, this difference is arguably due to a difference in guiding interests and underlying motivation. To return to analytic functionalism, its proponents have been anything but idle. But instead of doing what on their account needs to be done to prove that their theory is actually correct, they made sustained efforts to reconcile the theory with various powerful philosophical intuitions that appear to be incompatible with it. One is the intuition that we can ‘introspect’ at least our occurrent mental states (sensations, thoughts, etc.), at least in the sense that we can recognise them ‘directly’, without engaging in any inference (say, working out their causal relations). Another intuition has it that experiential states (like sensations, perceptions and emotions) are at least partially defined or individuated by the way it is like to have them: At least part of what makes an inner state a pain is what it feels to be in it, not that it is caused by injuries and causes moaning; an inner state might well have these (or various other) causes and effects without feeling the way it does and being a pain. Attempts to accommodate these and further intuitions have spawned an extensive literature.9

To sum up: The development of the major theories that have dominated analytic philosophy of mind for thirty and forty years respectively, logical behaviourism and analytic functionalism, consists largely in attempts to either explain away or accommodate philosophical intuitions which appear to be incompatible with each other or a certain world-view or familiar facts. It has not included sustained efforts to show that the theories are actually correct, even where generally accepted methods for doing so were available. It seems reasonable to infer that these theories’ proponents primarily tried, in different ways, to restore consistency to their beliefs, in the face of specific challenges posed by powerful intuitions—crucially including intuitions (like I1 above) that have been engendered by the perceptual pictures we have identified.

The only way to rigorously determine whether thinkers actually are in the grip of philosophical pictures and address problems raised only through picture-motivated reasoning is to conduct case-studies of the kind presented in previous chapters. In their course, we established not only that four lastingly influential early modern thinkers were in the grip of philosophical pictures and addressed problems raised in that grip. We also encountered prima facie evidence for adherence to pictures on a rather large scale: Thinkers are likely to adhere to philosophical pictures wherever their reflections are couched in terms introduced as the result of picture-motivated leaps (Chapter 2.5). We have found this to be the case for the key terms of the terminologies of “substances” and “accidents” (Chapter 3.1), “minds” and “ideas” (Chapter 1.3), and “perceptions” and “sense-data” (Chapter 3.5, cp. 8.2). These three terminologies pre-structure practically all Scholastic and 17th-century metaphysics, practically all early modern philosophy of mind, and modern philosophy of perception until the mid-20th century, respectively. While considerably loftier, the present considerations render it reasonable to engage in similar case-studies on yet more recent and current philosophical work, and to follow up the working hypothesis that, through the ages and to the present day, many, and many consequential, efforts in philosophy have been motivated by the struggle with philosophical pictures and the problems they engender; arguably, this struggle is both distinctive of, and (still) central to philosophy.

Some members of the philosophical community are driven by scientific motivations and engage in endeavours which sometimes develop into new autonomous disciplines. We can distinguish these ‘proto-scientific’ from more distinctively philosophical endeavours which have a distinctive pre-or non-scientific motivation and address problems that remain within the purview of the subject, no matter what new sciences emerge from it and take accretions to that core with them. For better or worse, such endeavours can be said to constitute the essence of philosophy. We have seen (in Section 1) that the struggle with picture-raised problems is of this kind and found reason to suspect that it plays a central role to this day. If that is so, it constitutes the essence of at any rate a part of philosophy. Our heterogeneous subject may include more than one class of such endeavours. The now common distinction between ‘theoretical philosophy’ (those areas of philosophy that cluster around epistemology and metaphysics, and the philosophies of mind and language) and ‘practical philosophy’ (comprising ethics, moral and political philosophy, as well as aesthetics) may imperfectly reflect the existence of two such classes: the concern with such normative questions as how we should lead our lives, treat each other and organise our communities, and the concern with problems of the distinctive kind we have considered here. The struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring may well constitute the essence of theoretical philosophy.

In view of the normative or exhortatory ring with which statements about the ‘nature’ or ‘essence’ of philosophy are frequently endorsed, it may bear stating that we are now advancing an empirical hypothesis about the problems addressed by philosophers and the motivation with which they address them, as evident from the efforts they make in response. This hypothesis allows us to understand how philosophy can be a distinctive and in some ways autonomous intellectual enterprise without having what it manifestly lacks, namely a subject-area of its own or some generally accepted body of method to set it apart. More importantly, this hypothesis is open to empirical confirmation and disconfirmation, namely through further case-studies of the kind we have undertaken. If it is confirmed, we will see that, as a brute matter of fact, theoretical philosophy as we know it is essentially a struggle with philosophical pictures.





3. THE META-PHILOSOPHICAL TURN




Whether or not this sweeping claim will be borne out, picture-raised problems certainly form an extensive and important class of philosophical problems. The struggle with them commonly takes the form of the construction of philosophical theories. The first responses to the conflicts between picture- motivated ideas and familiar facts are often spontaneous rather than deliberate: Thinkers spontaneously offer sublimating glosses which paper them over. The moment spontaneous reinterpretation can no longer gloss over these conflicts and they become salient, however, philosophers formulate paradoxes or reconciliation problems and construct theories to resolve the underlying tensions in their beliefs. These theories are typically developed in the grip of the same philosophical pictures that led to the problems they are meant to solve; that is, these theories tend to be developed under the spell of the very pictures that led thinkers to adopt the intuitively compelling claims that appear to be at odds with familiar facts and ways of speaking and thus raise the problems at issue. These theories are ill-founded to the extent to which they are built on these typically absurd and frequently delusional claims, pointless to the extent to which they are meant to solve problems which are generated only by such claims, and pernicious both to the extent to which they lead to further absurd claims which raise further ill-motivated problems, and to the extent to which they lull sincere thinkers into confidently maintaining those absurdities. These points were illustrated most forcefully by Berkeley’s swift ascent from a delusional doctrine of perception to an absurd metaphysical system which promised to reconcile that doctrine with common sense and, to this end, reduced the entire world to ideas and minds to house them (Chapters 4–5). While this particular system remained unpopular and did not migrate into men’s minds, it nicely illustrates that at any rate the philosophical theories devised in the grip of philosophical pictures, in response to picture-raised problems, ‘are but so many stage-plays, representing worlds of their own creation’ (to borrow words from Bacon).10

We have developed an arguably more reasonable and fruitful approach to the problems we raise in the grip of philosophical pictures: the approach of diagnostic analysis guided by novel meta-philosophical findings and theories (first outlined in Chapters 2.4–2.5). This new approach implies a radical reorientation of philosophical work. We now need to ascend from the detail to the big picture implied, from the trees we have studied to the wood we may otherwise miss for them.

The approach builds on two basic insights: Many philosophical questions are motivated by the impression of some sort of difficulty, often about familiar facts. Frequently, such impressions are due to picture-driven reasoning which is unsound by the proponent’s own lights, and the difficulty is illusory. Where this is the case, we can resolve the problem our question poses, by reconstructing the pertinent reasoning and showing that it is unsound: Where this reasoning is fallacious root-and-branch, we thus come to see that we have no right to believe there is such a difficulty as we imagined, that our problem is illusory. In response to such a problem, we accordingly ask, first, for the philosophical motivation for formulating it and, second, about the cognitive processes that systematically have us go wrong in philosophical reflection, and which may have misled us in formulating the question at issue:





Why do we ask this question, formulate this problem?

What cognitive processes systematically have us go wrong (i) in philosophical reflection in general and (ii) on that topic, in particular?





In many cases, pursuit of these two questions will allow us to elicit, develop and refute what philosophical motivation we had for raising the problem. We thus come to resolve philosophical problems by turning to meta-philosophical questions about how philosophers reason about the topic at issue and came to conceive of those problems and questions about it. This turn from the topic the philosophical question is about to the meta-philosophical question of how philosophers reason about that topic and came to ask that question represents a radical reorientation of philosophical work. Let us call it the ‘meta-philosophical turn’.

This turn represents as fundamental a reorientation of philosophical work as the ‘linguistic turn’ of early analytic philosophy, where—speaking very roughly indeed—philosophers sought to resolve philosophical problems by turning their attention from the matters of non-linguistic fact these problems appeared to be about, to questions about the meaning of the linguistic terms used to talk about those matters. The ultimate motivation of our new turn is the same: We turn away from the same issues of perennial philosophical disagreement, fired by the same hope of replacing manifestly unproductive by potentially more helpful questions. But we turn to an entirely new set of questions. (In their pursuit, however, we may also find ‘linguistic’ questions highly relevant: Wherever we seek to expose biased interpretations of linguistic expressions, the proper analysis of their actual meaning and established use is essential—e.g. when we reconstruct the third stage of the pictorial process, or other relevant processes like those we will consider in the next chapter.)

At first glance, the meta-philosophical turn may appear outright mad. After all, no historian will arrive at a correct answer to a historical question by examining his own motivation for pursuing it. This may make him aware of blinkers, ideological and other, which obstruct his quest for an answer, but will not by itself provide that answer. Nor will a physicist succeed in explaining any phenomenon by getting clear on what got him interested in it. And while both may benefit from an account of vicious cognitive processes shaping their reflections, this may help them to spot mistakes they have made in the past and avoid similar mistakes in the future, but will not by itself lead them to an answer to their questions about, say, the financial situation of the Prussian crown at the height of the Seven Years’ War or the conductivity of metals at low temperatures. So why should a philosopher be able to resolve the problems that worry him by examining his motivation for asking his questions and the cognitive processes that drive his reflections?

The answer is of course provided by old insights we have rediscovered and new findings we have made, about the genesis of (many) philosophical problems and the nature of (much) philosophical reflection: To put it in the language of Bacon and Berkeley, we have re-discovered that some of the difficulties which have worried philosophers are entirely of our own making, that under the spell of various idols we first raise ‘a dust, and then complain, we cannot see.’11 We have examined philosophical problems which are particularly central to and distinctive of the subject, and found that they are not raised by matters of fact but are generated only by unsound reasoning issuing in philosophical paradoxes. Therefore, they are to be resolved not by acquiring new knowledge about the topic at hand but by insight into their nature and genesis: by showing that they are generated only by certain paradoxical lines of thought, that these lines of thought are unsound by the proponent’s own lights, and that he has no right to maintain the conclusions that raise the problems. In many cases, the key to the resolution of a philosophical problem is a proper understanding of its nature and genesis.

This is illustrated by our first chapters’ treatment of the ontological mind-body problem in its seminal form (see, in particular, Chapter 2.3). We found that the struggle with a set of perceptual pictures has us introduce the ‘mind’ as an inner space of perception, conceive of this space as a nonphysical and private realm, interpret talk of thoughts and beliefs, memories and sensations as referring to things perceived in some such realm, and in this way has us wonder where in the world these things exist. We saw that we do not solve this problem by acquiring new knowledge about our thoughts and beliefs, memories and sensations, say knowledge about how and where these things are ‘perceived’ (or ‘realised’). Rather, we saw that we can dissolve the problem by becoming aware of the lines of thought that, in philosophical reflection, led us to imagine that these things have to be somewhere when we have them, by exposing in these lines of thought the moves that are unsound by our own lights, and by becoming aware of our propensity to unwittingly make such moves, against better knowledge. In the next chapter, we will develop an analogous treatment of problems raised by the sense-datum doctrine of perception. We can dissolve such problems through systematic diagnostic analysis, a new kind of historical, plain method: by retracing the steps that led us to formulate the problem, and exposing the fallacies they contain.

We have found that the first and most decisive of these steps are not made in deliberate reasoning and explicit philosophical argument, which often simply presuppose the most consequential ideas from the very start. The most fundamental of these ideas tend to be maintained without any argument whatsoever. Others get presupposed more or less directly by the arguments (if any) that are subsequently constructed to support them. With still pardonable exaggeration we can say that all the most important moves and mistakes have already been made when the deliberate construction of explicit arguments gets underway. We hence need to focus less on these arguments than on what precedes them: on our non-intentional reasoning and the plethora of inferences we spontaneously make without realising that we are making any substantive step; we need to turn our attention to those intuitively compelling or ‘natural’ steps which appear too trivial to merit closer examination, let alone argumentative support.

The motor of most creative thinking in philosophy, as elsewhere, is analogical reasoning, non-intentional and deliberate, sound and unsound. (To be ‘creative’, thinking has to engender novel but not necessarily good ideas.) Accordingly, we found the deductive arguments we encountered to be the icing on cakes filled with conclusions of analogical reasoning, metaphorical and other. So it seems we should turn our attention from deductive argument and inductive inference (which plays a rather minor role in philosophy, anyway) to analogical reasoning (which philosophers have explored rather less well). To sum up, the turn, at the strategic level, from philosophical problems to meta-philosophical questions about their nature and genesis and about the ways in which philosophers think about the pertinent topics, this meta-philosophical turn promises to be productive if accompanied, at the tactical level, by shifts of attention from controlled to non-intentional reasoning, and from deductive and inductive to analogical inference.

These moves take us to the project of a cognitive epistemology of philosophy. An ‘epistemology of’ a given subject is a normatively relevant study of how its practitioners build up and maintain a body of real or supposed knowledge: Such study seeks to help them assess what right or reason they have for maintaining what they do, by identifying and evaluating some of the relevant processes and principles of belief-formation and justification. Such epistemological study can go significantly beyond the sort of careful scrutiny with which conscientious researchers in any subject retrace their steps every now and then. It can make a highly pertinent contribution, in particular, when it proceeds from an analysis of factors or processes that shape belief-formation and justification in a discipline but lie outside that discipline’s purview.

The cognitive epistemology of philosophy analyses how philosophical reflection is shaped by non-intentional reasoning and spontaneous (non-controlled) inferences, which we are hardly ever aware of but get to know about through psychological experiments. With a focus on non-intentional analogical reasoning and its pit-falls, we have analysed, in particular, how philosophical intuitions, claims, questions, problems, arguments and theories are shaped by experimentally documented cognitive distortions: recurrent (rather than one-off), systematic (rather than unrelated) and characteristic (rather than idiosyncratic) mistakes in non-intentional reasoning and spontaneous inference. Such analysis puts us into a position to reconstruct the steps of philosophical reasoning even where traditional forms of philosophical analysis have nothing to go on, for example, where thinkers maintain substantive claims in the complete absence of argument (like the claims that make up the classical conception of the mind) or on the basis of ‘arguments’ sporting huge gaps which cannot be filled by invoking only their stated views (like Galileo’s argument from conceivability).

The cognitive epistemology of philosophy is an empirical study undertaken for philosophical purposes: with the foremost aim not of formulating any laws of nature (psychology) but of exposing, understanding and correcting fallacies in philosophical reasoning. This can either help us to resolve philosophical problems or prevent us from falling into error when engaged in speculative theorising. The immediate fruits of such study are accounts or theories of how cognitive distortions shape philosophical reflection about a certain topic (like our account of how picture-driven intuitions shaped thinking about cognition and sensation and led to a new concept of ‘the mind’). These, in turn, facilitate the diagnostic analysis of various philosophical problems in the area, which resolves them by showing that they arise only through unsound reasoning (like our treatment of the seminal ontological mind-body problem, in Chapter 2.3). They also facilitate the critical analysis of speculative theorising in which we are particularly prone to fall prey to such distortions. This includes not only distinctively philosophical theorising devoted to the above-mentioned problems but also proto-scientific theorising (like Boyle’s account of the qualities of bodies, cp. Chapter 3.2). (Thus those who stand to gain from a cognitive epistemology of our subject also include those philosophical theorists who have a primarily scientific motivation.)

There are at least two complementary approaches to engaging in such philosophically rewarding empirical study: Experimental work of a kind already undertaken in cognitive psychology can establish the existence or occurrence of certain kinds of cognitive distortions, under conditions which obtain also in much philosophical reflection (see Chapter 1.2). To find out how these distortions shape actual philosophical reflection, however, we must turn to philosophical texts which record such reflection and its results, typically in the shape that thinkers’ sustained efforts and corrections gave them, leaving only those distortions that manifestly overpower them and are of lasting consequence.

In the first part of this book, we have developed a methodology which employs philosophical texts as empirical evidence, first, to identify occurrences of experimentally documented cognitive distortions in the author’s reasoning and, second, to reconstruct how these distortions shape—and vitiate—his claims, arguments, problems and theories. In the central part of this book, we have used this new methodology in a series of case-studies on Locke’s, Berkeley’s and Ayer’s work on sense-perception. Through such a series of case-studies on philosophical works about the same range of problems or topics, we can build up to a meta-philosophical theory about the non-intentional reasoning that raises those problems and the patterns of such reasoning that permeate much philosophical reflection about the given topic. Such theories provide a basis for the diagnostic resolution of the pertinent problems (and insight into errors one needs to guard against when engaging in speculative theorising about the topic).

This approach, the findings it is built on and the results it yields endow the study of the history of our subject with a new kind of philosophical relevance: Such study can facilitate the resolution of philosophical problems, not by extracting from old sources important philosophical insights about the topic at issue but by identifying pernicious cognitive processes that drive (and vitiate) philosophical reflection about it, which engenders those problems. These meta-philosophical insights we can then apply— everyone for himself—to the analysis of our own thinking about the same problems or their descendants. In particular where the problems that worry us have emerged from the philosophical tradition (as will most often be the case), we are then likely to find that our own thinking involves fallacies of the same kind that led already our predecessors to imagine difficulties where there are none.

Where philosophy boils down to a struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring, its primary motivation is so radically different from those of scientific inquiry that it is a mistake to even try to turn it into a science (Section 1). But the struggle can be guided by science: The resolution of the philosophical problems we raise in the grip of philosophical pictures can be based on a study of their nature and genesis which is scientifically informed, empirically grounded and suitably rigorous. The conception of philosophy as a struggle with philosophical pictures thus has us give up the age-old ambition of placing the discipline on the secure path of a science. But, at the same time, the project of a cognitive epistemology of philosophy allows us to realise a closely related ambition: the ambition to provide the philosophical struggle with sound guidance from a discipline that can aspire to proceed on that path and put an end to complaints engendered by dust we have kicked up ourselves.

The struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring is a distinctively philosophical enterprise (Section 1). To the extent to which it serves this enterprise, this new discipline of cognitive epistemology is distinctively philosophical in character. While building on concepts and findings from different branches of cognitive science, including cognitive linguistics and cognitive and social psychology, the cognitive epistemology of philosophy is not ‘just psychology’; it is a new way of doing philosophy that builds on old (meta-)philosophical insights and fresh scientific findings.





4. THE THERAPEUTIC TURN




The principal result of our first exercises in such cognitive epistemology is the identification of the complementary workings of different autonomous cognitive processes, namely non-intentional analogical reasoning and belief-bias effects, which together with spontaneous reinterpretation (sublimation) make up what we have called the ‘pictorial process’. This autonomous cognitive process has us systematically form and maintain paradoxical beliefs in the absence of warrant. Their clash with other beliefs gives rise to ill-motivated but disquieting ‘problems’ which we typically try to solve through pointless and ill-founded theories whose construction is driven by the same process that had us imagine the problems. These find-ings vindicate the adoption of radically new aims for philosophical work: the adoption of aims that are constitutive of therapy, in the strict, literal sense in which the term applies to exemplary psychotherapies.

Philosophers frequently think of therapy ‘in the usual sense’ as necessarily opposed to argument and assume that the use of non-argumentative methods must set therapeutic intervention apart from rational discourse.12 But this is not so. Even exemplary psychotherapies like cognitive therapy 13 and rational emotive therapy14 for depression crucially involve argument and the assessment of evidence (to establish, for instance, whether the depressed patient really is as utterly inept as he thinks). Therapy may proceed by argument; therapeutic dialogue may be a form of rational discourse. What sets cognitive and rational therapy apart from other forms of rational discourse are not the (merely supposedly non-argumentative) means employed, but the ends pursued and the problems addressed—which are, anyway, the only things that the very different forms of psychotherapy have in common. According to standard explanations of the terms, a procedure qualifies as ‘therapeutic’ to the extent to which it is designed to cure illness or relieve the symptoms of disease.15 Psychotherapies are designed to cure mental illness, that is, to remedy a lack of rational control over one’s feelings and actions which materialises as a series of emotional or behavioural problems, i.e. emotions and behaviours which are frequently conceptualised as ‘symptoms’ of mental disorders or diseases. According to a common clinical criterion, a subject qualifies as in need of therapy when he has significant emotional or behavioural problems.16 Conversely, psychotherapy is, quite simply, a treatment that primarily seeks to solve or ease such problems and prevent their future recurrence.

Therapeutic procedures may seek to achieve this aim by realising other, instrumental, goals. Cognitive therapy, for instance, seeks to achieve its aim by improving the subject’s self-understanding in various ways and acquiring shared insight into the cognitive and other psychological processes that shape his thoughts and feelings (see below). But what makes it qualify as a ‘therapy’ is that it subordinates these intellectual or cognitive goals to the guiding aim of solving emotional and behavioural problems and organises a variety of efforts towards achieving this primary aim.

The autonomous cognitive process we have identified gives rise to paradoxical beliefs which engender unwarranted feelings of disquiet and the pointless construction of ill-founded theories. Those beliefs frequently qualify as ‘delusions’ and the feelings and efforts they engender as ‘emotional’ and ‘behavioural problems’ (Chapter 6.6). While few philosophers have strong feelings of disquiet, behavioural problems are not uncommon. You recall:

A subject has behavioural problems to the extent to which his behaviour is unreasonable and fails to be autonomous.



A subject’s behaviour fails to be autonomous in case he does things he would not want to do if not in a certain disabling condition that is not under his direct control, and in case he refrains from doing things that he would want to do if not in such a condition.





We may have such a problem when we are under the spell of philosophical pictures (the presently relevant disabling condition), when picture-driven reasoning has us formulate ill-motivated problems and when we construct otherwise pointless philosophical theories that are to solve these ‘problems’. These philosophically pointless efforts constitute a behavioural problem if, and only if, we would not want to waste time and effort on attempts to solve the ‘problems’ at issue if we were not under the spell of the pertinent pictures and saw through the problems they have us imagine. Hence a career-minded academic philosopher who does not care whether the problems he works on are well- or ill-motivated, as long as work on them is fashionable and easily publishable, will not have a behavioural problem when working on picture-raised and ill-motivated problems: He would want to do the same work even if he was not under the spell of the pertinent pictures and fully realised how ill-motivated his philosophical problems are. Behavioural problems of this kind are the privilege of intellectually sincere thinkers.

When the philosophical problems we work on are raised only by the clash between delusions and other beliefs, or among each other, we imagine a problem where there is none—or, at any rate, where we have no right to believe there is one. As we have seen (in Section 1), philosophical questions are frequently motivated by the impression that there is some kind of difficulty or problem about familiar facts, and this impression is frequently created by, and only by, a paradoxical claim we find intuitively compelling when engaged in philosophical reflection: When we use our five senses, we immediately perceive only immaterial sense-data. So how is it possible for us to see houses and trees (Chapter 5) or to communicate by means of terms—like “house” and “tree”—which purport to refer to public material objects (Chapter 6)? Only mechanical properties really exist in physical bodies. So where are the colours we see, and how is it possible for us to describe such bodies as coloured (Chapter 3)? And so on and so forth. All these philosophical questions are motivated by absurd beliefs frequently maintained as a matter of delusion, and only these beliefs create the impression of the difficulty to be overcome.

These problems are as imaginary as the intellectual problem of a man who is in the grip of paranoid delusions and wonders how it is possible that his wife apparently fails to notice the spies who surround them. (Perhaps she is part of the plot?) But just as this imaginary problem causes the poor man emotional and behavioural problems which are very real—his behaviour towards his wife gets ever more hostile—the difficulties we merely imagine under the spell of philosophical pictures give rise to genuine emotional or behavioural problems. And just as the poor man’s emotional and behavioural problems are the only ‘paranoia-related’ problems that are real, the philosopher’s emotional or behavioural problems are the only ‘picture-related’ problems that really confront him. We have seen reason to suspect that an extensive and central part of theoretical philosophy is driven by a specifically philosophical motivation ultimately due to picture-driven reasoning (Section 1), that this central part of philosophy consists in a struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring, and addresses only ‘picture-related’ problems (Section 2). If this is correct, emotional and behavioural problems are the only problems we actually confront, and do not merely imagine, in a core part of our subject. In this part of our subject, the only problems we can reasonably try to solve are the emotional and behavioural problems constituted by unreasonable philosophical toil and worries.

If we do not wish to waste our lives on merely imaginary problems, we may respond to this conclusion in either of two ways. We can accept the specifically philosophical motivation we have identified (in Section 1) as the strongest force driving us, acknowledge the struggle with philosophical pictures and their off-spring as our main concern, and make it our main aim to put an end to the unwarranted intellectual disquiet and the pointless intellectual efforts thus engendered and, eventually, to cure the disease of the understanding that brings about those symptoms, i.e., to liberate ourselves from the spell of philosophical pictures. The adoption of this primary aim is constitutive of therapy. It amounts to a major reorientation of philosophical work. Let’s call it the therapeutic turn: To take the therapeutic turn is to explicitly adopt as primary aim of one’s philosophical work the aim of solving emotional or behavioural problems or of curing the diseases that cause them.

Alternatively, we can disown the specifically philosophical motivation we have identified, decide not to waste a thought on the very possibility of any familiar fact, not allow ourselves any Platonic marvelling but only scientific curiosity and turn from the familiar problems of philosophical tradition to topically related scientific questions. If we do not retrain in a different discipline but try to contribute through the kind of abstract theorising characteristic of philosophy, we will probably continue to be under the spell of philosophical pictures and remain prone to the cognitive distortions they engender. These will systematically hinder our efforts to contribute sound argument to the scientific debate we wish to join. To put ourselves into a position to make a worthwhile contribution, we hence first have to break or weaken the hold the pertinent pictures have on us. We have to cure in ourselves the intellectual altitude sickness we have identified. Even if we do not want to take the therapeutic turn, we need to make therapeutic efforts.

Up to now, we have adopted the perspective of the intellectual craftsman who seeks to contribute to the solution of some problems, who therefore turns either to emotional or behavioural problems or to scientific questions when he finds traditional philosophical problems to be ill-motivated, and who needs to make therapeutic efforts to contribute to problems or questions of either kind. But there is of course also a deeper, ethical, motivation for trying to cure diseases of the understanding from which we find we suffer: We aspire to being masters of ourselves. When we find that in pure reflection we are at the mercy of deeply entrenched habits of unsound inference rooted in autonomous cognitive processes, we may therefore wish to wrest from them control over our own thoughts, to weaken those ingrained habits and to modify those autonomous processes, in order to gain as much rational control over our beliefs and as much intellectual autonomy as possible—not only to increase our ability to attain further goals, intellectual or other, but also, quite simply, as an end in itself.

Our meta-philosophical findings thus vindicate a two-fold reorientation of philosophical work, at the level of approach and aims. The meta-philosophical turn leads us to a new approach to philosophical problems. The therapeutic turn has us adopt new aims for philosophical work. We now turn to a framework that allows us to harness the new approach to the new aims: Some guiding ideas from cognitive therapy will provide us with a helpful framework for the practice of therapeutic philosophy, the kind of therapy in philosophy which seeks, first and foremost, to solve emotional and behavioural problems that arise in and through philosophical reflection and to cure the diseases of the understanding that give rise to those problems.





5. A FRAMEWORK FOR THERAPEUTIC PHILOSOPHY




The disease of the understanding we face is adherence to philosophical pictures. It engenders unwarranted toil and worry by having us form delusional beliefs and ideas which clash with common sense or other convictions. Since they are supported by autonomous cognitive processes which are not under our direct control and are maintained as a matter of delusion, the mere identification and refutation of these beliefs is not going to make us shed them: Even if we do not continue to maintain them explicitly, we will be unable to stop them from creeping back into our reasoning, as tacit presuppositions. As long as this happens, tensions in our beliefs will persist and motivate philosophical efforts which we would reject as pointless if we were not in the grip of the pertinent delusions and the philosophical pictures that engender them. To overcome picture-raised philosophical problems and put an end to the toil and worry they engender, we have to do more than merely refute the pertinent beliefs.

To meet this at first sight daunting challenge we may borrow ideas from cognitive approaches in clinical psychology. Cognitive-behavioural therapies addressing delusions began to emerge about fifteen to twenty years ago and have proved quite effective.17 The main aim of cognitive-behavioural therapy for psychotic conditions is to reduce the emotional and behavioural distress due to delusional beliefs.18 Once formed, these beliefs permeate subjects’ thinking through (perfectly normal) belief-bias effects; biased interpretation of everyday situations in the light of delusional beliefs then systematically generates bogus evidence that appears to support them.19 (Hearing a car horn outside, the paranoid man leaps to the conclusion that ‘they have come to get me’ and flees in distress through the back door, apparently with fresh evidence of the ongoing conspiracy against him.) To put an end to such unreasonable worries and actions, therapists seek to break such ‘belief maintenance cycles’, i.e., seek to weaken the delusional beliefs and the propensity to interpret things in their light, ideally until the subject explicitly rejects the beliefs and no longer presupposes them in interpretation and reasoning. To weaken these beliefs and propensities, an approach of cognitive-behavioural therapy proceeds in four conceptually distinct but practically overlapping steps.20

(1) The therapist elicits and challenges what evidence the subject is able to adduce for the belief targeted. Most, if not all, of this evidence is constituted by biased interpretations of specific events (like the sounding of the car horn), namely interpretations in the light of the delusional belief at issue. The therapist explains how belief-bias effects commonly shape everybody’s interpretation of situations and helps the subject identify the beliefs that may have guided him in this way. Going through the evidence for these beliefs, the therapist then suggests, for each item of evidence offered, a more reasonable interpretation of the situation adverted to. The exercise is to make the subject wary of his spontaneous interpretations of events, to bring out that these interpretations owe more to his own beliefs than to any salient features of the situations in question and show that he has little or no warrant for the belief thus ‘supported’ (which may of course be true, for all that). 21

(2) Once this has prepared the subject for the suggestion that he holds the pertinent beliefs for another, other than rational motivation, the therapist seeks to identify such a motivation. According to some theories of paranoia, for example, delusional beliefs formed in this condition have a psychological function and serve to ‘defend against’ negative self-evaluations, that is, prevent the subject from being completely overwhelmed by feelings of inadequacy and insignificance (e.g. by making him feel the focus of many conspirators’ attention). 22 Thus the therapist seeks to explain to the patient how he may have come to form and maintain certain beliefs in the complete absence of warrant, due to a-rational psychological processes, cognitive and other, over which subjects have no direct control.23 Together, these first two steps provide the subject with a new, alternative framework for understanding his situation: He comes to understand that psychological processes, cognitive and other, which are not under our direct control and of which we are typically unaware, may systematically push people to form and maintain beliefs in the complete absence of warrant. Such processes may be systematically unsound and surround us with imaginary threats and challenges, successes and failures, which those very processes have us regard as ever more real.

(3) To enable the subject to soberly explore whether his initial or this new understanding of his situation is accurate (whether he is really pursued by conspirators or whether psychological processes of which he is unaware drive him to imagine a conspiracy where there is none), the therapist then seeks to weaken the psychological motivation identified. He may, e.g., try to improve the subject’s self-esteem through a variety of exercises.24 These moves, and only these moves, put the subject into a position to accept and assimilate the refutation of his delusional beliefs: To do so, he needs a new, alternative framework for understanding how he could form and maintain the beliefs in the complete absence of warrant, and needs to be liberated from psychological pressures to cleave to them, come what may.

(4) Once the ground has been thus prepared for a convincing refutation of the targeted beliefs, the therapist discusses with the subject what observations or tests would establish their falsity to the latter’s satisfaction and prods him to make such observations and tests (including ‘behavioural tests’ which establish to the subject’s satisfaction either that he is able to do things he believed beyond his pale or that he is able to cope with failure he believed would devastate him). 25 This approach has been found to significantly weaken delusional beliefs and the propensity to presuppose them and interpret everyday situations in their light. More specifically, it has been found to weaken them to a point where the subject becomes able to distance himself from them not only in word but also in deed and feeling, so that they no longer cause sustained distress and no longer influence his actions.

Apart from the identification and removal of pertinent psychological motivations, the key move in this kind of cognitive therapy consists in conveying ‘meta-cognitive insight’, 26 namely general insight into the a-rational and autonomous psychological processes, cognitive and other, which have the subject systematically form and maintain troubling beliefs in the absence of warrant. The key move, in other words, is to help the subject acquire a proper understanding of why and how he comes to imagine, e.g., a conspiracy where there is none and to surround himself with threats of his mind’s making.

Where delusional beliefs do not have any distinct, non-cognitive, psychological motivation and are mainly due to a-rational and autonomous cognitive processes, it is reasonable to assume that they can be successfully modified by conveying such meta-cognitive insight. Where we have no specifically psychological problems to contend with, the key to overcoming philosophical delusions lies in improving the thinker’s self-understanding: We can overcome such delusions by coming to understand how unsound cognitive processes of which we are hardly ever aware shape our philosophical reflections about the topic at issue and systematically push us to maintain wild claims and imagine difficulties where there are none. Thinkers can overcome their philosophical delusions by improving their self-understanding.

In the next chapters, we shall see that two therapeutic philosophers, J.L. Austin and Ludwig Wittgenstein, explicitly adopted primarily therapeutic aims for their work and sought to achieve them by gaining and conveying relevant meta-cognitive insight: by exposing ‘concealed motives’ for espousing a philosophical delusion, motives of which its champions are unaware (Austin), or by identifying ‘urges to misunderstand’ which are not under our direct control (Wittgenstein). In the previous chapters, we have built up to meta-cognitive insights of this kind, in a more systematic manner, on a larger scale, and with the help of concepts and findings not yet available to these philosophers. We have identified an autonomous cognitive process of crucial importance, the pictorial process (Chapter 1.3), traced how it shapes philosophical reflection at several levels, and devised the approach of systematic diagnostic analysis that lets us understand how this process systematically shapes our philosophical reflection and leads us to maintain several related philosophical claims and to raise several related philosophical problems (Chapters 2.4–2.5). We now see that this approach, which we initially introduced only to facilitate economies of scale, actually provides us with exactly the kind of meta-cognitive insight we need to weaken delusional philosophical beliefs and solve the emotional and behavioural problems they engender.





6. A THERAPEUTIC STRATEGY




Cognitive therapists found initial engagement with those in need of therapy one of the biggest challenges facing them.27 Many philosophers will feel hostile to the new account of philosophical reflection and, in particular, the suggestions that such reflection is profoundly shaped by inferences thinkers are typically not aware of making, that many philosophical problems are ultimately due to mistakes in such non-intentional reasoning, and that these problems are to be resolved by coming to understand their nature and genesis—rather than by acquiring new knowledge about the topic they are about. To get even sincere thinkers to soberly listen to these suggestions and follow them up with an open mind, we clearly need to make some such moves as cognitive therapists who devote much effort to ‘de-stigmatising’ and ‘normalising’ the phenomena they address, e.g., by pointing out that various famous and successful people were affected by them.28 Thus, in addition to stressing the ‘normality’ of non-intentional analogical inferences and belief-bias effects, the present book has adapted this particular move and developed its new account of philosophical reasoning by analysing classical works of thinkers whose lasting philosophical importance cannot reasonably be questioned (Locke and Berkeley), before turning to a rightly highly respected academic philosopher (A.J. Ayer) whose stature and working environment are perhaps more similar to those of current readers.

The first step of a viable therapeutic strategy thus consists in a systematic diagnostic analysis of the classical texts from which the philosophical problems that interest us are ultimately derived. This analysis shows us that the authors at issue were under the spell of certain philosophical pictures and reconstructs how non-intentional inferences driven by these pictures have shaped their philosophical reflections. We thus acquire general insight into the way in which unsound processes of non-intentional reasoning can lead competent thinkers to accept unsound intuitions, maintain unwarranted claims and raise ill-motivated problems. There is significantly less variation between these philosophical intuitions, claims and problems than there is between the delusions of psychotic patients who share the same diagnosis. The specific content of the latter is to a considerable extent determined by the personal fates and fortunes of the individual patients—even when two men have the delusion that their wives are unfaithful, their delusions will still be about different women and reinforced by different bogus evidence. The philosophical claims and questions that interest us, by contrast, are advanced with pretty similar content by many different thinkers and tend to be based on a repertoire of intuitions or arguments shared by many different philosophers, often across different generations. The analysis of classical texts can therefore reveal not only what unsound cognitive processes may in general shape philosophical reflection but can also show us how such processes may shape particular intuitions, arguments, claims and questions which we share ourselves.

The insight that philosophical intuitions may be systematically due to cognitive distortions rather than intellectual competencies may make us wary of the claims we find intuitively compelling in philosophical reflection. We may then suspend our trust not only in the particular intuitions reconstructed but also in all other philosophical intuitions we have not yet examined in detail (which may, for all we know at this point, be due to the same unsound processes, if to different philosophical pictures). When we do so, we should also suspend our belief in the claims apparently supported by those intuitions as well as our work on philosophical questions and problems that might be motivated by them, until we have found out whether we are ourselves under the spell of philosophical pictures or victim to other unsound processes of non-intentional inference.

To determine whether a thinker is under the spell of a given philosophical picture, we need to determine whether inferences driven by that picture contribute to the best available explanation of paradoxical intuitions and gaps in his argument (Chapter 1.2). These are comparatively easy to identify where the intuitions and arguments at issue are couched in concepts in which we are not at home ourselves—as in the early modern texts from which we proceeded in this book. The concepts’ novelty—to us—significantly reduces the likelihood of the relevant non-intentional analogical inferences being triggered in us, even when we are under the spell of the pertinent philosophical pictures. But the moment we turn from historical case-studies to our own case, the relevant intuitions will not strike us as paradoxical, as picture-driven inferences or belief bias will lead us to conflate these intuitive claims with the distinct truisms or common-sense-convictions from which we in fact infer them. The same phenomena will have us mistake argumentative gaps that are actually quite wild for trivial or obvious steps. To identify the relevant explananda in our own work, we will have to make an extra effort.

This effort involves different kinds of ordinary language analysis, pioneered by G.E. Moore and J.L. Austin, respectively:29 We may have to get clear on what the philosophical claims we find intuitively compelling come down to in plain English. And we certainly need to determine, through careful analysis of ordinary pre-philosophical talk, whether we assert or imply anything of the sort in such talk about the pertinent topic. This allows us to determine whether the claims we initially regarded as truisms or pieces of common sense really qualify as such—or go beyond common sense or are even at odds with it. A case in point is our analysis of pre-philosophical talk of ‘the mind’ (Chapters 1.4–1.5), which revealed that in such talk we do not use the term to refer to any space or organ of inner perception but employ it either as a metaphor-marker or as an integral part of idiomatic expressions which do not imply the existence of any literally or figuratively ‘inner’ space or organ of perception. (For instance, “I see the solution in my mind” means the same as “I see the solution” in the familiar metaphorical sense of that verb, namely that I managed to think of the solution; and “to keep in mind” simply means ‘to remember in one’s thinking’ and does not imply that anything is kept at any location.) Thus the apparently commonsensical intuition—I1 (in Chapter 1)—that there are in us spaces and organs of inner perception called ‘minds’ turned out to be a paradoxical intuition which cannot be explained as the result of the exercise of ordinary linguistic skills or common sense but of picture-driven inference.

Such ordinary language analysis will often require us to think of different situations in which we would actually use the expressions at issue, of the different purposes to which they are then put and the different implications they are then taken to carry, depending upon differences in the details of the context. Lack of awareness of relevant detail and context is one of the three conditions we hypothesised to facilitate non-intentional analogical reasoning (Chapter 1.2). By remedying this lack, this Austinian kind of ordinary language analysis can be expected to reduce a bit our propensity to engage in such reasoning, and to put picture-driven interpretations on familiar facts and ways of speaking. Ordinary language analysis can thus establish that certain intuitively compelling claims are in fact paradoxical and at the same time improve our ability to make and accept such findings.

Paradoxical claims are utterly unwarranted, viz. absurd, when (and, of course, only when) they are not supported by at least prima facie sound argument (Chapter 5.5). Where such a claim’s proponents fail either to produce or (like Ayer) to accept any argument adduced in its support, this exposure of its paradoxical nature is enough to show it absurd. Where arguments are produced and accepted for a paradoxical claim, ordinary language analysis can be used in conjunction with logical analysis of these arguments to assess their soundness. It will thus contribute to showing the claim unwarranted, where all the arguments for it are found unsound—as when we found all the classical arguments for the sense-datum doctrine to be circular, or almost circular (Chapter 5).

The insights gained through systematic diagnostic analysis of classical texts provide us with a new framework for making sense of the disconcerting finding that we, competent thinkers, maintain unwarranted claims in the absence of all argument or on the basis of arguments which are circular or almost circular: Unsound cognitive processes which are experimentally documented but of which we are typically unaware may lead us to do just this. We may come to accept and assimilate the refutation of these intuitively compelling ideas through systematic diagnostic analysis of our own work, which shows that this hypothesis actually applies to us: The moment we have, one by one, worked through a whole series of our philosophical intuitions, including perhaps new intuitions generated for the purposes of this inquiry, and the moment we have found, again and again, that our intuitions can be best explained by assuming the occurrence of unsound non-intentional inferences which are independently documented, we will come to form and accept a realistic self-image: The moment we engage in overly abstract reflection, unsound cognitive processes which are not under our direct control and of which we are typically unaware, systematically have us form, and maintain or presuppose, paradoxical beliefs, whose con-flict with other convictions, or among each other, gives rise to a characteristic class of ill-motivated philosophical problems. Conceptualising these processes as constitutive of a kind of intellectual altitude sickness may further help us to distance ourselves from, and disown, these intuitions and intuitive leaps in arguments, and the ill-motivated problems into which they lead us.

The successful use of partially self-gained meta-cognitive insight in cognitive therapy of psychosis warrants the hypothesis that the strategy outlined may significantly weaken our belief, both explicit and implicit, in intuitively compelling philosophical claims, even where these are maintained as a matter of delusion. It should allow us to simultaneously dissolve picture-driven problems by exposing and refuting the assumptions that raise them, and cure the underlying intellectual altitude sickness, namely weaken the spell of the philosophical pictures that render these assumptions intuitive. In brief, the present strategy should let us dissolve particularly tenacious philosophical problems in a way that enables us to actually let them go. We will now further develop this approach by developing ideas first mooted by J.L. Austin (Chapter 8) and Ludwig Wittgenstein (Chapter 9).

To sum up, we have seen that the struggle with processes of non-intentional reasoning and their deliverances, with philosophical pictures and their off-spring, is a particularly central and distinctive part of philosophy. We have found that a proper understanding of how these processes shape philosophical reflection and have us raise philosophical problems is the key to turning a frequently futile struggle into an effective response: It is the key to refuting unwarranted claims and overcoming them even when maintained as a matter of delusion—as will frequently be the case. We have developed first concepts and methods of a cognitive epistemology, which may allow us to gain such a proper understanding. This understanding also vindicates the adoption of new, therapeutic, aims for philosophical work: First and foremost, we should not seek to solve philosophical problems but to cure in us the diseases of the intellect that have us imagine such problems where there are none and to put an end to intellectual pursuits which are largely pointless.

We have thus won through to a new conception of philosophy as it is actually practiced in an important part of the subject and to a fresh vision of philosophy as we ought to practice the subject. The conception is that of philosophy as a—commonly futile—struggle with philosophical pictures and the delusions they engender. The vision is that of a therapy that allows us to put an end to this struggle and to regain or increase our intellectual autonomy: a therapy that is guided by the findings and theories of a scientifically informed cognitive epistemology, in something like the way in which cognitive psychotherapy is guided by findings and theories from various branches of psychology.





8 Linguistic Analysis as Therapy


Austin on ‘Perceptions’




J.L. Austin’s lecture series Sense and Sensibilia is not only the most thorough response to the subject of our last case-study, A.J. Ayer’s Foundations of Empirical Knowledge. It is also one of the most forceful attacks on the sense-datum doctrine of perception in the history of our subject. At the same time, it is a deeply perplexing text. In many respects it is a model of clarity. The points made are individually straightforward, the structure of argument is neither convoluted nor elaborate; the language is plain and devoid of technicalities. But, even so, the text notoriously puzzles its readers and gives rise to two questions that appear to have perplexed even the editor who reconstructed the text from Austin’s lecture notes: ‘Though not an obscure text, it is certainly a rather strange one: what is it for? What does it do?’1 That is: What are Austin’s aims? What is his approach? In his later, primarily ‘positive’ or constructive papers, Austin is often thought to have proceeded to establish philosophical claims by addressing the question, what we should ordinarily say when. Indeed, this approach became associated with his name. We shall see, however, that, at least in these early, primarily ‘negative’ or critical lectures, his aims are therapeutic, and his methods are geared towards acquisition of meta-cognitive insight that allows us to attain those therapeutic aims. In other words, we will see that, in Sense and Sensibilia (henceforward: S&S), Austin took the two turns we have outlined in the previous chapter: the therapeutic turn which had him adopt new aims, and the meta-philosophical turn which led him to a novel approach.

In this chapter, we will establish this claim and thus start providing our fresh vision of philosophy with a pedigree (Section 1). Building on Austin’s ideas, we will come to expose another unsound process of non-intentional inference, independent from the pictorial process we have focused on so far, which may shape philosophical reflection just as systematically and with equally unhelpful results. This process involves seductive verbal fallacies of kinds we are particularly prone to make in philosophical reflection and are then prone to make systematically, against our better knowledge: the unwitting transfer of ordinary implications (Section 2), which may be facilitated by philosophically motivated but unwitting linguistic innovation (Section 3). Independently from all explicit argument, this process may lead thinkers to endorse the Phenomenal Principle (Section 2) and the sense-datum doctrine often derived from it (Section 3). Finally we will sum up how ordinary language analysis can contribute to endeavours in therapeutic philosophy—without running afoul of the familiar objections to ordinary language philosophy, which have led to its perhaps premature demise (Section 4).





1. AUSTIN’S AIMS AND APPROACH




Sense and Sensibilia is a critical examination of the doctrine that we never see or otherwise perceive, or anyhow never directly perceive, material objects but only sense-data (S&S 2). Austin approaches this familiar topic with novel aims and an apparently outrageous approach. He is clear on what he wants to do—and what not:

I am not, then—and this is a point to be clear about from the beginning—going to maintain that we ought to be ‘realists’, to embrace, that is, the doctrine that we do perceive material things (or objects). This doctrine would be no less scholastic and erroneous than its antithesis. The question, do we perceive material things or sense-data, no doubt looks very simple—too simple—but is entirely misleading . . . So we are not to look for an answer to the question . . . What we have above all to do is, negatively, to rid us of such illusions as ‘the argument from illusion’ [for the sense-datum doctrine] . . . —an operation which leaves us, in a sense, just where we began. In a sense—but actually we may hope to learn something positive in the way of a technique for dissolving philosophical worries (some kinds of philosophical worry, not the whole of philosophy). (S&S 3–5)





I.e.: Austin’s chief aim is not to establish any general philosophical claim or theory, but to dissolve the philosophical worry of those who ‘find’ the sense-datum doctrine ‘disturbing’ (S&S 3). Second, he wants to ‘reduce a bit’ the ‘constant repetition of assertions that are . . . not even faintly sensible’ (S&S 5), in particular, the repetition of answers to the ‘entirely misleading’ question, what kind of thing we perceive: He wants to get the philosophers he addresses to give up looking for an answer to it (S&S 4). Finally, he also hopes to learn something ‘about the meanings of some English words . . . which, besides being philosophically very slippery are in their own right interesting’ (S&S 5).

Austin addresses philosophers disturbed by a doctrine they find compelling even though it is, he judges, ‘not even faintly sensible’ for them to maintain. The worries he addresses are hence, in Austin’s judgement, utterly unwarranted. Austin’s chief aim thus is to put an end to unwarranted feelings of intellectual unease and disquiet, that is, to solve a specific emotional problem (in the sense defined in Chapter 6.6). His second aim is that of solving what we called a ‘behavioural problem’: He wants to put an end to attempts to answer an entirely misleading question and accommodate a not even faintly sensible doctrine that purports to answer that question. Question and answer are, Austin thinks, motivated by ‘a wide variety of concealed motives’ (S&S 5). Since Austin accuses nobody of insincerity, these are not motives philosophers conceal but motives concealed from them, motives of which they are unaware. At least as long we are unaware of such concealed motives, they are arguably not under our direct control. In this case they are constitutive of the kind of ‘disabling condition’ that turns unreasonable efforts thus motivated into ‘behavioural problems’, in the strict sense defined (in Chapter 6.6). An enterprise is therapeutic if its chief—though not necessarily sole—aim is to solve emotional or behavioural problems (Chapter 7.4). In Sense and Sensibilia, Austin is squarely engaged in what we called ‘therapeutic philosophy’ and seeks, first and foremost, to solve emotional and behavioural problems that arise in and through philosophical reflection.

In pursuit of his therapeutic aims, Austin employs a striking approach: Instead of examining the stated arguments explicitly adduced to support the disturbing doctrine, he proposes to proceed by ‘exposing a wide variety of concealed motives’ (S&S 5). Above, we have seen that such motives must indeed be more relevant than the arguments stated in the doctrine’s support: All the classical arguments for the sense-datum doctrine simply presuppose or assume from the start either the doctrine itself or equally paradoxical assumptions motivated by it (Chapters 5.1–5.2). Indeed, some of their ablest proponents were prepared to ‘reckon [these arguments] for nothing’ (Berkeley: 3D 200) or reject them as failing to support any factual doctrine (Ayer: FEK 24–25). But, even so, they went on to maintain the doctrine, explicitly (e.g. Berkeley) or implicitly (e.g. Ayer), on the basis of arguments which are patently defective, as they either assume the doctrine (Berkeley, Chapter 5.3) or do not even purport to support it (like Ayer’s ‘purely linguistic’ arguments, Chapters 6.1–6.2).

At least to some extent, Austin is aware of these facts: Mentioning Berkeley, Hume, Russell and Ayer, he judges that the philosophers ‘who have been most adept at working’ the argument from illusion ‘have all themselves felt [their argument] to be somehow spurious’ (S&S 4). And while we established the persistence of Ayer’s belief in the factual sense-datum doctrine he had explicitly rejected, by considering the problems Ayer addresses in the bulk of Foundations (Chapter 6.2), Austin infers from his own analysis of an earlier passage (FEK 11–17) that ‘the apparent sophistication of Ayer’s ‘linguistic’ doctrine really rests squarely on the old Berkeleian . . . ontology of the ‘sensible manifold’’ (S&S 61, cp. 106)—and that Ayer continues to maintain the sense-datum doctrine on the very factual reading he takes to be unsupported by the arguments he accepts for it. Hence it is perfectly reasonable, for us and for Austin, to turn to concealed motives which may push thinkers to maintain the paradoxical doctrine independently from the stated arguments.

In the bulk of his lectures, Austin seeks to ‘unpick, one by one, a mass of seductive (mainly verbal) fallacies’ that may constitute such motives (S&S 4–5), namely fallacies that may lead one to pursue the question, what kind of thing we perceive, and to accept part or all of the sense-datum doctrine that purports to answer it. The most fully spelled out account of such a motivating fallacy that Austin gives is that of a conflation between “illusion” and “delusion” which, he claims, is apt to ‘edge us a little closer towards the position’ of the sense-datum theorist (S&S 25). At first sight, this conflation (if it is made at all) appears to be philosophically irrelevant: After all, it is only in the name or title of the ‘argument from illusion’, but not in the statement of the argument itself, that there is the implication that it proceeds from cases of illusion—which are also described as cases of ‘delusive perception’ (though not necessarily in the course of the argument itself). By discussing this conflation, Austin thus seems to fail to engage with the actual argument (which might as well be renamed, or employ the term “non-veridical” instead of “delusive”). But since Austin seeks to expose fallacies that may lead thinkers to accept part or all of the sense-datum doctrine independently of the arguments stated in its support, these fallacies need not be committed in the course of the argument itself but may rather surface in the surrounding text, including its name and the description the proponent gives elsewhere of the cases from which it proceeds. In three steps, Austin explains why the conflation of “illusion” and “delusion” is a fallacy, why we may commit it, and how it may suggest to us that we perceive something immaterial in those crucial cases, say, when looking at a straight stick that is partially immersed in water and looks bent (S&S 22–25).

First, Austin shows that there are important differences between illusions and delusions, that the concepts of illusion and delusion are not at all the same. To do so, he points out some genuine examples of illusion and delusion, respectively: optical illusions like the Müller-Lyer illusion or the familiar phenomenon of rapidly rotating wheels that look as if they were turning slowly in the other direction; as opposed to delusions of persecution or of grandeur, which ‘are primarily a matter of grossly disordered beliefs . . . and may well have nothing to do with perception’ (S&S 23). These examples he then uses to bring out what are for present purposes ‘the most important differences’ between the two, first and foremost: ‘The term ‘an illusion’ (in a perceptual context) does not suggest that something totally unreal is conjured up—on the contrary, there just is the arrangement of lines on the page . . . [or] the rotating wheels; whereas the term ‘delusion’ does suggest something totally unreal, not really there at all’ (S&S 23).

Second, Austin provides those who found the ‘argument from illusion’ persuasive with reasons to believe that they actually confused the two concepts: He brings out that, and why, this confusion is seductive and points out that it surfaces in the argument from illusion. As he explains, it is easy to confuse ‘illusions’ and ‘delusions’ not only because ‘these terms are often used loosely’, but also because ‘people may have, without making this explicit, different views or theories about the facts of some cases’ (S&S 24), so that one and the same case is described in both terms—e.g., Ayer’s example of the ‘delusive perception’ of a mirage: Some (like Ayer) tend to think mirages are visions conjured up by the crazed brains of thirsty and exhausted travellers (cp. delusion); many others explain mirages as cases of atmospheric refraction (illusion). The confusion thus rendered seductive actually crops up in the ‘argument from illusion’: In its title and its talk of ‘delusive perceptions’, ‘there are two clear implications—(a) that all the cases cited in the argument are cases of illusions; and (b) that illusion and delusion are the same thing’ (S&S 22).

Third, Austin explains how this confusion may have been effective as a motive for endorsing the idea at issue. This might make those who previously acknowledged that they shared the confusion further acknowledge it as one of their motives for endorsing that idea. Austin explains: ‘So long as it is being suggested that the cases paraded for our attention are cases of illusion, there is the implication (from the ordinary use of the word) that there really is something there that we perceive’ (S&S 25). Whereas when we call these cases ‘delusive’, ‘there comes in the very different suggestion of something being conjured up, something unreal or at any rate ‘immaterial’. These two implications taken together may then subtly insinuate that in the cases cited there really is something that we are perceiving, but that this is an immaterial something’ (S&S 25), that, in Ayer’s words, ‘even in the case where what we see is not the real quality of a material thing . . . we are still seeing something . . . [but something that] is not part of any material thing’ (FEK 4).

Having thus exposed a ‘seductive (mainly verbal) fallacy’ as a concealed motive for endorsing this idea, Austin needs to remove the motive by showing up the fallacy for what it is. Already the opening step of the exposure showed that, pace (b), illusions are not to be conflated with delusions. In the sequel (S&S 26–27), Austin examines briefly ‘some of the other cases Ayer lists’ (refraction, perspective, reflections), to show that, pace (a), none of them can be described as a case of illusion. This argument involves two assumptions: (i) Someone qualifies as being ‘under an illusion’ only if he is ‘taken in’; and (ii) something deserves to be termed an ‘illusion’ only if most people are under an illusion when confronted with it. Both assumptions are in line not only with common usage but also with the explicit definitions of “illusion” given by the philosophers Austin targets, such as this defini-tion from Price: ‘An illusory sense-datum of sight or touch is a sense-datum which is such that we tend to take it to be part of the surface of a material object, but if we take it so we are wrong’. 2 Indeed, but for the reference to ‘parts of surfaces’, this definition would capture no other idea than the one the present two assumptions articulate. Perhaps for this reason, Austin goes on to show that this reference should be dropped, as it prevents the definition from fitting exemplary cases of illusion (such as the Müller-Lyer illusion or the Headless Woman), which it is surely meant to accommodate (S&S 27–28). The relevant upshot is that it is presumably from assumptions (i) and (ii) that the philosophers addressed meant to proceed to (a). Austin’s argument against the latter thus engages with his addressees: He exposed and refuted fallacies that constituted (one of) their concealed motives for adopting the specific doctrine that we perceive only immaterial sense-data in cases of ‘delusive perception’.

Thus Austin does not merely seek to show this doctrine unwarranted but tries to explain what led competent thinkers to find it compelling enough to endorse it prior to or independently from the arguments offered in its support. To do so, he does not just point out fallacies that would lead us to endorse the doctrine but also explains why it is natural and tempting for people to make these fallacies and provides evidence that the proponents of the argument from illusion actually made them. We can further develop this approach by looking for specifically philosophical fallacies: We can look for fallacies which we are particularly prone to make in philosophical reflection, and are then prone to make recurrently or systematically.

We will now proceed from exegetical to philosophical development of Austin’s ideas, and proceed from some acute observations of his to an account of two such specifically philosophical fallacies and the processes of non-intentional inference in which they are embedded: We will consider how the unwitting transfer of the implications an expression has in one context, to its use in another context, can motivate the two assumptions on which the argument from illusion is built, including the Phenomenal Principle (Section 2). Then we will consider how the characteristically philosophical quest for generality can facilitate the unwitting transfer of ordinary implications of one term, to certain other terms, and how this transfer can independently motivate that arguments’ conclusion, the sense-datum doctrine in its full splendour (Section 3).





2. UNWITTING TRANSFER OF IMPLICATIONS:

THE PHENOMENAL PRINCIPLE




Different processes of non-intentional reasoning may work together, and in conjunction with a variety of well-documented cognitive distortions. Austin mentions a number of such distortions that tend to recur in philosophical reflection: ‘over-simplification, schematization, and constant obsessive repetition of the same small range of jejune ‘examples’ are . . . far too common to be dismissed as an occasional weakness of philosophers . . . It is essential, here as elsewhere, to abandon old habits of Gleichschaltung, the deeply ingrained worship of tidy-looking dichotomies’ (S&S 3). Together with the pictorial process we have reconstructed (in Chapters 1–2), this latter habit of dichotomous thought has momentous consequences. The moment they have the picture-driven intuitions that have us postulate in us spaces of inner perception called ‘minds’, thinkers are prone to embrace a dichotomy of two realms of perception: We are surrounded by a physical environment in which we perceive public and material objects through our eyes and other external sense-organs; at the same time, we harbour within us a mind in which we perceive private and immaterial things through an inner sense. Everything we can be said to ‘perceive’ has to be perceived either in that external or in this internal space of perception. Whenever thinkers feel compelled to conclude that some object of perception cannot populate the physical space that surrounds us, they therefore infer that it has to be located in the internal space of our mind, instead. Whatever is perceived, but not perceived around us, must be perceived within us.

Such inferences swiftly extended the scope of inner perception. In particular, they had early modern thinkers conclude that we must perceive ideas in our mind not only when we use our wits but also when we use our eyes or ears, palates or noses. Above (in Chapters 1–2), we have reconstructed how non-intentional reasoning driven by perceptual pictures of various intellectual activities and achievements (but also of sensation) led early modern thinkers to take for granted that we perceive ideas or sensations in our mind whenever we think (or have pains). We have also reconstructed how non-intentional reasoning driven by another philosophical picture, the mereological picture of qualities built into the substance/accident-terminology of the period (Chapter 3.1), led early modern philosophers to believe that colours and sounds, tastes and smells do not really exist in the physical bodies we commonly credit with such ‘secondary qualities’ (Chapter 3.2). By the pattern of dichotomous reasoning we just considered, they concluded that since we manifestly see colours, hear sounds, enjoy tastes and smell odours, and these colours etc. manifestly exist, they must be perceived, and exist, in the mind (Chapter 3.3): The colours (etc.) we see (etc.) must be ideas or sensations which physical bodies outside us cause within us when we direct our organs of sense at them (Chapters 3.4–3.5). From its very inception, the modern mind thus served as an asylum for objects of perception evicted from the physical world.

Such dichotomous reasoning is also at the heart of the more recently popular argument from illusion: With the Phenomenal Principle we infer from such truisms as that a round coin looks elliptical when viewed from the side, that we then are, in perception, aware of something, a silvery patch, which actually is elliptical. We thus come to posit a patch of colour that is elliptical, as an object of perception. By Leibniz’s Law, this object is distinct from the—round—coin looked at. Of course it is not identical with any other physical object in our environment, either. In its most popular version, the argument concludes without further ado that the distinct object of perception is the kind of immaterial and private object that is allegedly perceived in the mind. The moment we find it compelling to posit an object of perception that appears to have no place in our physical environment, we infer it must be perceived in our mind, instead. Conversely, it is because we take the existence of this inner asylum or alternative space of perception for granted all along that we have no qualms positing objects of perception which appear to have no place in our physical environment.

What has us posit such objects, in the cases at issue, is the Phenomenal Principle: The champions of the argument from illusion tend to accept without argument, as an obvious truism, that whenever something appears to a subject to possess a certain quality, there is something of which the subject is aware which does possess that quality. We have already noted that this claim is plainly false, when interpreted in line with the ordinary English that most champions of the argument think they then speak (Chapter 6.1): As any dictionary reminds us, “aware of” is commonly used to mean ‘having knowledge or understanding of’. Like the claim that someone knows something, the claim that he is aware of something entails that certain facts obtain; and like the attribution of knowledge, it entails no claim about the ‘experience’ the subject ‘enjoys’. Accordingly, ‘There is something that is elliptical of which you are aware’ would commonly be understood to imply that there is in fact something elliptical lying around to be seen or felt, and that you know this (Chapter 6.1). But of course there need not be anything elliptical lying around to be seen when something looks elliptical to us, and you know that there is nothing elliptical—but only a round coin—lying around to be seen or felt in the case from which the argument from illusion proceeds. So why do we find it intuitively compelling to go along with the Phenomenal Principle and conclude that we then see something, some patch of colour, which is elliptical and therefore distinct from the round coin on the table?

This may be due to another kind of non-intentional inference that may complement the non-intentional analogical inferences we have focused on so far and can be plausibly hypothesised to recur in philosophical reflection: the unwitting transfer of ordinary implications. While he did not use these terms, Austin seems to have spotted the general phenomenon and some of the pertinent inferences. He notes that linguistic expressions carry different implications in different contexts: ‘How [a word] is intended and taken will depend on further facts about the occasion of utterance; the words themselves imply nothing either way’ (S&S 40). But even though ‘what is meant and what can be inferred (if anything) can be decided only by examining the full circumstances in which the words are used’, philosophers are prone merely ‘to examine the words themselves’ (S&S 41). As a result, they may unwittingly credit their words with implications they only have in other contexts and draw unsound inferences. Earlier, Austin suggested that the inadvertent mixing of the implications of different words—such as “illusion” and “delusion”—can facilitate the ready acceptance of false claims (S&S 25, cp. Section 1). The same thing may happen when we inadvertently mix the implications one and the same word has in different contexts.

Let’s develop this idea. A variety of factors can make us lose sight of the relevant contextual features: When philosophising, we are prone to generalise quickly and extensively and to proceed by abstract argument developed without reference to specific cases. These propensities make us ignore or neglect those contextual features that would determine what implications our words should be taken to have. Where we come to ignore or neglect these features, we may spontaneously and unwittingly fall back on patterns of inference that exploit those implications that our words have in contexts which are particularly dominant or common, and therefore shape our habits of spontaneous or ‘automatic’ inference. When speaking in a less common context to whose features we are oblivious, we may spontaneously leap to conclusions licensed by the implications our words have in such more common or dominant contexts—regardless or whether or not they have them in the context at issue. We may thus unwittingly transfer the implications our words have in dominant contexts also to further contexts of utterance in which they do not have them. Such unwitting transfer of implications has us leap to unwarranted conclusions and may even have us adopt conclusions that are patently false.

This may account for our ready acceptance of the Phenomenal Principle. When we grant that we are aware of, or see, an elliptical silvery patch when viewing a round coin sideways, we regard this as an obvious fact stated in ordinary English. In ordinary English, we sometimes use talk of ‘patches’ and ‘spots’ of colour in order to pick out physical objects by the way they look to us (from here, now). We typically do this when we cannot tell (from here, now) what kind of object it is we are seeing: On a mountain tour, we might point down into the valley and ask, ‘What is the small reddish spot over there? Might that be our car?’ As we approach it, we can say that ‘the spot grows bigger’ and that it finally ‘turns out to be our car’ (or another physical object). Here spot-talk is used throughout to refer to physical objects: The ‘small reddish spot’ is a physical object that looks small and reddish (to the speaker, at the time of utterance). When we use the phrase thus, there is no implication that we see anything that does not merely look small and reddish (from here, now) but actually possesses these two sensible qualities. We can hence use these phrases when we know full well that nothing actually answering to the description is around to be seen, and speak of an ‘elliptical silvery patch’ when we full well know that the only thing to be seen on the table is a round object which merely looks elliptical to us now—the phrase “the elliptical silvery speck” is then used to refer to that round physical object; the speck is the coin.

The dominant use of adjectives like “elliptical”, “small” and “silvery” is of course very different. First and foremost, we use these adjectives to attribute those shapes, sizes and colours to whatever the nouns thus quali-fied stand for. When I say ‘I have to remove a small speck of grime from the table’, I clearly imply, and you may infer, that there is something—the speck of grime—that actually is small. The moment we ignore or fail to think of the less frequent use that allows us to employ the phrase “elliptical silvery patch” in setting out the argument from illusion, we will unwittingly fall back on the pattern of inference that is licensed by this implication from the dominant use of the relevant adjectives, and leap to the conclusion that there then is something, a silvery patch, that actually is elliptical. It is when we make the special use previously discussed and then unwittingly transfer to it the implications of the dominant use of the pertinent adjectives that we go along with the Phenomenal Principle and find it natural and compelling to first speak of our seeing an elliptical silvery patch and then infer that there is something we see with our eyes, this patch, which is elliptical and therefore distinct from the round coin on the table—or any other physical object in our environment.

This conclusion is of course false. For sure, we commonly see with our eyes many things which we would hesitate to describe as ‘physical objects’: rainbows, images in mirrors, pictures on the movie screen, etc. But no such non-physical object of perception is around to be seen in the case at issue, on the table we are meant to look at. Nothing elliptical and distinct from the coin is around to be seen then and there, by you and me. Arguably, we readily accept the conclusion only because we accept all along the picture-driven conception of an alternative private realm of perception, in which we can place the elliptical object of perception we have now posited. Indeed, the common formulation of the Phenomenal Principle suggests that the latter is placed in the mind immediately, rather than as the result of an extra inference: When philosophers endorse that assumption about what we are ‘aware of in perception’, they typically think of ‘experiences’ we ‘enjoy’ in perception as the things we are ‘aware of’, and take ‘experiences’ to be things we behold in the privacy of our mind (rather than joint trips, public encounters or other ‘experiences’ in the pre-philosophical sense of the term).

To sum up, the habit of dichotomous thinking, the picture-driven conception of the mind as a space of inner perception, and the unwitting transfer of implications from a dominant to a quite special use of adjectives may work together and have us go along with the Phenomenal Principle. The assumption on which the first half of the argument from illusion is built is rendered intuitively compelling by different kinds of non-intentional inference that are particularly likely to occur the moment thinkers lose themselves in overly general or abstract reflection—as frequently happens in philosophy.

The unwitting transfer of ordinary implications might also facilitate acceptance of the assumption on which the second half of the argument from illusion rests. This assumption too is wild and, even so, typically maintained without argument: There is, we are told, no qualitative difference between ‘delusive’ and ‘veridical perceptions’. With the further assumption that qualitatively identical perceptions must be of the same kind of object, this allows the argument to generalise: If immaterial sense-data are what we are aware of, in perception, in the ‘delusive’ cases, they are what we are thus aware of in all cases of perception. Austin refutes both assumptions (S&S 44–54) and breaks the first up into these assumptions about the specific cases on which arguments from illusion are typically based: Seeing a round coin from the side, so that it looks bent, is just like seeing an elliptical piece of silver. Seeing a straight stick partially immersed in water, so that it looks bent, is just like seeing a bent stick. Etc. These assumptions are patently false. As Austin points out, ‘it is simply not true to say . . . that seeing a stick refracted in water is exactly like seeing a bent stick’ (S&S 49): Of course the straight stick only looks bent when partially immersed in water. But then it does not look like a bent stick partially immersed in water—which would, in these circumstances, look a different shape. So the most we can say is that a straight stick partially immersed in water looks like a bent stick that is not immersed in water. But then the two experiences are not alike at all: In one case, the stick is immersed in water, in the other it is not, and this makes for a quite noticeable difference, since water is not invisible (cp. S&S 53).

We might be led to accept these otherwise patently false assumptions by a confusion of two different ways in which the expressions “like”, “looks like” and “looks” may be meant and taken (S&S 40). Consider the sentence “They look like ants.” When I say this of some small animals scurrying around at my feet, I mean that they look exactly like ants, that going by their looks I think them ants (or would do so, had I not been warned of similar insects populating the area). When I say this of people I watch from a high tower, however, I mean no such thing. Rather, I then mean that people seen from this great distance look rather like ants—as big as ants— seen from the sort of distance at which one normally sees ants—say, about six feet (S&S 40–41). Mutatis mutandis, the same goes for “They look small”: In some contexts, I imply that going by their looks I think they are small, in others I do not. These two ways in which “looks (like)” may be meant and taken are easy to confuse in philosophising, where thinkers tend not to examine the full circumstances in which the words are used. When discussing the ‘delusive’ perception of the stick partially immersed in water we may thus fail to ‘remember . . . what sort of situation we are dealing with’ (cp. S&S 42) and spontaneously take the perfectly true sentence “The stick looks bent” to imply that the stick looks exactly like, and might well be mistaken for, a bent stick. In this way, the spontaneous transfer of implications “looks” has in dominant or prominent contexts, to a rarer context, may contribute to our acceptance of an assumption we would see through the moment we bothered to attend to the ‘highly significant attendant circumstances’ of the special case at issue (cp. S&S 54).

To sum up: By developing ideas mooted by Austin, we have identified a second kind of spontaneous or non-intentional inference which is particularly likely to occur under conditions frequently met in philosophical reflection and which may complement the non-intentional analogical inferences we have explored previously: the unwitting transfer of implications an expression ordinarily has in a dominant use or context, to another use or context in which it does not have them. Such unwitting transfer of implications can facilitate ready acceptance of the two dubious assumptions on which the successive main steps of the argument from illusion rely.





3. UNWITTING LINGUISTIC INNOVATION:

THE SENSE-DATUM DOCTRINE




We may also unwittingly transfer ordinary implications of one term onto another term, which does not have them. Austin suggested that this may happen where people hold different views about a case without acknowledging their difference of view, and thus come to apply different descriptions or terms (say, “illusion” and “delusion”), with different implications, to the same case (say, mirages), and regard the terms as equivalent (Section 1).

Earlier, we identified another, specifically philosophical, motivation for such spontaneous transfer of implications (Chapter 4.1): Wanting to argue at a very general level, philosophers often give a general or generic use to familiar terms which ordinarily do not have it. Without noticing the novelty, philosophers of perception thus started to use the verb “to perceive” as shorthand, to talk at one go about seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling and feeling—without realising that “to perceive” has (in several constructions) implications of recognition and knowledge which “to see” and its cognates do not share (in the same constructions). You recall: I can be said to ‘see’ Fred in the crowd, even when I fail to recognise my former school-mate. The explosion of the secret ammunitions depot can be ‘heard’ by anyone within ten miles, not only by the few soldiers who know what the loud bang is. Etc. By contrast, it is unidiomatic to say ‘I perceived Fred straightaway but recognised him only later’: The ordinary implication of ‘S perceives x’ is that the perceiving subject recognises x and knows who or what it is he sees or hears. When we start to use “to perceive” as a generic term for seeing, hearing, etc. but continue to leap to conclusions licensed only by the ordinary implications it does not share with “to see” and its cognates, we unwittingly transfer those epistemic implications to the latter. (If x sees y, x perceives y. If x perceives y, then x recognises y. Therefore: If x sees y, then x recognises y.) Accordingly, many philosophers of perception have regarded seeing and hearing, in the ordinary senses of these terms, as epistemic achievements, involving recognition or knowledge of what is seen or heard. In this way, unwitting linguistic innovation can lead to equally unwitting transfer of ordinary implications.

This transfer turns seeing and hearing into epistemic achievements which require a knowledge that can be acquired either through the mere use of the senses or only with the help of reason and inference. This conception motivated Berkeley’s introduction of a new ‘strict’ sense of perception-verbs, which singles out the contribution the senses make to these epistemic achievements: ‘In truth and strictness’ we see or hear or otherwise perceive by sense, rather than reason, only what we perceive without making an inference (Chapter 4.1). This imposes two requirements on seeing and its cognates: To qualify ‘in truth and strictness’ as seeing an F, a subject has to know that it is an F he is seeing, and has to acquire this knowledge without any inference, automatic or other. Ordinary English fails to impose either of these two requirements; in particular, it does not even require possession of the kind of knowledge at issue: The visitor to the aviary can be said to ‘see’ the Hammerkop in front of him already prior to looking at the sign that indicates the species he never heard of before. Berkeley and others thus change the topic, from seeing to completely different achievements, while imagining they are merely rendering ordinary talk more ‘strict’ or precise. Unwitting linguistic innovation involving unwitting transfer of ordinary implications may motivate deliberate linguistic innovation which looks less radical than it is.

When engaged in philosophical reflection about a given topic, we may unwittingly press various different, if related, terms into new, more general or generic uses. Thus, philosophers who want to speak and reason at one go about all five ‘modes of perception’ often also want to speak and reason at one go about how the things we see, hear, smell, taste or feel look or sound or smell or taste or feel to us. They then usually take the verbs “to seem” and “to appear” for the job, without being aware of putting them to any new use. They thus take for granted that also in ordinary parlance the two verbs mean pretty much the same, namely something like “to look” but more general, namely ‘to look-or-sound-or-taste-or smell-or-feel’ to a subject.

This, however, is quite wrong: As Austin brings out, the ‘root ideas behind the uses’ of these three expressions in ordinary language are quite distinct: “Looks” is used quite simply to comment on the looks of things. “Appears” is used with reference to certain special circumstances, whereas “seems” makes an implicit reference to certain (less than conclusive) evidence. Austin brings this out by considering three sets of examples (S&S 36–37):





He looks guilty—he has the look of a guilty man.

He appears guilty—‘I quite agree that, when he’s prevaricating over all those searching questions about what he did with the money, he appears guilty, but most of the time his demeanour (not just ‘his looks’) is innocence itself.’

He seems guilty—‘On the evidence we have heard so far, he certainly seems guilty.’ [The evidence of course suggests that he is guilty, not that he seems guilty. And it is less than conclusive; otherwise, I would have said less cautiously, ‘He is guilty.’]

‘The hill looks steep’—it has the look of a steep hill.

‘The hill appears steep’—when you look at it from down here.

‘The hill seems steep’—to judge by the fact that we have had to change gear twice.

‘She looks chic’—straightforward enough.

‘She appears (to be) chic’—in unsophisticated, provincial circles.

‘She seems (to be) chic’—from these photographs, from what they have told me about her, etc.



When we start to use “appears” and “seems” as generic terms for ‘looks-or-sounds-or-smells-or-tastes-or-feels’ but, failing to notice the novelty, continue to leap to conclusions licensed by their ordinary implications, we will hence again unwittingly transfer ordinary implications from supposedly generic to a supposedly merely more specific term which does not have them: Given the new generic sense of “seems”, “X looks F” entails “X seems F”. “X seems F” ordinarily implies that there is some less than conclusive evidence that suggests that X is F. Accordingly, we may in philosophical reflection take “X looks F” to imply that there is some such less than conclusive evidence. Similarly: Given the new sense of “appears”, “X looks F” implies “X appears F”. “X appears F” ordinarily implies that X looks F under certain special circumstances and suggests the possibility that in fact it is not F. Accordingly, we may, in philosophical reflection, take “X looks F” to imply that it does so under certain special circumstances and to suggest the possibility that it is not in fact F.

Such transfer of ordinary implications may be simultaneously facilitated by the philosophical failing we considered in the previous section, viz. by philosophers’ not uncommon failure to pay sufficient attention to the specific circumstances of terms’ use. Such attention is particularly necessary where terms share implications in some, but not all contexts. The use of “seems”, for instance, often involves implicit reference to certain evidence, but not always (‘The next three days seemed like one long nightmare’), while the use of “looks” usually does not involve such reference, but occasionally does. For example, ‘that somebody looks ill may be the evidence on which we could also remark that he seems to be ill’ (S&S 38). But “looks” is not used to refer to any evidence ‘either when the way something looks is wholly inadequate evidence (it would be rash to say that her jewellery seems to be genuine just because it looks genuine); or when the way something looks is wholly conclusive (what more must she do to be chic than to look chic?); or, for that matter, when something’s really being such-and-such is not in question at all (‘He looks like his father’—but no one is going to say that he seems to be his father)’ (S&S 38). Therefore ‘just what is meant and what can be inferred (if anything) can be decided only by examining the full circumstances in which the word is used’ (S&S 41). The moment we pay insufficient attention to these circumstances or reason from insufficiently developed examples which leave those circumstances unspecified, we are therefore prone to treat these different expressions as more or less interchangeable—like Ayer, who puts his terms exactly the wrong way ‘round when indicating the case from which his argument from illusion proceeds: ‘A stick that normally appears straight looks bent when it is seen in water’ (FEK 3). When we do this, we will take these terms to always share certain implications which they in fact have in common only in specific circumstances.

These unwitting transfers of ordinary implications may lead us to apparently paradoxical conclusions and render these conclusions intuitively plausible prior to all explicit argument. In the present case, it may lead us to endorse, first, an unduly sceptical conclusion and, second, the sense-datum doctrine of perception. Suppose we take “X looks F” to imply (i) that there is some less than conclusive evidence that X is F and (ii) that it looks F only under certain special circumstances (with some suggestion that in fact it is not F). Then we will take the looks of F to be potentially deceptive in any situation in which we apply it: Even under the most favourable circumstances, we may not assume that X actually is F when it looks F; even then we have only less than conclusive evidence that X is F and cannot know that the thing in front of us is an F by simply having a look there and then. We always have to work this out, perhaps—as many philosophers, again including Ayer, suggest—on the basis of how the thing looks (and feels) under various different conditions (cp. FEK 267–270).

A moment ago, we have considered a similar transfer of ordinary implications, namely from “perceiving” to “seeing” and “hearing”. This had us take for granted that to see or hear an F we have to know that it is an F, and led us on to say that we strictly speaking see or hear an F only if this knowledge is acquired by exercising these senses there and then, that we strictly speaking perceive an F by sense only when we can acquire this knowledge without having to work anything out by reason. The present conclusion thus implies that we can never, strictly speaking, see or hear an F or perceive by sense any physical object (under this or any other name or description). All we can, strictly speaking, perceive by sense, are the looks or appearances of physical objects, which may constitute less than conclusive evidence for those objects’ being what they seem to be. (Dichotomous thinking may then have us conclude that since our physical environment only contains the physical objects that appear to us thus but not the appearances that are what we strictly speaking perceive by sense, these appearances must be perceived in that other space of perception, our mind.) To sum up: By unwittingly giving first “perceive” and then “seem” and “appear” new generic uses, while inadvertently transferring their ordinary implications to supposedly merely more specific terms, we may arrive at a version of the sense-datum doctrine of perception.

Since we have unwittingly burdened “seeing” and “hearing” with epistemic implications they do not have in ordinary language, the conclusion that we do not, strictly speaking, see or hear physical objects or events, is quite compatible with the common-sense conviction that we see or hear coins, sticks, coaches and explosions, in the ordinary sense of those verbs. But when we fail to notice the fundamental and unwitting linguistic innovation that burdens “seeing” etc. with implications of knowledge and recognition, we will interpret the conclusion as being at odds with this piece of common sense. Thus unwitting linguistic innovation going with equally unwitting transfer of ordinary implications may lead us to a claim that strikes us as both intuitively compelling and paradoxical.

We have thus identified a second process of non-intentional inference, distinct from the pictorial process with its analogical inferences, which is facilitated by common and characteristic features of philosophical reflec-tion and can render apparently paradoxical claims intuitively compelling independently from, and already prior to, explicit argument: The quest for generality may have us engage in unwitting linguistic innovation, as we put familiar terms to more general or generic uses whose novelty we fail to realise. This and insufficient attention to relevant context may have us transfer ordinary implications from some terms or statements to others, which do not have them. We have reconstructed a sequence of such non-analogical non-intentional inferences that provides an alternative route to the sense-datum doctrine, namely an alternative to the classical early modern route which proceeds through picture-driven inferences and via the view that only primary qualities really exist in physical bodies.

This alternative route may have led Ayer to adopt his terminology of ‘direct perception’ and the factual sense-datum doctrine he could not shed. To define ‘direct perception’, Ayer stipulates that ‘S directly perceives x’ entails (i) that x really exists and (ii) that it really has whatever properties it appears (to S) to have (FEK 61), and that all things that can be directly perceived are to be called ‘sense-data’ (FEK 59) (cp. Chapter 6.1). After noting the paucity of the reasons Ayer gives for introducing the first of these terms (which we examined in Chapter 6.3), Austin suggests that Ayer’s ‘real motive’ for its introduction is the desire to produce statements (presumably, perceptual judgements) which are incorrigible (S&S 103): It is tempting to think that, if the sense-data I directly perceive are guaranteed to exist and be what they appear, then I cannot go wrong in my perceptual judgements, as long as I content myself with judgements about sense-data. But Ayer explicitly rejects at any rate the most influential motivation for seeking incorrigible statements, namely the quest for certainty (FEK 45, cp. Chapter 6.2). Possibly, he rather sought, like Berkeley, to single out those things which we can perceive by using only our senses and not our reason. Possibly, he too transferred the epistemic implications of “to perceive” to “to see” and its cognates, assumed that when things must be what they appear we can recognise them by just having a look, whereas we must work out what they are when appearances may be deceptive, and leaped to the conclusion that ‘in truth and strictness’ we perceive by sense, and without automatic or other inference, only those things which are guaranteed to be elliptical when they look elliptical, i.e., to which the distinction between being F and merely looking F does not apply: the elliptical silvery patches he resolved to call ‘sense-data’.3

This would be consistent with the fact that he presupposes in core passages that only what is directly perceived is in fact observed (e.g. FEK 231, cp. Chapter 6.2)—and not inferred. Other passages suggest that Ayer also conflated “appears” and “looks” (e.g. FEK 3), and establish that he maintained the apparent implication that we always have to work out what material objects we are seeing—and hence cannot ever perceive such objects directly (e.g. FEK 267–270). The sequence of non-intentional inferences we have outlined might well account for Ayer’s adoption of, and his strikingly persistent implicit belief in, the sense-datum doctrine. I have to leave it to the reader to follow up this hypothesis, with Ayer’s text in hand.





4. PROSPECTS FOR ORDINARY LANGUAGE ANALYSIS




By their friends and foes alike, ordinary language philosophers have frequently, and often rightly, been credited with the aim of showing philosophical claims false or meaningless by showing they are inconsistent with common sense, as implicit in ordinary language, or by demonstrating that they involve deviations from ordinary use.4 However, many common-sense convictions have been refuted by scientific inquiry, many others still stand to be refuted thus, and ordinary language ‘can everywhere be supplemented and improved upon and superseded’—as Austin himself pointed out. 5 This objection appears particularly forceful in the case of Sense and Sensibilia, which addresses a philosopher who develops his arguments and theories in technical language explicitly introduced for the purpose. Even philosophers who admired the brilliance of ordinary language analysis at its best have therefore taken a rather dim view of its ultimate philosophical relevance.6 This raises what is presumably the central methodological puzzle about ordinary language analysis: How can such analysis lead not only to insight about pre-philosophical talk but contribute to the resolution of philosophical problems?

In this book, we have developed a new conception of the nature and genesis of an extensive and important class of philosophical problems. This conception warrants a new approach to the problems at issue, within which ordinary language analysis can be put to novel uses. These uses do not require us to assume that common-sense convictions must be true or that philosophers’ utterances must be meaningless the moment they deviate from established usage. And these uses are apt to contribute significantly to resolving and overcoming philosophical problems.

At the end of the previous chapter, we saw how ordinary language analysis can contribute to the dissolution of ill-motivated problems, that is, to refuting our reasons for raising them and showing we are justified in dropping their pursuit. It can contribute by exposing the paradoxical character of intuitively compelling assumptions that raise those problems. From this character we must not infer that these claims are false or meaningless. But we may infer that their proponents are under an obligation to support them with explanation or argument, and that they are unwarranted when their proponents fail to provide or accept any relevant explanation or argument—as is frequently the case (Chapter 7.6).

In this chapter, we have seen how ordinary language analysis can make a second major contribution and help us to actually overcome what we have seen reason to abandon. Such analysis can help us reconstruct unsound processes of non-intentional inference that may complement the kind of non-intentional analogical reasoning we have previously considered. Where those reconstructions offer the best available explanation of why certain philosophers maintain certain claims—which may happen, for instance, where philosophers do not provide or accept any relevant arguments for claims in strong need of argumentative support—we may conclude that those processes actually drove these thinkers to maintain these claims and raise whatever ill-motivated problems the latter engender. Ordinary language analysis can thus complement the sort of diagnostic analysis we have developed in the bulk of this book, to uncover and reconstruct a wider range of non-intentional reasoning shaping philosophical reflection. In this way, it can help us acquire the kind of meta-cognitive insight or self-understanding that we have seen apt to weaken delusional beliefs and mitigate the underlying intellectual altitude sickness (Chapter 7.5). Ordinary language analysis can thus contribute to therapeutic efforts that liberate us from philosophical delusions and the groundless worries and pointless efforts these delusions engender by clashing with common sense, familiar facts, or among each other. By exposing some of the concealed motives that may stealthily shape our philosophical reflection, the analysis of ordinary language can help us to liberate ourselves from bad questions, including deeply disquieting questions that have mesmerised generations of philosophers.





9 Self-Reflection as Therapy


Wittgenstein on Understanding




Our new account of philosophical problems and reflection vindicates a two-fold reorientation of philosophical work: the ‘meta-philosophical turn’ which has us adopt a novel approach and the ‘therapeutic turn’ which has us pursue new ultimate aims (Chapter 7). The latter ‘turn’ motivates another reorientation of philosophical work, at the level of addressees. Where picture-driven reasoning or other ‘concealed motives’ of which we are unaware have us imagine philosophical problems where there are none, and worry and toil needlessly, the only thing we can reasonably do is put an end to such unreasonable worries and endeavours. We thus turn from attempts to solve philosophical problems which are ill-motivated or illusory to efforts to solve emotional and behavioural problems which are genuine. By and large, the personal problems that matter most to us are our own. The adoption, for philosophical work, of the new therapeutic aims of solving emotional or behavioural problems thus motivates, though it does not necessitate, the turn from a third- to a first-person focus: The moment we seriously turn to the practice of philosophy as therapy, we are likely to find ourselves the most worthwhile patients. First and foremost, therapeutic philosophy will be practiced as self-therapy.

We have seen that, by and large, the predicaments of one philosopher tend to resemble those of others: Our worries and efforts are as similar as the philosophical pictures that guide us, the intuitions they generate, and the problems and questions these intuitions engender. By solving the emotional and behavioural problems engendered by my intuitions I can hence show you not only what kind of thing you need to do to solve yours, in the way in which the successful self-therapy of a cognitive therapist suffering from depression can show another sufferer what kind of treatment might help him too. Rather, my efforts may sometimes demonstrate almost the exact treatment you too require. Self-therapy does not even get close to implying inter-subjective irrelevance.

But, even so, the turn from others to oneself is probably even harder for many philosophers to countenance than the two-fold reorientation of philosophical work we have advocated so far: One may well accept the approach of dissolving and overcoming ill-motivated problems by gaining meta-cognitive insight, and may even adopt as one’s paramount goal the therapeutic aims of solving the emotional and behavioural problems of those worried by such ‘problems’, but still balk at the idea that the approach should be applied, first and foremost, to oneself (rather than a philosophical opponent) and that one should, first and foremost, treat one’s own emotional and behavioural problems rather than help others with theirs. Here, more than anywhere else, we need to adapt and employ the kind of move cognitive therapists employ to facilitate engagement, and provide a respected model (cp. Chapter 7.6): To get as much as a fair hearing for the idea of philosophy as self-therapy, we arguably need to show that a philosopher whose work is widely accepted as important and relevant has practised philosophy in this way.

We therefore now turn to Ludwig Wittgenstein and, more specifically, the ‘chapter’ on understanding that forms a core part of his later main work, the Philosophical Investigations (henceforward: PI). We will argue that the later Wittgenstein advocated and practiced philosophy as therapy (Section 1), and was his own patient: We will identify a pertinent habit of non-intentional inference or ‘urge to misunderstand’ (Section 2) and show that Wittgenstein exposed this urge in his own thought, i.e., diagnosed himself with this ‘disease of the understanding’ (Section 3). Then we will reconstruct how this ‘disease’ led him to raise the problem about sudden understanding around which that ‘chapter’ of the Investigations revolves (Section 4). We will find that this problem fits Wittgenstein’s conception of nature and genesis of philosophical problems, and that this conception vindicates his adoption of a therapeutic aim (Section 5). Finally, we will consider how he pursues this aim in response to the problem about sudden understanding; we will find that Wittgenstein employs an approach which is geared towards the acquisition of meta-cognitive insight (Section 6). By showing that, why, and how, Wittgenstein took the therapeutic and the meta-philosophical turn, we will obtain a model for philosophical self-therapy. By considering the results of his self-analyses, we will also extend our case-studies on non-intentional reasoning in philosophy beyond members of the empiricist tradition, and from problems in metaphysics and the philosophies of mind and perception to problems in the philosophy of language: Non-intentional reasoning shapes philosophical reflection not only in the areas in which we have been moving up to now or in the one tradition of philosophy we have studied so far. It demonstrably occurs rather more widely.





1. WITTGENSTEIN’S THERAPEUTIC AIM




Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations is perplexing in the same way as Austin’s Sense and Sensibilia, and perhaps even more so. While written in plain German, this text too has left its readers wondering what it is for, and what it does. For a start, it explicitly repudiates various conventional aims of philosophical work:

[W]e may not advance any kind of theory. There must not be anything hypothetical in our considerations. We must do away with all explanation, and description alone must take its place. (PI 109)





That is: Wittgenstein does not seek to construct any theories or offer any explanations (cp. PI 126). Nor is it his aim to establish the truth of any hypotheses or non-trivial or potentially controversial claims (cp. PI 128, 599).

These statements of non-intent are consistent with Wittgenstein’s actual proceeding. While commentators guided by more conventional ideas about the point and purpose of philosophical work tended to read substantive claims, or even philosophical theories, into various passages of the Investigations,1 an unbiased and closer look quickly reveals that Wittgenstein either did not endorse the claims attributed to him or did not pursue the pertinent investigations with the chief aim of establishing them—neither on a substantive nor on a truistic reading. Take the closely linked investigations of understanding and rule-following that lie at the heart of the Investigations (PI 138–242). This long stretch of text contains only four (!) remarks that even appear to state substantive philosophical claims, 2 and appear to state, between them, the grand total of three distinct claims, which we now consider in turn.

The first is the so-called ‘use theory of meaning’, i.e., the claim that the meaning of an expression consists in its use. Wittgenstein is usually taken to advance this claim already in an earlier passage, with the words: ‘For a large class of cases of the use of the word “meaning”—though not for all cases of its use, one can explain the word thus: the meaning of a word is its use in language’ (PI 43). This formulation is not only remarkably cautious (the italics are Wittgenstein’s), but also stops noticeably short of advancing any claim about ‘what the meaning of a word is’ or ‘consists in’. It is not ‘about word meaning’ but about one of different actual uses of the word “meaning”: It contents itself with the claim that in many (though not all) cases in which we speak of a word’s ‘meaning’, one can explain what we are saying by paraphrasing it as a statement about the word’s use in language. When the idea that ‘the meaning of a word is its use’ is taken up again in the investigations now at issue, in PI 138, it is not asserted but constitutes the antecedent of a conditional employed in setting up an objection Wittgenstein proceeds to attack. When taken up again, in PI 197, it is rewritten as a premise of the refuted objection. Accordingly (to take another famous, if apparently trivial, remark supposedly stating what the meaning of a word is), Wittgenstein does not assert that ‘the meaning of a word is what an explanation of its meaning explains’; rather, this sentence is merely being mentioned, enclosed in double quotes, and explicitly interpreted as expressing not a claim but this heuristic principle: ‘if you want to understand the use of the word “meaning”, look for what are called “explanations of meaning”’ (PI 560). There is no textual basis for attributing to him any answer, substantive or trivial, to the philosophical question ‘What is the meaning of a word?’ Indeed, there is every reason to believe that Wittgenstein rejected the very question as the expression of a groundless disquiet, in line with his general view that ‘[t]he first mistake we encounter in a philosophical investigation is . . . always the question itself’ (MS 165: 55).3

The next pertinent remark states: ‘In the sense in which there are processes (including mental processes) which are characteristic of understanding, understanding is not a mental process’ (PI 154d). Depending upon what the ‘sense’ adverted to is, this may well boil down to an entirely uncontroversial and trivial observation. More importantly, this and the third, apparently more substantive, pertinent remark—‘And hence also ‘obeying a rule’ is a practice’ (PI 202)—were inserted into the text considerably later than the discussion surrounding them: Paragraph 154d was included neither in the first nor the second typescript version of the surrounding discussion, but only inserted in handwriting into the latter typescript (TS 239). And section 202 was not included in the first version of the discussion from which its claim is inferred (the so-called ‘Intermediary Version’).4 This can be explained in a way consistent with Wittgenstein’s meta-philosophical statements: The present investigations at first did not contain these claims because these investigations are not directed at establishing their truth, substantive or trivial, but at different ends, and were subsequently included when Wittgenstein came to believe that their appreciation can contribute to attaining these different ends.

In line with the potentially unhelpful view that ‘[i]f this book is written as it should be, then everything I say must be easily understandable, indeed, trivial, but it should be difficult to understand why I say it’ (MS 117: 140–41), 5 the Investigations remain largely silent about what these different ends or aims might be.6 In his earlier Big Typescript, however, Wittgenstein clearly identifies a guiding aim. Here, in his most extensive discussion of philosophical method, he stresses again and again the disquiet or uneasiness (‘Beunruhigung’ or ‘Unruhe’: BT 409, 415, 416, 421, 431) engendered in us by wrong analogies (BT 409), ‘disorder in our concepts’ (BT 421) and (misleading) expressions (BT 416). Wittgenstein’s declared chief aim is the removal of such unwarranted disquiet:

As I do philosophy, its entire [!] task is to shape expression in such a way that certain disquietudes disappear. (BT 421)





He seeks freedom from those unwarranted but ‘deep disquietudes’ that arise through various forms of ‘misinterpretation’ (PI 111a2), so as to achieve a certain peace of mind:

Thoughts at peace. That is the [!] goal someone who philosophises longs for. (CV 50) 7





Since his proceeding in the investigations we are studying is consistent with his explicit rejection of more conventional aims, we should take these statements perfectly seriously.8

Unwarranted but distressing or otherwise disabling emotions are constitutive of emotional problems (Chapter 6.6). In other words, Wittgenstein’s chief goal is the therapeutic aim of solving emotional problems. Accordingly, he conceives of the problems he seeks to solve as consisting in the feelings of disquiet of particular subjects, rather than in the philosophical questions or puzzles they are disquieted by or worry about: 9 ‘The problems arising through a misinterpretation of our forms of language . . . are deep disquietudes’ (PI 111a1–111a2, my italics). Indeed, even more to the point: ‘What we [i.e., I—editorial plural] call “philosophical problems” are particular personal disquiets [besondere individuelle Beunruhigungen]’ (MS 115: 35, my italics).

Wittgenstein puts these emotional problems down to ‘diseases of the understanding’ and maintains that ‘the philosopher’ needs to cure such diseases in himself:

The philosopher is someone who has to cure in himself many diseases of the understanding, before he can arrive at the notions of common sense. (CV 50)





A disease, you recall (from Chapter 6.6), is a somatic or psychological process, cognitive or other, that is not under our direct control and makes us physically or mentally ill, for instance by bringing about emotional problems. Wittgenstein puts the emotional problems at issue down to ‘urges to misunderstand’: These disquietudes ‘aris[e] through a misinterpretation of our forms of language’ (PI 111a1) and these ‘philosophical problems’—i.e. personal disquiets—‘are to be solved . . . by mak[ing] us recognise [the workings of our language]: in despite of an urge to misunderstand them’ (PI 109a8). ‘Urges’ are propensities which are not under our direct control. When they bring about groundless disquiet, urges to misunderstand thus qualify as diseases. Arguably, they are constitutive of the ‘diseases of the understanding’ Wittgenstein thinks a philosopher has to cure in himself. We shall presently see that Wittgenstein attempts to cure intellectual diseases he diagnoses in himself. Arguably, he wants to put an end to certain feelings of disquiet that bother him, i.e., to solve his own emotional problems. To show that Wittgenstein was indeed engaged in self-therapy, we shall now develop his notion of ‘urges to misunderstand’ (Section 2) and show that he exposed such urges in his own thought (Section 3).





2. URGES TO MISUNDERSTAND




One of the ‘urges to misunderstand’ Wittgenstein struggles with at length is the inclination to posit conscious or inner events where there are none: ‘When we do philosophy, we should like to hypostasise [e.g.] feelings where there are none’ (PI 598). This urge materialises, for example, in leaps to unwarranted conclusions from sentences containing verbs or expressions like “reading”, “copying”, “writing from dictation”, “playing from a score”—the at first sight motley crew that Wittgenstein idiosyncratically lumps together under the label of “reading” (PI 156a). For all these activities there are characteristic forms of behaviour that may, however, be displayed without actually performing the activity. Thus, a pupil may carefully follow the text line by line with eyes and finger, while merely pretending to read out a text he has previously learnt by rote. Actual and merely apparent reading may involve exactly the same external behaviour, in the given situation. In abstract reflection, many people therefore find it intuitively compelling to conclude that the two must involve different inner processes (156g), and unquestioningly go along with leaps of thought that presuppose instances of

Schema I: If, and only if, someone actually V-ies, an inner (conscious or unconscious) process P goes on that makes the difference between actual and merely apparent V-ing.



Wittgenstein characterises the inclination to make such leaps by means of a comparison that brings out its most striking feature:

Just as Germanisms creep into the speech of a German who speaks English well although he does not first construct the German expression and then translate into English; just as this makes him speak English as if he were translating, ‘unconsciously’, from the German—so we often think as if our thinking were founded on a thought-schema:

as if we were translating from a more primitive mode of thought into ours. (PI 597)





That we ‘think as if our thinking were founded on a thought-schema’ means that we have a certain habit of thought or inference: We systematically make non-trivial leaps of thought that tacitly presuppose assumptions instancing always the same schema, like Schema I. The comparison brings out that we are not aware of relying on the assumptions presupposed, which may even be assumptions we explicitly reject. (In leaping to a conclusion, ‘we think as if we were inferring it, “unconsciously”, from an assumption’ that remains tacit and may ‘creep in’ against our will, just as the German constructions creep in, even though the speaker knows them to be out of place.) Hence these leaps, and the propensity to make them, are ‘autonomous’: The thinker is prone to make these leaps irrespective of whether or not he wants to rely on the assumptions they presuppose.

Wittgenstein points out that the propensity to make the pertinent leaps is context-sensitive: We make them when considering particular examples, with an abstract philosophical question in mind (PI 156e). Thus, it is not when considering an adult reader, but when thinking of a beginner who makes a conscious effort as he ‘reads the words by laboriously spelling them out’ (PI 156d), that ‘we shall be inclined’ to leap from this straightforward description to the conclusion that the subject’s reading essentially involves conscious mental acts. When asking ourselves what reading consists in, we then further leap from this specific to the general conclusion that reading ‘is a special conscious activity of mind’ (PI 156e) or, put in semantic guise, that ‘the one real criterion for anybody’s reading is the conscious act of reading’ (PI 159a1). This happens in abstract reflection; when confronted with specific cases, we are unwilling to treat any conscious event either as necessary or as sufficient condition of reading (PI 159–160).

Third, the propensity asserts itself even when we have no warrant whatsoever for the conclusions we leap to: Wittgenstein swiftly brings out that we have no warrant for the present conclusion, in either guise (see below, Section 6). Moreover, the moment we accept this fact, we leap to a related conclusion: Suppose ‘we . . . admit that—as far as concerns uttering any one of the printed words—the same thing may take place in the consciousness of the pupil who is ‘pretending’ to read, as in that of the practised reader who is ‘reading’ it’ (PI 156g1). Then we infer that an unconscious inner process must make the relevant difference:

Now we should of course like to say: What goes on in the practised reader and in a beginner [who is ‘pretending’ to read] when they utter the word cannot be the same. And if there is no difference in what they happen to be conscious of there must be one in the unconscious workings of their minds, or in the brain. (PI 156g3–156g4)





We should like to jump to this conclusion, even though we really do not know anything at all about such unconscious mechanisms (PI 158). The moment we appreciate this, we may then revert to the previous conclusion (PI 159a1). I.e.: In abstract reflection seizing on certain examples, we may shuttle between different unwarranted conclusions to which we leap in line with Schema I. The inclination to make such leaps of thought is a-rational (though not necessarily irrational): Their conclusions strike the thinker as intuitively compelling, regardless of what warrant he has for these claims.

To sum up: According to Wittgenstein’s analysis, the intellectual propensity at issue is autonomous, a-rational and context-sensitive. In these three respects, it is similar to exemplary urges, like the otherwise very different urges for food or sex: These urges are context-sensitive, as they lie dormant for certain periods and assert themselves in particular situations, frequently triggered by certain cues. They are autonomous in that they make themselves felt and influence our behaviour, whether or not we want them to. And they are a-rational in the sense that we feel the urge to act, and may succumb to it, whether or not the action is right by our lights. In view of these similarities, it is quite fitting to characterise autonomous cognitive habits or propensities like the one at issue as cognitive or intellectual ‘urges’. Let’s call the present urge, to make inferences in line with Schema I and posit inner events where there are none, the ‘mentalist urge’.

When we find given claims intuitively compelling, we tend to presuppose them in our interpretation of the observations we make and the talk we encounter—the well-documented phenomenon of belief bias we have already come across several times. Due to such bias, any a-rational intellectual urge that has us find unwarranted conclusions intuitively compelling will lead us to place unwarranted interpretations on observations and statements and thus to misunderstand what is going on and what is being said. The conclusions to which the mentalist urge has us leap will colour our interpretation of our observations of pertinent activities (like the laborious reading of the beginner) as well as our interpretation of talk about them. We will consequently misunderstand what is going on, for instance, when somebody reads, as well as what we say, and how we talk, about this (as when we conclude that we must seize on a conscious act as a criterion for reading). In the latter case, we can be said to ‘misunderstand the workings of our language’. But in examining the mentalist urge, Wittgenstein examines also various ‘non-linguistic’ conclusions to which it may have us leap (in conjunction with belief bias). The intellectual urges he seeks to expose and overcome are hence not just ‘urges to misunderstand the workings of our language’ (as he characterises his foes in PI 109a8) but are ‘urges to misunderstand’ a rather wider variety of things. The ‘urges to misunderstand’ he examines are, more generally, context-sensitive and autonomous habits or propensities to make a-rational leaps of thought.

Many of the phenomena of non-intentional reasoning we have examined in previous chapters satisfy this definition: Being under the spell of a philosophical picture amounts to having a context-sensitive and autonomous propensity to make certain a-rational leaps of thought (Chapter 1.2). The same goes for the various propensities to unwittingly transfer ordinary implications that we have examined in connection with Austin’s work (Chapter 8). It also applies to some further propensities that Austin commented on, like our tendency to unwittingly fall back on dichotomous patterns of inference, when engaged in abstract reflection.

Some of these more fundamental ‘urges to misunderstand’ can account for leaps of thought in line with the present Schema I. Recall the perceptual pictures of intellectual activities and achievements we considered at the outset (Chapter 1). Non-intentional inferences driven by these pictures render compelling the assumption that various intellectual activities and achievements essentially involve perceiving something in the mind, that is, a conscious ‘inner’ event. Thus, an inference driven by the perceptual picture of understanding could account for the first manifestation of the mentalist urge Wittgenstein considers: the propensity to leap to conclusions, which presuppose that when we understand something (like a number-series), we must be aware of some inner event or process (PI 153, see Section 4).

Another relevant source is philosophers’ widespread tendency to ignore context, which may have them presuppose that real and apparent V-ing have to be distinguished by reference to something that happens in the given or present situation—rather than anything that happens or might happen before or after. Dichotomous thinking may then have us leap from the observation that actual and merely apparent, say, reading may involve exactly the same external behaviour, in the given situation, to the conclusion that different internal events or processes must distinguish the two. The urge to misunderstand that Wittgenstein examines in his investigations of understanding and reading results, I submit, from the phenomena of non-intentional reasoning we have examined.





3. WITTGENSTEIN’S SELF-DIAGNOSIS




Wittgenstein does not seek to explain this urge; he merely seeks to expose it in a philosopher’s thought. In his investigation of ‘reading’ (PI 156–178), which interrupts the investigation of understanding, Wittgenstein examines how the mentalist urge has a philosopher imagine experiences where there are none. This philosopher is none other than Wittgenstein himself. He is his own guinea-pig, as he works here from the first-person perspective he advocates in characterising ‘the philosopher’ as ‘someone who has to cure in himself [!] many diseases of the understanding’ (CV 50), and which he explicitly acknowledges as his own: ‘Almost the whole time I am writing conversations with myself. Things I say to myself tête-à-tête’ (CV 88). The afterthought brings out what the otherwise pleonastic German formulation (‘Selbstgespräche mit mir selbst’, i.e. ‘soliloquies with myself’) makes clear from the start: Wittgenstein’s Investigations do not merely have the form of a philosophical soliloquy (with a, perhaps, fictitious protagonist), but record what their author actually told himself.

One of the ‘diseases of the understanding’ Wittgenstein finds ‘in himself’ by examining the things he is inclined to say to himself tête-à-tête is the present urge to misunderstand: He uses, rather than quotes, the words “I [!] should like to say” in introducing the different versions of the idea to which the mentalist urge has thinkers leap (e.g. PI 169c2, 173b11, 174a3, 176a4). He ‘would like to say’ (in the cautious sense presently explained) that when reading or copying, etc., we are having characteristic experiences that distinguish actual from merely apparent exercises of these activities— and frequently expresses this idea with idiosyncratic formulations that cannot credibly be put into anyone else’s mouth, e.g.: ‘I should like to say: “I experience the because”’ (PI 177a1). Indeed, Wittgenstein often addresses himself in the second person (‘you’), as one does in soliloquy, and various of the statements that in the Investigations occur in double quotes and without attribution to ‘me’ or ‘you’ or anyone else, are derived from manuscript sources in which they are referred to as what ‘I am inclined to say’.10 Most of the statements commentators commonly attribute to a fictitious interlocutor, and many of the statements typically regarded as impersonal items for discussion, in fact articulate things Wittgenstein is inclined to say and prone to find intuitively compelling.11

Wittgenstein’s attitude towards these intuitively compelling ideas differs radically, though, from that of other philosophers in the grip of the mentalist urge: He is aware of his predicament and therefore careful not to endorse the ideas that strike him as compelling. He would ‘like to say’ and believe these things merely in the sense that it comes naturally to him to say them and that they strike him as intuitively compelling. For he regards this inclination as just that—as an inclination or ‘temptation to use a particular kind of expression’ (PI 254a3), indeed, as a temptation to talk ‘nonsense’ (in the colloquial sense that covers both meaninglessness and absurdity). All the same, he attends to it carefully, in line with his exhortation: ‘Don’t for Heaven’s sake be afraid of talking nonsense. Only don’t fail to pay attention to your nonsense’ (CV 64). He pays attention even to patently nonsensical conclusions that strike him as tempting, in order to identify urges to misunderstand that, in different settings, may have him actually go along with absurd ideas he sees through less easily (as we shall see in the next section).

In the investigation of ‘reading’—in his liberal, ‘technical’ sense of the word which includes copying, writing from dictation, etc. (PI 156a)— Wittgenstein makes himself aware that he has (1) a context-sensitive propensity to be attracted by specific ideas (about reading, copying, etc.) for which (2) there really is no warrant. He achieves this through a series of ‘experiment[s]’ (PI 169c7): Addressing each activity in turn (reading: PI 169, copying a text: PI 173, copying a figure: PI 175), he first executes it, bearing in mind the question of what then happens (PI 170b1). Then he (1) takes note of what he is spontaneously inclined to say about experiences that then occur, of the precise expression he feels attracted to, and of the particular circumstances under which he is tempted to use it. This yields a ‘psychologically accurate account’ of his ‘temptation’ (PI 254a3). And (2) he checks what warrant there is for saying what he thus says, by considering what he can actually remember. This reveals the idea at hand is a ‘fiction’ (PI 166a2) or ‘imagination’ (PI 170c1) due to unwarranted leaps of thought.

Thus, after copying a doodle put down for the purpose (PI 175a1–2), he is spontaneously inclined to say that he felt a kind of influence of the original on his movements: ‘When I look back on the experience I have the feeling that what is essential about it is an ‘experience of being influenced’, of a connexion—as opposed to any mere simultaneity of phenomena’ (PI 176a1). But this impression is entirely unwarranted: ‘It’s as if I couldn’t believe that I merely looked, made such-and-such a face, and drew a line.— But don’t I remember anything else? No’ (PI 175b4–175b 5, cp. PI 176a2). He notes that certain formulations trigger the leap of thought: ‘And yet I feel as if there must have been something else; in particular when I say “guidance”, “influence”, and other such words to myself. “For surely”, I tell myself, “I was being guided.” Only then does the idea of that ethereal, intangible influence arise’ (PI 175b6–175b8).

This is a leap of thought presupposing an instance of (part of) Schema I:





(1) ‘I have actually copied the figure, was being guided by it.’

(I1) ‘If someone actually copies a figure, he has an experience of being influenced or guided, which experience makes the difference between actual copying and merely coincidental reproduction.’ Which entails:

(i) ‘I had an experience of being influenced’ (of being guided: cp. PI 172).



Wittgenstein feels inclined to leap to this conclusion, even though he reflec-tively rejects (I1): It is not an experience that makes the difference between actually being guided by, and merely coincidental reproduction of, the original, but rather the fact that he drew the second line down exactly parallel to it, rather than arbitrarily, and would have explained by reference to the original line why he drew the second the way he did (PI 177a3, cp. PI 169b5–169b6). I.e.: As all the leaps of thought Wittgenstein examines in this investigation, this leap is autonomous.

These leaps have him posit an experience where there is none—as the leap from (1) to (i)—or to radically misinterpret an experience he actually has. Wittgenstein elicits one such misinterpretation through another self-experiment: He first reads off a sentence and then pronounces it while following a line of mostly non-alphabetic signs, including: &8§‚ §‚?ß . . . (PI 169a2–169a3). ‘It does of course make a difference whether I say “i” when I see “i” or when I see “§”’ (PI 169c5). Spontaneously, ‘I should like to say: when I read I feel a kind of influence of the letters working on me—but I feel no influence from that series of arbitrary flourishes on what I say’ (PI 169c2). But, comparing the cases more carefully, Wittgenstein finds that this misinterprets the difference he can actually notice, which is this: ‘when I see the letter it is automatic for me to hear the sound “i” inwardly, it happens even against my will; and I pronounce the letter more effortlessly when I read it than when I am looking at “§”’ (PI 169c6). So he interprets this difference which he actually notices ‘as the difference between being influenced and not being influenced’ (PI 170a3) and thus comes to imagine an ‘experience of being influenced’ where he is not aware of anything that would fit the description (PI 170c).

Through these and similar experiments, with himself in the two-fold role of guinea-pig and experimenter, Wittgenstein elicits many autonomous leaps of thought (PI 165, 166, 169, 173, 175; cp. Section 6 below). He thus exposes his own urge to systematically imagine or misinterpret experiences, in leaps of thought that presuppose assumptions he explicitly rejects. He thus comes to diagnose himself with a specific disease of the understanding.





4. ILLUSORY PROBLEMS: SUDDEN UNDERSTANDING




When this urge has him imagine experiences where there are none, a particularly acute conflict with reality arises and generates the impression of a problem, at the very least in the form of unwarranted philosophical puzzlement. Thus, Wittgenstein initially feels puzzled by his ‘copying-experiment’: He is inclined to say he had an ‘experience of being influenced’. ‘But at the same time I should not be willing to call any experienced phenomenon [that I can actually remember] the “experience of being influenced”’ (PI 176a2). His inclination thus leaves him with the perplexing idea of an influence that is effective but ‘ethereal, intangible’ (PI 175b8).

A philosopher who is not merely inclined to say, but actually assumes, that a characteristic mental event is essential to the exercise of some activity, and is simultaneously unable to grow aware of any suitable event in performing it, will feel there is a tension between a philosophical assumption he makes and a fact he recognises. This will have him formulate the characteristic kind of problem we called a ‘reconciliation problem’: the problem of reconciling different assumptions in the face of an apparent tension between them (Chapter 2.3).

Wittgenstein develops a problem of this sort right before launching the investigation of reading (in PI 151–153). The problem is about understanding of number-series. While of course no activity, but an achievement, such understanding is akin to the activities discussed in that it is associated with characteristic forms of behaviour that may, however, be displayed without actual understanding. Thus, someone may correctly continue the series by a fluke, may utter the pertinent formula without understanding (of either the formula or the series), etc. Also here leaps of thought in line with Schema I may occur. The temptation to make them is particularly strong in the case of sudden understanding, signalled by the exclamation ‘Now I understand!’ For in such cases of understanding, in marked contrast to others, we typically are aware of some mental process (thinking of a pertinent formula, some mental arithmetic, etc.)—and may all too easily conclude that it makes the difference between genuine and merely apparent understanding. Accordingly, leaps to this mentalist conclusion about sudden understanding may occur even once one has appreciated that the attribution of understanding (of a number series) amounts to more or less the same as the attribution of a capacity or know-how (to continue the series), which point Wittgenstein appreciates in the immediately preceding sections (PI 146–150).

He then raises his problem about sudden understanding as a result of three leaps of thought. They differ from those he deliberately examines in his subsequent ‘experiments’ in that he initially finds them compelling and goes along with them. Even though he explicitly equates understanding with a capacity (PI 151b4), he immediately puts a ‘mentalist’ interpretation on the question posed by the next sentence, ‘What is it that makes its appearance here?’ (PI 151b5): He does not respond with a detailed or otherwise informative description of the capacity he explicitly assumes to make its appearance, but spontaneously interprets the question as one about an event: ‘What happened here?’ (PI 151b7), and immediately answers it by adducing some mental events we are typically aware of when suddenly understanding a series: thinking of a formula, etc. (PI 151b8ff.). In leaping from the first to the second question, Wittgenstein inadvertently presupposes that the understanding that makes its appearance here is a mental event. This translates into an assumption instancing Schema I:



(I2) If and only if someone actually understands, a mental event occurs that constitutes (real) understanding: It is inconceivable that the subject should not understand when it occurs.



The next two leaps presuppose this very assumption. The observation that



(2) Each of the events adduced may conceivably occur even when the subject does not understand (PI 152b2–152b4)



leads Wittgenstein to conclude immediately that



(ii) The mental process of understanding . . . seems to be hidden behind those coarser and therefore more readily visible accompaniments. (PI 153a1)



He tries to ‘get hold’ of this process, and fails to succeed (PI 153a1–153a2). This process is as ‘ethereal, intangible’ as the ‘experience of being influ-enced’ in copying. The conclusion thus brought home, that this process is ‘hidden’, then is at odds with the observation that



(3) ‘I said “Now I understand” because I understood’ (PI 153a5),



inadvertently interpreted—in the light of I2— as amounting to



(iii) ‘I said “Now I understand” because I was aware of the mental process that constitutes understanding.’



Whence ‘I am in a muddle’ (PI 153a7): Wittgenstein apparently faces the problem of reconciling his conclusion (ii) with the present observation.

In marked contrast to (ii) and (iii), (2) and (3) do not even appear to be at odds, when interpreted in line with our ordinary way of attributing understanding to others and to ourselves: We do not use the phrase “Now I understand” to report a mental state, but to signal that we can continue the series; and we and others judge whether the signal was rightly employed by considering how we continue that series (PI 180) and how we explain and justify our continuation of it. Accordingly, I may say ‘I said “Now I understand” because I understood (and not because I wanted to impress you)’ to state that I employed the signal sincerely, being confident that I could continue the series correctly and give an explanation to justify my choice of numbers (rather than hoping for luck in guessing). When rightly employing the signal, we will frequently think of such an explanation, usually a formula. But whether our utterance is correct does not depend upon whether any such mental event occurs. We may well say ‘Now I understand’ when nothing at all occurs in our minds (PI 179c). A fortiori, we may say this correctly when no mental event occurs that makes our failure to understand inconceivable: say, when we think of a formula that enables us (who we have learnt algebra and have used this kind of formula before) to continue the series correctly, but does not put a novice to algebra into that position (PI 179b). Properly understood, (3) does not even appear to be inconsistent with (2)—or with (ii), for that matter.

Thus, Wittgenstein (momentarily) feels there is a tension between assumptions that have to be honoured, only because he makes two moves (which he will swiftly correct): because he explicitly infers (ii) from (2) and implicitly interprets (3) as amounting to (iii). He has (as he will quickly realise) no warrant for either move: He is not aware of any such process as (ii) takes to be hidden and (iii) takes him to report, and he is not in possession of some more general grounds to support the tacit presupposition (I2), so as to turn his inadvertent leaps of thought into sound arguments. Indeed, he repudiates (I2), in equating understanding with a capacity. So he has no warrant for his assumption (ii), and none for regarding his other explicit assumption (3) as at odds with it. This illustrates at one go the two potentially complementary ways in which a reconciliation problem may be ill motivated: When raising the problem of reconciling different assumptions in the face of an apparent tension between them, we may lack warrant either for at least one of the assumptions to be reconciled, or for our impression of a tension between them—or, like Wittgenstein, for both. Like practically all the problems we have considered in this book, Wittgenstein’s problem is an ill-motivated reconciliation-problem, engendered by unsound inferences or leaps of thought which are not under the thinker’s direct control.





5. WITTGENSTEIN’S THERAPEUTIC TURN




A common response to such problems is the construction of a philosophical theory that is to reconcile what apparently is at odds. Many philosophical theories are explicitly meant to ‘reconcile’ different philosophical intuitions and salient facts, which the theory must ‘accommodate’. In the case of the present problem, this response would take the shape of the development of a ‘theory of hidden mental processes’ to solve the problem by explaining how it is possible for subjects to report that they understand something— even though the process of understanding is hidden. Such a theory would be in some ways similar to the ‘theory of tacit semantic knowledge’ actually proposed by Gareth Evans and others, in the early 1980s, which we briefly encountered above (Chapter 7.2).

Wittgenstein’s first decisive move towards an alternative response is to suspend belief in the things he is irresistibly inclined to say; he does not regard these intuitions as sources of insight:

Being unable—when we surrender ourselves to philosophical thought—to help saying such-and-such; being irresistibly inclined to say it—does not mean being forced into an assumption, or having an immediate perception or knowledge of a state of affairs. (PI 299)





Accordingly, he does not rush to ‘honour’ such philosophical intuitions by constructing a reconciliatory ‘theory’. As we already noted, he regards his inclinations to say this-or-that, and to find it compelling, as just that—as inclinations or temptations:

What we are ‘tempted to say’ in such a case is, of course, not philosophy; but it is its raw material. Thus, for example, what a mathematician is inclined to say about the objectivity and reality of mathematical facts [or a philosopher about processes of understanding], is not a philosophy of mathematics [or language], but something for philosophical treatment. (PI 254a4–254a5)





Prior to examination of the warrant for saying those things, it is a genuinely open question in which of two very different senses this ‘raw material’ ought to be ‘treated’: whether it should be elaborated into a theory of the matter or subject about which we are inclined to say this-or-that (a theory of understanding, say); or whether we should cure an urge to say things that are not even faintly sensible. This second, commonly neglected, possibility is explicitly adduced in the next sentence: ‘The philosopher’s treatment of a question is like the treatment of an illness’ (PI 255).

This detached attitude makes it possible for Wittgenstein to soberly determine the content of the claims that strike him as intuitively plausible or compelling, and to assess what warrant he has for maintaining them: ‘Now, ask yourself’, he enjoins himself, ‘what do you know about these things?’ (PI 158a7). Sincere answers to this question reveal systematic lack of warrant, if not of meaning, and allow him to conceptualise the problems he believed to confront him as arising from conflicts between intuitively compelling but unwarranted claims and other assumptions or convictions:

[The philosophical problem]12 A simile that has been absorbed into the forms of our language produces a false appearance, and this disquiets us. “But this isn’t how it is!”—we say. “Yet this is how it has to be!” (PI 112)





The disquieting problem is raised by the apparent conflict between how we are intuitively inclined to think that something has to be—a ‘false appearance’ like the intuitively compelling conclusion, (ii) above, that the mental process of understanding seems to be hidden—and the conviction or observation that this is not how it is.

Wittgenstein takes this problematic intuition to be produced by—presumably unsound—reasoning of which we are unaware: It is produced by a ‘simile . . . absorbed into the forms of our language’ (PI 112), and such similes are ‘at work in the unconscious’ (VW 69) or are at any rate not deliberately employed by the philosopher.13 More generally, Wittgenstein puts the problematic intuitions down to urges to misunderstand—a concept which covers also the urges to treat similes and metaphors more literally than we know we may that we have analysed in this book (Section 1).14 To put it in our terms, Wittgenstein thus takes autonomous habits of non-intentional reasoning to engender reconciliation problems which are ill-motivated. Indeed, he thinks such habits have us imagine difficulties where there are none: Only the ‘false appearances’ they produce create the disquieting impression that things cannot be how they actually are.

When the disquieting philosophical difficulties we take ourselves to face are merely imaginary, the only genuine problems we actually confront are the emotional problem constituted by our groundless disquiet and the behavioural problems constituted by what theoretical or other efforts we may make to solve those difficulties (cp. Chapter 7.4). Such emotional and behavioural problems are the only genuine problems that are engendered in this way, viz. through ‘misinterpretation of our forms of language’ guided by ‘similes absorbed into the forms of language’ (cp. PI 111a1). Since Wittgenstein distances himself from his philosophical intuitions, which he suspects are due to various urges to misunderstand, he does not make any efforts to reconcile them with his beliefs or to solve the difficulty they appear to raise, in any other way. The ‘misinterpretation’ at issue hence causes him no behavioural but only emotional problems, and he treats the latter as the only problems ‘arising through misinterpretation’: These problems are ‘deep disquietudes’ (PI 111a2).

Misinterpretation guided by similes absorbed into the forms of language is constitutive of just one kind of urge to misunderstand. The present argument applies more generally, wherever such an urge creates the disquieting impression that things cannot be how they actually are—say, that I cannot suddenly come to understand a number series without being aware of a strangely elusive mental process. In all these cases, the only genuine problems we face are our own behavioural and emotional problems—and only the latter, if, like Wittgenstein, we suspend our belief in the intuitively compelling ideas that create that disquieting impression.

Wittgenstein explicitly acknowledges the aim of solving such emotional problems as his paramount goal (Section 1). Above, we have seen reason to believe that his actual practice is consistent with this acknowledgement. We now see that the adoption of this new therapeutic aim is warranted by his conception of the nature and genesis of the philosophical ‘difficulties’ facing him, and that this conception actually applies, in its essentials, to a problem Wittgenstein is struggling with in a core part of his Investigations, viz. the ‘problem’ about sudden understanding. His adoption of a novel chief aim is appropriate in the face of at least some of the philosophical ‘problems’ he addresses and is vindicated by his—admittedly sketchy—conception of their nature and genesis.





6. WITTGENSTEIN’S THERAPEUTIC APPROACH




By itself, adopting the aim of putting an end to groundless worries does not push us beyond the demonstration of truth or falsity, and the assessment of warrant for the particular claims at issue. When worrying about an ill-motivated reconciliation problem, for instance, we may well put an end to our unwarranted disquiet, quite simply, by refuting the groundless ideas that give rise to the worrying problem: the unwarranted claims to be reconciled, and their presuppositions. In the case of the problem about sudden understanding (Section 4), we have to refute the conflicting conclusions (ii) and (iii), expose and refute the presupposition (I2), and thus return to the uncontroversial assumptions (2) and (3) from which we started—and which, properly understood, do not even appear to give rise to a contradiction, disquieting or other.

But where inferential urges which are autonomous and a-rational push us to leap from uncontroversial or common-sense assumptions to contradictory conclusions, we have to do more: ‘The philosopher . . . has to cure in himself many diseases of the understanding, before he can arrive at the notions of common sense’ (CV 50)—or return to them. The conclusions we leap to, when in the grip of such pathological urges, strike us as natural and compelling regardless of what warrant we have for them, and may continue to do so even in the face of their refutation. The present problem is a case in point. At first blush, we might think that the perplexity engendered by this ‘muddle’ is to be removed by refuting the idea that gives rise to it, viz., the idea that sudden understanding of a number-series involves a conscious mental event that constitutes understanding. This idea is to be shown false by considering which mental events we are, or can grow, aware of when coming to understand a number-series, and considering whether it is conceivable that the subject fails to understand when one of them occurs— which will reveal that no conscious event ‘constitutes’ understanding. But so far from ridding Wittgenstein of the problem, this finding—(2) above— leads him into it: He leaps from it to the conclusion (ii) that the conscious process of understanding is ‘hidden’. The ‘mentalist’ urge is overpowering: It has Wittgenstein cleave to an idea that has been shown false, by sensible standards he accepts. The idea—or, more accurately, the implicit belief (Chapter 6.2)—is delusional (Chapter 6.5). To rid himself of it and the disquiet it induces in him, Wittgenstein has to do more than merely refute it. He also needs to weaken the autonomous urge to misunderstand that has him cleave to the unwarranted idea and presuppose it, willy-nilly, in his further reasoning. He also has to cure in himself this disease of the understanding that has him cleave to his delusional idea, not only without, but against reason.

This is the key to a pretty, if neglected, exegetical puzzle. In response to his problem, Wittgenstein examines the idea that raised it by taking him from truism (2) to the disquieting conclusion (ii). He recasts both in linguistic terms and transforms the latter into ‘I employ the sentence “Now I understand” . . . as a description of a process occurring behind . . . that of saying [or thinking of] the formula’ (PI 154a). He then points out an alternative to the presupposition that a process has to back up the claim that I understand: Instead, it might be ‘particular circumstances which justify me in saying I can go on—when the formula occurs to me’ (PI 154b). This suggestion is reiterated (PI 155) and followed up: What entitles me to say I can go on when the formula occurs to me are such circumstances as that I know arithmetic and have used formulae of that kind before (179a–b; cp. Section 4). This refutes the idea presupposed in the crucial move to the disquieting conclusion and thereby the reasons for raising the problem, which is thus ‘dissolved’, in the sense we explained (in Chapter 2.4). So far, so straightforward. But, as the perceptive reader may have noticed, the sections that prepare (PI 154–155) and effect (PI 179ff.) this refutation are separated by a full twenty-three sections—devoted to the apparently unrelated topics of reading and copying (PI 156–178). Whence the puzzle: Why this digression?

From recent cognitive psychotherapies we have gleaned the insight that we can significantly weaken delusional beliefs and the emotions they engender, by gaining general meta-cognitive insight into the autonomous and a-rational cognitive processes that have us form and maintain them: by coming to understand not only how we came to form the particular belief at issue but how the pertinent processes shape our philosophical reflection quite generally and have us systematically maintain or presuppose unwarranted or even patently false claims (Chapter 7.5). The investigation of ‘reading’ is devoted to acquiring this kind of meta-cognitive insight, which allows a thinker to accept and assimilate the refutation of his delusional beliefs. Through this investigation, Wittgenstein makes himself aware of the fact that he has a certain general urge to misunderstand: a context-sensitive, a-rational and autonomous propensity to leap to unwarranted conclusions which are about various subtly related topics but are all variations on the same theme—the mentalist Schema I. To expose this general urge, he turns to the new topic of reading and makes three moves.

In abstract reflection in the grip of an urge to misunderstand, we tend to think that things ‘must be like this’, as we simply fail to think of possible alternatives. This failure makes it easy to overlook that we lack warrant for the conclusions and, indeed, that we are making a substantive move in leaping to them. As a preparatory move, Wittgenstein therefore first outlines an alternative to the ‘mentalist’ way of drawing the distinction between true and merely apparent reading (PI 157): We could draw it by reference to further responses to written signs, rather than to inner processes. He provides a context in which this proposal is attractive: If we trained people as ‘reading machines’, we would indeed care primarily about whether they consistently respond correctly to given signs. Then he derives from either alternative a consequence that can be tested against our ordinary way of speaking: When we use a certain inner process as a criterion of reading, we can say of a particular word that it was the first word the subject read; when we refer exclusively to his overt performance, we cannot say this. The fact that we do not commonly say this then suggests that we ordinarily draw the distinction between actual and apparent reading without reference to inner processes. While sorely inadequate as an analysis of the concept of reading (for which it has often been mistaken), Wittgenstein’s sketchy alternative does drive home that, so far from necessarily having to invoke inner processes to draw that distinction, we commonly do not do this. This alternative allows Wittgenstein to distance himself from the mentalist ideas on reading: In marked contrast to the above conclusion (ii), he merely takes note of his ‘temptation’ to endorse them, while careful not to do so.

Second, he elicits leaps of thought similar to the one that raised the initial problem, by ‘listening to the nonsense’ (CV 64) he is tempted to say, and gets clear on the context-sensitivity of this temptation to leap to conclusions by ‘giving a psychologically accurate’ account of it (PI 254a3): Wittgenstein considers contexts relevantly similar to the one in which his initial problem arose, lets himself say in response whatever strikes him as intuitively plausible, without self-censorship, and takes note of the precise wording that attracts him, and of the particular circumstances under which it strikes him thus. I.e.: He makes the sort of ‘experiment[s]’ (169c7) with himself in the dual role of subject and observer that we have considered above (in Section 3).

Third and finally, he refutes the tempting conclusions. The central part of the investigation of reading considers a sequence of thoughts in which each cedes only as much ground as made absolutely necessary by the refutation of the previous one:





The one real criterion for anybody’s reading is the conscious act of reading, the act of reading the sounds off from the letters. (PI 159a1)

Even if we do not seize on this conscious act or process as a criterion to distinguish genuine from merely apparent reading, still ‘reading is a quite particular process’ (PI 165a1), namely a conscious process: ‘reading is a particular experience’ (PI 165a7). We merely need to ‘read a page of print’ to ‘see that something special and highly characteristic is going on’ (PI 165a2).

Even if no special or characteristic trait I am conscious of is shared by all cases of reading, still ‘I feel [in various different ways perhaps] a kind of influence of the letters working on me, when I read’ (PI 169c2).





Wittgenstein refutes each of these claims in turn (in PI 159–160, 165–168 and 169–171, respectively). In view of the influential preconception that Wittgenstein proceeded exclusively by establishing conceptual facts and thus sought to expose philosophical ‘claims’ as meaningless (rather than ‘merely’ absurd) nonsense, it is worth noting that Wittgenstein shows all these claims to be, properly understood, false.

While (I) is ‘grammatical’, (II) and (III) are empirical, psychological claims. Accordingly, Wittgenstein refutes them in different ways: He elicits linguistic intuitions and their rationale, which are all at odds with (I). And he refutes (II) and (III) in various steps that crucially involve empirical observation and experiment (sic). We have already considered Wittgenstein’s treatment of (III) (Section 3). So let’s now focus on his treatment of (II), which he highlights as the most important of the three claims by using it, in the opening section of the discussion of reading (PI 156), as his example to introduce the notion that we are, in specific contexts, spontaneously inclined to leap to certain conclusions: When considering particular examples in the light of the philosophical question ‘What does reading consist in?’, ‘we shall be inclined to say: it is a special conscious activity of mind’ (PI 156e).

Wittgenstein now (in PI 165) returns to this question: ‘One could say, if you want to see what reading consists in, read, and attend to what happens’ (MS 152: 5, source of PI 165). He does this, i.e., actually reads a page of print, and finds: ‘I see printed words and say words out loud’ (PI 165a4)— and don’t know what else to say about ‘what happens’. But even so, in spite of having no warrant to say this, he finds it tempting to utter variations on the theme that ‘reading is a quite particular [conscious] process’ (PI 165a1): that ‘reading is a particular experience’ (PI 165a7), of which he ‘should like to say: “The words I utter come in a special way”’ (PI 165a9). This first reading exercise does not, of course, serve to find out what happens when we read so as to answer the question what reading consists in. Rather, it serves to expose a context-sensitive urge to misunderstand, namely, to elicit what Wittgenstein is, spontaneously and without warrant, inclined to say about reading, in specific actual cases, when considering that abstract question (cp. Section 2).

This first is followed by further exercises or ‘experiment[s]’ (PI 166a9). These serve, second, to get clear on the content of the things that sound so tempting in the abstract, namely on what they come down to in concrete terms in specific reading situations experimentally reproduced for the purpose. Further ‘experiments’ then serve, third, to refute the claims thus obtained, by showing them not meaningless, but false. Thus, Wittgenstein next reads the letter “A” (PI 166a4), writes a letter (PI 166a7), pronounces a sound while looking at a mere flourish (PI 166a11), and attends to the way in which the sounds and hand-movements ‘come’ in each case (PI 166a3). He does so to see whether he can identify any ‘special way’ in which they come. In each case, he finds he cannot (PI 166a6, 166a10, 166a11). This suggests (though it does not establish) that the empirical claim at issue is always false, namely the claim that when I read (and attend to what is happening) I can grow aware of a characteristic way in which the sounds ‘come’ to me, which is different from the way in which sounds ‘come’, e.g., when I make them up or something reminds me of them (PI 165a10–165a14). But, perhaps surprisingly, Wittgenstein then develops another interpretation of that phrase, and thus obtains a related claim he thinks is actually true of some cases of reading: The moment he does not look for characteristic sensations but rather takes the ‘situation’ or context of utterance into account as well, he can identify various differences between the way in which the sound of the familiar letter comes in actual reading and the sound he pronounces comes when he looks at the mere flourish (PI 166a13–166a17). And these differences allow us to say that when we read familiar letters in print the sounds come to us automatically, in a way they do not come when we look at unfamiliar marks (PI 166a18–166a20). When reading printed letters, the sounds do come to us ‘in a special way’. This much, properly understood, is not merely meaningful, but even true.

From this clarification, however, Wittgenstein proceeds to refute the generic proposition that attracts him: ‘Now what is there in the proposition that reading is ‘a quite particular process’? It presumably means that when we read one particular process takes place, which we recognize’ (PI 167a1– 167a2). And this proposition, Wittgenstein shows, is simply false. It is not false because we cannot grow aware of any potentially pertinent ‘mental process’ (PI 167a3)—‘there are of course many more or less characteristic sensations in reading a printed sentence; [and] it is not difficult to call such sensations to mind’ (PI 159a6). But the present proposition is false because all such processes or experiences occur only in some, rather than in all cases of reading: When we read a page of print, which is indeed a uniform experience (PI 167a4ff.), ‘our eye passes over printed lines differently from the way it passes over arbitrary pothooks and flourishes. (I am not speaking here of what can be established by observing the movements of the eyes of a reader [but about our experience].) The eye passes . . . with particular ease . . . and yet it doesn’t skid. And at the same time involuntary speech goes on in the imagination’ (PI 168a1–168a4); the sounds come automatically. ‘That is how it is when I read German and other languages, printed or written’ (PI 168a5), as I usually do. But it is not, as he seems to ascertain by further experiment (‘Compare . . . ’), when reading a text printed exclusively in capital letters (PI 168a8–168a9) or reading our script from right to left (PI 168a10), nor, as he suggests apparently without making the experiment, when turning Morse code into letters (PI 167a3). So we are not dealing with the same ‘mental process’ (PI 167a3) in all cases of reading: There is no one characteristic process which we recognise whenever we read.

To sum up, Wittgenstein experimentally reproduces ‘reading’ situations, for three purposes: to, first, elicit what things he is inclined to say in abstract reflection, spontaneously and without warrant, about what happens when he reads (what ‘experience’ he then has); second, to get clear on what content and import these things have in concrete terms (what kind of ‘experience’ they might advert to); and, third, to refute the claims thus obtained, by showing them false (no pertinent experience occurs sufficiently generally). In this way, he makes himself aware of a general urge to misunderstand that drives him to make leaps of thought which lead him to conclusions he finds compelling even though he has no warrant for them, and which in fact are simply false.

All three steps are in line with the striking precept from which our discussion of Wittgenstein’s approach proceeded: the precept that to take care of a philosophical problem we should advance no theories, hypotheses or explanations (PI 109), no uncontroversial claims (PI 128) and, in particular, no ‘new truths about the subject of the investigation’ (BT 416), here: understanding, reading, copying, etc. At none of those three stages does Wittgenstein advance an explanation or hypothesis. Rather, he allows himself to say what strikes him as compelling, and clarifies and refutes these things (like ‘When I read, the words come in a special way’), without adopting and advancing them at any stage as a hypothesis or explanation. And while he does establish in the process some facts about reading and the experiences it may involve, these facts (like the fact that when one reads letters in print, the eye passes with particular ease, yet does not skid) are familiar to any proficient reader—we merely need to be reminded of facts we did not think of in abstract reflection. By contrast, we do learn new facts, and can, perhaps, be said to obtain some sort of ‘explanation’, as the repeated execution of those three steps has us grow aware of a general urge to misunderstand that systematically drives us from truisms to perplexing conclusions. But these new facts are not about the subject of the philosophical investigation (reading or sudden understanding), but about our thinking about it; and we do not explain the phenomenon that perplexes us (say, sudden understanding), but come to understand why we came to find it perplexing. Improved self-understanding helps us see through self-made mystery. In the investigations we have examined, Wittgenstein gains such self-understanding through self-experimentation, through simple experiments with himself in the two-fold role of experimenter and subject.





7. BEYOND WITTGENSTEIN




We can move beyond such simple experiments, not only to more sophisticated philosophical self-experimentation (cp. Chapter 2.5) but also to scientific experiment. We may, in particular, turn to experimental work from those parts of cognitive science that are not excessively speculative or vitiated by the very phenomena of picture-driven reasoning that are, we suggested, liable to occur in speculative theorising—in philosophy and beyond. Since Wittgenstein’s day, experimental work in social and cognitive psychology has established the occurrence of a wide range of autonomous leaps of thought, including non-intentional analogical reasoning and several belief bias effects, which may shape philosophical reflection. In this book, we have developed ways and means for determining on the basis of evidence from philosophical texts whether, and how, such autonomous thought has shaped the philosophical reflections of particular thinkers (Chapters 1–2).

Where the pertinent inferences rely on tacit presuppositions the thinkers at issue explicitly reject, where those inferences thus are unsound by the thinkers’ own lights, such findings become a powerful tool of philosophical criticism—including self-criticism. We have found that a process in which non-intentional analogical reasoning works in conjunction with belief-bias effects may systematically affect philosophical reflection at several levels and shape philosophers’ intuitions, concepts, claims, problems and theories, arguments and argumentative strategies; this unsound ‘pictorial process’ may even determine what we accept as reason or evidence, and how strong a reason we think it is (Chapters 3–4). Several unsound processes of non-intentional and automatic inference may work together and lead even the most competent thinkers to form and maintain absurd claims, as a matter of delusion (Chapters 5–6 and 8). By reconstructing how these unsound processes stealthily shape the reflections of other philosophers and our own, we can refute part or all of our philosophical motivation for raising various philosophical problems, and thus solve or dissolve these problems (Chapter 2.4). At the same time, we can acquire the kind of general meta-cognitive insight into commonly hidden sources and channels of philosophical reflection that can weaken even delusional beliefs and allows us to give up the problems we have seen we should reject (Chapter 7).

To engage in such philosophical and therapeutic efforts and provide them with a firm foundation, we need to be sufficiently, but not excessively, wary of theories: We have seen ample reason to reject philosophical theories, in particular theories with a brief to ‘honour’ or ‘accommodate’ philosophical intuitions and ‘explain’ familiar facts in the light of apparent difficulties raised only by such intuitions.—All too often, such theories are based on the same unsound intuitions that raise the bogus problems they are meant to solve, and are both unwarranted and pointless.—But, at the same time, we have seen good reason to develop meta-philosophical theories which explain how competent thinkers come to go along with wild intuitions and gaps in arguments, and let us understand how our philosophical reflections are shaped by cognitive processes of which we are typically unaware. Such theories do not stand in any opposition to therapy; on the contrary, they may guide therapeutic efforts in philosophy in something like the way in which findings and theories from different branches of psychology guide efforts in cognitive psychotherapy.

We can develop such meta-philosophical theories through case-studies that examine how experimentally documented thought processes have shaped the philosophical reflections of actual thinkers, whose predicaments are sometimes more and sometimes less similar to our own, and sometimes exactly the same. Such theories not only let us dispel groundless intellectual disquiet (which does not seem to bother many philosophers as acutely as it bothered Wittgenstein). More importantly, they allow us to solve or dissolve tenacious philosophical problems, and wrest from autonomous habits of thought enough control over our reasoning to actually give up those problems and others like them, and start to think about the topics at issue with less undue interference. This might put an end to some bogus mystery and to intellectual efforts that are pointless by the lights of the very thinkers who are engaged in them. It might reduce the notorious disagreement among philosophers. And it can facilitate sound work on new problems, of a different kind.





Notes



NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION





1. BT 421. The next two quotes are from CV 50 and BT 416. Please refer to the list of abbreviations following the tables of content. For discussion of Wittgenstein’s aim and approach, see Chapter 9.

2. PI 127. The next two quotes are from CV 50 and PI 255.

3. The seminal texts are Wisdom 1937 and the papers subsequently collected in Wisdom 1952, Farrell’s review of this work, in Farrell 1946, and Waismann 1956 (repr. 1968).

4. S&S 5. While published only in 1962, the bulk of these lectures were prepared in 1947-–1949.

5. Austin: S&S 5.

6. Wittgenstein: BT 409 and VW 69.

7. My first introduction to cognitive therapy of delusions was Chadwick, Birch-wood & Trower 1996.

8. A. Beck 1976.

9. Fischer 2004, on PI 138–197.

10. Plato, Theaetetus 155b–155d.

11. Fischer 2006a.

12. Pitcher 1977: 25—34.

13. These experiments, by cognitive psychologist Derdre Gentner and colleagues, were subsequently published as Day & Gentner 2007. Cp. Perrott, Gentner & Bodenhausen 2005.

14. 3D 250.

15. For a recent case in point see Hanfling 2004: 197.

16. See J. Beck 1995 for an accessible but substantive introduction.

17. E.g. Ellis 1994.

18. BT 409, 415, 416, 421, 431.

19. See BT 421 and CV 50. In the recent literature on Wittgenstein’s methods, this has been recognised most clearly by Gordon Baker. See, e.g., Baker 2004: 312.

20. In this way Pitcher seeks to make sense of Wittgenstein’s notion of therapy. See Pitcher 1964: 323–326.

21. Seminal texts include Kingdon & Turkington 1994 and Chadwick, Birch-wood & Trower 1996. For overviews over the current state of the art, see Nelson 2005 and Beck, Rector, Stolar & Grant 2009.

22. BT 416.

23. Corsini 2002.

24. Even psychotherapy addressing psychotic conditions involving delusions and hallucinations primarily seeks to relieve the emotional and behavioural problems associated with these. Cp. Chadwick, Birchwood & Trower 1996: 4.

25. These efforts are analysed, e.g., in Sorabji 2000, Nussbaum 1996 and Xena-kis 1969.

26. See, e.g., Paden’s (1998) programmatic explanation of the project of philosophical counselling.

27. This distinction is developed more fully in Fischer 2011.

28. A review article by Wisnewski (2003) brings out just how desirable a book-length study of this kind would be. I would be happy if this book contributed to stimulating efforts in this vein.

29. It will become obvious, however, how much I owe to various therapeutic interpretations of Wittgenstein and to the innovative work of Gordon Baker (including Baker 2004), in particular.

30. Crary & Read 2000: 1. This much is common ground between the ‘New Wittgensteinians’ and their most serious critics. The major commentaries on the Investigations develop the general idea in different ways: Hallett 1977: 36, Baker & Hacker 1992: 289, von Savigny 1994: 176.

31. Baker 2004: 212, taken up by Hutchinson 2007: 694. Cp. Peterman 1992: 48 and Plant 2004: 254, who develops an idea mooted by Fogelin 1987:

234.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 1





1. A prominent example is Richard Rorty, from whom the opening sentence is lifted (1980: 12).

2. The seminal works are Weinrich 1976 and Lakoff & Johnson 1980.

3. See Sweetser 1990 for the seminal work, Traugott & Dasher 2005 for a recent overview and Trim 2007 for a recent thorough study.

4. See Jäkel 1995 and 2003 for an analysis of the ‘mental’ extensions of a whole range of manipulation-terms like “grasp”.

5. See e.g. Lakoff & Johnson 1980 (argument), Reddy 1979 (communication), Kövecses 1990 (emotion), Jäkel 2003 (intellectual activity and economic development; with a list of further areas covered, pp.).

6. Evans & Wilkins 2000.

7. Jäkel 2003.

8. Lakoff & Johnson 1980: 91ff.

9. Here and throughout, information about historical senses of English terms has been taken from the Oxford English Dictionary Online, September 2009 edition (Simpson & Weiner 2009).

10. Cp. Gentner 1983.

11. Blanchette & Dunbar 2002, Moreau, Markman & Lehmann 2001, Perrott, Gentner & Bodenhausen 2005. The experiments outlined in this section are reported and analysed in Day & Gentner 2007.

12. Perrott, Gentner & Bodenhausen 2005.

13. Baker & Hacker 1992: 14.

14. E.g., Hutchinson 2007: 694.

15. Baker 2004: 185.

16. My forthcoming paper ‘Through Pictures to Perceptions’ compares the present notion with another important (if neglected) concept of ‘philosophical pictures’, developed by Frank Ebersole (1967).

17. See McDonald 2003 for a literature review.

18. See Nickerson 1998 and Oswald & Grosjean 2004 for comprehensive reviews.

19. E. g. Ryle 1949/1990: 21.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 2





1. These are the ‘constitutive accounts’ of self-knowledge championed, e.g., by Wright 1989, Heal 2002, Bilgrami 2006 or Coliva 2009.

2. Churchland 1988: 7.

3. E.g., Searle 1984: 14ff.

4. For a comprehensive approach see Steen 2007; for a review of pertinent methods see Gonzalez-Marquez,Mittelberg, Coulson & Spivey 2007.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 3





1. E.g. Schneider & Shiffrin 1977, Kahneman, Slovis & Tversky 1982, Sloman 1996, Smith & DeCoster 2000, Strack & Deutsch 2004.

2. Roughly since DePaul & Ramsey 1998 and mainly within the movement of ‘experimental philosophy’. Cp. the manifesto by Knobe & Nichols (2008) and the review by Alexander & Weinberg (2007).

3. Locke, for instance, frequently uses the expressions “the mind” and “the soul” interchangeably (e.g. in EHU II.i.9–20 and IV.iii.6), while Descartes treats “mens” and “esprit” as synonyms of “anima” and “âme”, respectively (Baker & Morris 2002: 70).

4. Macintosh 1976.

5. The pertinent interpretation was pioneered by Jackson 1929 and became orthodox in the wake of Bennett 1971 and Mackie 1976. For a detailed discussion and refutation, see my forthcoming Berkeley—A New Kind of History.

6. E.g. Mackie 1976: 15.

7. Jackson 1929: 60 deplores this confusion in both Locke and Boyle.

8. Curley 1972: 440.

9. E.g.: In the passage ‘Take away the sensations of them [i.e. bodies] . . . and all colours, tastes, odours, and sounds, as they are such particular ideas, vanish and cease’ (EHU II.viii.17), we are told, ‘the qualification “as they are such particular ideas” should really read “or rather the ideas which these powers produce”’ (Jackson 1929: 71).

10. Alexander 1985: 168–169.

11. Reid 1764/1997: 73.

12. Two modern scholars attribute this view at least to Boyle. See Mandelbaum 1964: 19–21, 101, 115, and Keating 1993: 312. Cp. Alexander 1985: 85. No modern scholar credits Locke with this view.

13. McIntosh 1976: 90.

14. Hacker 1987: 3–4.

15. Prudovsky 1995: 68.

16. Galileo’s work predates the introduction of post-Aristotelian ‘minds’. For an account of how picture-driven inferences can lead a thinker to place accidents that have no space in inanimate corporeal substances into ‘sensitive bodies’ (instead of minds), see Fischer 2009: 100–102.

17. See, e.g., Bennett 1971: 94 and Jacovides 2007: 111, despite criticism from Rickless 1997: 307.

18. In a similar vein, Boyle, speaking of snow, reports he ‘couldn’t find it had any [colour] in places exactly darkened’ (OFQ 33).





NOTES TO CHAPTER 4





1. Where helpful, we shall also consult his two other major, and almost contemporaneous, works: the Essay towards a New Theory of Vision (NTV), and his Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (PHK).

2. The claims about Berkeley advanced in this and the next chapter are further developed in my Berkeley—A New Kind of History (currently in preparation). Due to considerations of space and target audience, all explicit discussion of secondary literature has been moved to that volume.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 5





1. See Evans & Feeney 2004 for this particular effect and Nickerson 1998 for a general review of belief bias effects.

2. The claims about Berkeley advanced in this and the previous chapter are further developed in my Berkeley—A New Kind of History (currently in preparation). As before, considerations of space and target audience had me move all explicit discussion of secondary literature to that volume.

3. This position was maintained by Boyle, who took for granted that we ordinarily apply colour-terms (also) to sensations in us (sic), voiced reservations about saying that colour ‘is a quality that resides in the body that is said to be coloured’ and preferred to say that colour is in ‘the light itself, which so modified strikes upon the organ of sight, and so causes that sensation which we [ordinarily] call colour’ (Boyle 1664/1999: 28).

4. This is an actual case, taken from Freud 1963: 248–50.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 6





1. For a still up-to-date and sympathetic outline, see Robinson 2001: 57–58.

2. Ayer 1946: 35.

3. The classical source is Nisbett & Wilson 1977.

4. Freud 1963: 248–250.

5. Op. cit. 250.

6. Chadwick,Birchwood & Trower 1996: 8, 15; and Beck, Rector, Stolar & Grant 2009: 64.

7. Freud 1963: 251.

8. Bentall 2003: 187.

9. Green 1998.

10. Bentall 2003: 315 ff.

11. Kindermann & Bentall 1996.

12. Corcoran, Frith & Mercer 1995.

13. Frith & Corcoran 1996.

14. See, e.g., reviews by Spitzer 1990, Berrios 1991 and Jones 1999, with responses including David 1999 and Sass 2004.

15. APA 2000: 821.

16. Schmidt 1940, quoted in Cutting 1997: 118.

17. Cp. Brockington 1991.

18. Spitzer 1990.

19. Garety 1985, Harrow, Rattenbury & Stoll 1988.

20. Pace, e.g. Berrios 1991.

21. Since Strauss 1969.

22. Beck, Rector, Stolar & Grant 2009: 64.

23. Successive editions of the main textbook of Emil Kraepelin, the foremost of the founding fathers, explain: ‘Every delusional idea is a pathological distorted notion’; ‘delusional ideas are pathologically derived errors, not amenable to correction by logical proof to the contrary’ (quoted in Cutting 1997: 117). Note that Kraepelin here infers pathology from otherwise unintelligible ‘derivation’ and from strong persistence.

24. WordNet 3.0, Princeton University, 2006, http://wordnet.princeton.edu, entry “pathological”.

25. Culminating in Rep. 443c–444e.

26. Chadwick, Birchwood & Trower. 1996: 4

27. WordNet 3.0, Princeton University, 2006, http://wordnet.princeton.edu, entry “mental illness”.

28. Chadwick, Birchwood & Trower 1996: 5.

29. Op. cit. 15.

30. E.g. op. cit. 5

31. Ibid.

32. Developed in detail by Wakefield 1992, critical responses reviewed by Boyle 2000, Houts 2001 and Cooper 2005.

33. Hence only emotions we assess for warrant, like fear or anger, can be constitutive of emotional problems. Since we do not assess it for warrant, romantic love, e.g., is not constitutive of such problems, even though it can be disabling (preventing us from concentrating properly on work we would like to get done, etc.) But an amour fou can engender behavioural problems (see below).

34. Cp. Clouser et al. 1997: 186–187 and Wakefield 1992: 374.

35. Boyle 2000: 13.

36. Op. cit. 12.

37. Op.cit. 88–89.

38. APA 2000: 329.

39. Cp. Chadwick et al. 1996: 15.

40. Clouser et al. 1996: 190 ff.

41. http://www.ismmed.org/np_altitude_tutorial.htm, last accessed August 5, 2009.



42. See Nickerson 1998 and Pohl 2004.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 7





1. For a detailed phenomenology and analysis of this peculiarly philosophical sense of wonder, see Fischer 2000, chap.4.

2. Plato, Theaetetus 155b-d.

3. Smart 1959: 144.

4. Putnam 1967.

5. Lewis 1972, cp. Levin 2009.

6. E.g. Evans 1981, Wright 1986, Peacocke 1986, Davies 1987, analysed in Fischer 2000 and 2006b.

7. Cp. Fischer 2006b.

8. Winograd 1972.

9. For an up-to-date bibliography, see Levin 2009.

10. Bacon 1620/2000: I 44.

11. Berkeley, PHK I3, cp. Bacon 1620/2000: I38ff.

12. For a recent case in point see Hanfling 2004: 197.

13. See J. Beck 1995 for an accessible but substantive introduction.

14. E.g. Ellis 1994.

15. Corsini 2002, entry “therapy”.

16. Chadwick, Birchwood & Trower 1996: 4.

17. Op. cit., Fowler, Garety & Kuipers 1995, Kingdon & Turkington 1994. For a review of outcome studies, see Beck, Rector, Stolar & Grant 2009: 22ff.

18. Chadwick, Birchwood & Trower 1996: 4–5, Chadwick 2006: 2, Nelson 2005: 1.

19. Nelson 2005: 10–12.

20. This is a slightly idealised model of the approach first presented by Chad-wick, Birchwood & Trower 1996.

21. Op. cit. 27–22, 71–77, Nelson 2005: 101ff.

22. E.g. Bentall 2003: 330ff.

23. Nelson 2005: 108–128.

24. Chadwick et al. 1996: 34–73, 81–84.

25. Op. cit. 87–90.

26. Chadwick 2006: 13.

27. Chadwick et al. 1996: 37.

28. Nelson 2005: 115.

29. See, e.g., Moore 1939 and Austin 1962, chap.10.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 8





1. Warnock 1989: 12.

2. Price 1932: 27.

3. Ayer explicitly maintains and develops this conclusion in his later response to Austin (Ayer 1969: 285–294, see esp. 291–293).

4. E.g. Hanfling 2000: 32, 35—a friend of ordinary language philosophy.

5. Austin 1979: 185.

6. E.g. Hanfling 2004: 32–33.





NOTES TO CHAPTER 9





1. Wittgenstein’s methodological remarks to the contrary were either simply ignored or rejected as expression of a methodological self-misunderstanding. See, e.g., Kenny 2004.

2. PI 138a3, repeated in PI 197a5; 154d and PI 202.

3. See Fischer 2006a.

4. See the ‘critical-genetic’ edition of the PI, Wittgenstein 2001b.

5. This note from early Fall 1938 presumably refers to the early version of the Investigations then nearing completion.

6. The most helpful statement we get is: ‘What is your aim in philosophy?—To show the fly the way out of the fly-bottle’ (PI 309).

7. From MS 127, 41v; dated 4.3.1944. This late remark provides evidence that Wittgenstein pursues the same chief aim in his BT (from 1933) and in the later PI (reworked and completed in 1944–46).

8. This goes very much against the grain of the secondary literature, where even most ‘therapeutic’ interpretations of Wittgenstein’s work regard it as the prime function of therapy to disentangle puzzles, confusions or conceptual difficulties, or improve our understanding of language or the relevant facts and their connections. The few clear exceptions include Farrell 1946, Peter-man 1992, Baker 2004 and Plant 2004. Fischer (2008: 80–82) explains how the account to be developed complements these extant interpretations.

9. This has been pointed out most clearly by Baker (2004: 212).

10. See Fischer 2004: 91-–101.

11. See Fischer 2004: 97–98 for a list of such statements from PI 138–197.

12. This initial, then deleted, heading of the remark in the final typescript (Wittgenstein 2001b: 810, fn.2) suggests that Wittgenstein regarded the structure and genesis indicated here as paradigmatic.

13. The longer early versions of PI 112 employ some of the same examples as VW 69–70, suggesting that the same kind of ‘similes’ are at issue in both passages. But this evidence is inconclusive, since the particular paragraph speaking of ‘a simile at work in the unconscious’ seems to be mislocated in the surrounding passages that contain those examples (VW 70, fn. 103).

14. The similes Wittgenstein has in mind here in PI 112 are, however, very different from the conceptual metaphors that are at the heart of our account of nature and genesis of philosophical problems: In earlier, longer versions of this remark (Wittgenstein 2001b: 146, 281) he suggests that the mere sub-stantival form of the noun “time” can create the illusion of a sort of medium, a suggestion we found dubious (Chapter 1.5), and traces another problem back to the fact that predications and identity-statements both employ the same form of words: “is . . .” (also in VW 70).





Bibliography


Alexander, Joshua & Jonathan Weinberg (2007): ‘Analytic Epistemology and Experimental Philosophy’, Philosophy Compass 2 (1): 56–80.

Alexander, Peter (1985): Ideas, Qualities, and Corpuscles. Locke and Boyle on the External World, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Anstey, Peter (2000): The Philosophy of Robert Boyle, London: Routledge.

APA—American Psychiatric Association (2000): Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: Text Revision (of the 4th ed.), Washington, DC: APA.

Austin, John L. (1962): Sense and Sensibilia, ed. by G.J. Warnock, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

. (1979): Philosophical Papers, 3rd ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ayer, Alfred J. (1940): The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, London: Macmillan.

. (1946): Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd ed., London: Victor Gollantz, repr.: New York: Dover, 1952.

. (1969): ‘Has Austin Refuted Sense-data?’, in: K.T. Fann (ed.): Symposium on J.L. Austin, London: Routledge, pp. 284–308.

Bacon, Francis (1620/2000): The New Organon, trans. & ed. by L. Jardine & M. Silverthorne, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Baker, Gordon (2004): Wittgenstein’s Method: Neglected Aspects, Oxford: Blackwell.

Baker, Gordon & Peter Hacker (1992): Wittgenstein: Meaning and Understanding. Essays on the ‘Philosophical Investigations’, vol. 1, reprinted with corrections, Oxford: Blackwell.

Baker, Gordon & Katherine Morris (2002): Descartes’ Dualism, London: Routledge.

Beck, Aaron (1976): Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders, New York: International Universities Press.

Beck, Aaron, Neil Rector, Neal Stolar & Paul Grant (2009): Schizophrenia: Cognitive Theory, Research and Therapy, New York: Guildford Press.

Beck, Judith (1995): Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond, New York: Guildford Press.

Bennett, Jonathan (1971): Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bentall, Richard (2003): Madness Explained: Psychosis and Human Nature, London: Penguin.

Berkeley, George (1732/1998): An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, 4th ed., in his: Philosophical Works, ed. by M. Ayers, London: Dent (Everyman), 1998.

. (1734/1998a): A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, 2nd ed., ed. by J. Dancy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

(1734/1998b): Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous, 3rd ed., in his: Philosophical Works, ed. by M. Ayers, London: Dent (Everyman).

Berrios, G.E. (1991): ‘Delusions as “Wrong Beliefs”: A Conceptual History’, British Journal of Psychiatry 159 (suppl. 14): 6–13.

Bilgrami, Akeel (2006): Self-Knowledge and Resentment, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Blanchette, I. & K. Dunbar (2002): ‘Representational Change and Analogy: How Analogical Inferences Alter Representations’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 28: 672–685.

Boyle, Mary (2000): Schizophrenia—a Scientific Delusion? 2nd ed., London: Routledge.

Boyle, Robert (1664/1999): ‘Experiments and Considerations Touching Colours’, in his: The Works of Robert Boyle, vol. 4, ed. by M. Hunter & E.B. Davis, London: Pickering & Chatto, 1999

. (1666/1979): ‘The Origin of Forms and Qualities According to the Corpuscular Hypothesis’, in his: Selected Philosophical Papers of Robert Boyle, ed. by M.A. Stewart, Manchester: Manchester University Press.

. (1675/2000): ‘Experiments, Notes, etc. about the Mechanical Origin or Production of Divers Particular Qualities’, in his: The Works of Robert Boyle, vol. 8, ed. by M. Hunter & E.B. Davis, London: Pickering & Chatto, 2000.

Brockington, I.F. (1991): ‘Factors Involved in Delusion Formation’, British Journal of Psychiatry 159 (suppl.): 42–46.

Brown, Lesley (ed.) (1993): The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Principles, Oxford: Clarendon.

Chadwick, Paul (2006): Person-Based Cognitive Therapy for Distressing Psychosis, Chichester: Wiley.

Chadwick, Paul, Max Birchwood & Peter Trower (1996): Cognitive Therapy for Delusions, Voices, and Paranoia, Chichester: Wiley.

Churchland, Paul (1988): Matter and Consciousness, rev. ed., Cambridge: MIT Press.

Clouser, Danner, Charles Culver & Bernhard Gert (1997): ‘Malady’, in: James Humber & Robert Almeder (eds.): What Is Disease? Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.

Coliva, Annalisa (2009): ‘SelfKnowledge and Commitments’, Synthese 171 (3): 365–375.

Cooper, Rachel (2005): Classifying Madness: A Philosophical Examination of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Dordrecht: Springer. Corcoran, R., C.D. Frith & G. Mercer (1995): ‘Schizophrenia, Symptomatology and Social Inference: Investigating “Theory of Mind” in People with Schizophrenia’, Schizophrenia Research 17 (1): 5–13.

Corsini, Raymond J. (ed.) (2002): The Dictionary of Psychology, New York; Brunner-Routledge.

Crary, Alice & Rupert Read (2000): The New Wittgenstein, London: Routledge. Curley, E.M. (1972): ‘Locke, Boyle, and the Distinction between Primary and Secondary Qualities’, The Philosophical Review 81: 438–464.

Cutting, J. (1997): Principles of Psychopathology, Oxford: Oxford University Press. David, Anthony (1999): ‘On the Impossibility of Defining Delusions’, Philosophy, Psychology and Psychiatry 6 (1): 17–20.

Davies, Martin (1987): ‘Tacit Knowledge and Semantic Theory: Can a Five Percent Difference Matter?’ Mind 96: 441–462.

Day, Samuel & Derdre Gentner (2007): ‘Non-intentional Analogical Inference in Text-Comprehension’, Memory & Cognition 35 (1): 39–49.

DePaul, Michael & William Ramsay (eds.) (1998): Rethinking Intuition. The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, Lanham, MD: Row-man & Littlefield.

Ebersole, Frank (1967): Things We Know, Eugene: University of Oregon Press.

Ellis, Albert (1994): Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy, revised and updated, New York: Birch Lane Press.

Evans, Gareth (1981): ‘Semantic Theory and Tacit Knowledge’, in: S. Holtzman & C. Leich (eds.): Wittgenstein: To Follow a Rule, London: Routledge.

Evans, Jonathan (2004): ‘Biases in Deductive Reasoning’, in: Rüdiger Pohl (ed.): Cognitive Illusions, Hove: Psychology Press, pp. .

Evans, Jonathan & Aidan Feeney (2004): ‘The Role of Prior Belief in Reasoning’, in: J. Leighton & R. Sternberg (eds.): The Nature of Reasoning, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. .

Evans, Nicholas & David Wilkins (2000): ‘In the Mind’s Ear. The Semantic Extensions of Perception Verbs in Australian Languages’, Language 76 (3): 546–592.

Farrell, B.A. (1946): “An Appraisal of Therapeutic Positivism”, Mind 55: 25–48 & 133–149.

Fischer, Eugen (2000): Linguistic Creativity. Exercises in ‘Philosophical Therapy’, Dordrecht: Kluwer.

. (2004): ‘A Cognitive Self-Therapy—Philosophical Investigations §§.138– 197’, in: E. Ammereller & E. Fischer (eds.): Wittgenstein at Work. Method in the “Philosophical Investigations”, London: Routledge, pp. .

. (2005): ‘Austin on Sense-Data’, Grazer Philosophische Studien 70: 67–99. . (2006a): ‘Therapie statt Theorie. Das ‘Big Typescript’ als Schlüssel zu Witt-gensteins später Philosophieauffassung’, in: S. Majetschak (ed.): Wittgensteins „große Maschineneschrift“, Frankfurt: Peter Lang, pp. .

. (2006b): ‘Philosophical Pictures’, Synthese 148 (2): 469–501.

. (2008): ‘Wittgenstein’s Non-Cognitivism—Explained and Vindicated’, Synthese 162 (1): 53–84.

(2009): ‘Philosophical Pictures and Secondary Qualities’, Synthese 171: 77–110.

. (2011): ‘How to Practise Philosophy as Therapy: Philosophical Therapy and Therapeutic Philosophy’, Metaphilosophy 42 (1–2).

Fogelin, Robert (1987): Wittgenstein, London: Routledge.

Fowler, David, P. Garety & E. Kuipers (1995): Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Psychosis: Theory and Practice, Chichester: Wiley.

Freud, Sigmund (1917/1969): Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse, ed. by A. Mitscherlich, A. Richards & J. Strachey, Frankfurt/Main: S. Fischer, 1969.

. (1963): Introductory Lectures in Psychoanalysis (Part III), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. XVI, ed. & trans. by J. Strachey, London: The Hogarth Press.

Frith, C.D. & R. Corcoran (1996): ‘Exploring “Theory of Mind” in People with Schizophrenia”, Psychological Medicine 26 (3): 521–530.

Galilei, Galileo (1623/1953): Il Saggiatore, in: Opere di Galileo Galilei, ed. by F. Flora, Milan & Naples: Ricciardi, 1953.

. (1623/1960): ‘Two Kinds of Properties: Selection from Il Saggiatore’, in: A. Danto & S. Morgenbesser (eds.): Philosophy of Science, New York: Meridian Books, 1960.

Garety, Philippa A. (1985): ‘Delusions: Problems in Definitions and Measurement’, British Journal of Medical Psychology 58 (1): 25–34.

Gentner, Dedre (1983): ‘Structure Mapping: A Theoretical Framework for Analogy’, Cognitive Science 7: 155–170.

Gonzalez-Marquez, Monica, Irene Mittelberg, Seana Coulson & Michael Spivey (eds.) (2007): Methods in Cognitive Linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Green, Michael Foster (1998): Schizophrenia from a Neurocognitive Perspective: Probing the Impenetrable Darkness, Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Hacker, Peter (1987): Appearance and Reality. A Philosophical Investigation into Perception and Perceptual Qualities, Oxford: Blackwell.

. (2007): Human Nature: The Categorial Framework, Oxford: Blackwell. Hagberg, Garry (2003): ‘On Philosophy as Therapy: Wittgenstein, Cavell, and Autobiographical Writing’, Philosophy and Literature 27 (1): 196–210.

Hallett, Garth (1977): A Companion to Wittgenstein’s “Philosophical Investigations”, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Hanfling, Oswald (2004): ‘The Use of “Theory” in Philosophy’, in: Erich Ammereller & Eugen Fischer (eds.): Wittgenstein at Work, London: Routledge, pp. .

Harrow, M., F. Rattenbury & F. Stoll (1988): ‘Schizophrenic Delusions’, in: T. Oltmanns & B. Maher (eds.); Delusional Beliefs, New York: Wiley.

Heal, Jane (2002): ‘First-Person Authority’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 102, repr. in her: Mind, Reason and Imagination, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, pp.

Houts, C.S. (2001): ‘Harmful Dysfunction and the Search for Value Neutrality in the Definition of Mental Disorder’, Behaviour Research and Therapy 39 (9): 1099–1132.

Hutchinson, Phil (2007): ‘What’s the Point of Elucidation?’ Metaphilosophy 38 (5): 691–713.

Jackson, Reginald (1929): ‘Locke’s Distinction between Primary and Secondary Qualities’, Mind 38 (149): 56–76.

Jacovides, Michael (2007): ‘Locke’s Distinctions between Primary and Secondary Qualities’, in: Lex Newman (ed.): The Cambridge Companion to Locke’s “Essay Concerning Human Understanding”, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

Jäkel, Olaf (1995): ‘The Metaphorical Concept of Mind’, in: John R. Taylor & Robert E. McLaury (eds.): Language and the Cognitive Construal of the World, Berlin & New York: de Gruyter, pp.

. (2003): Wie Metaphern Wissen schaffen, Hamburg: Verlag Dr. Kovac.

Johnson, Mark (1987): The Body in the Mind, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Johnston, Paul (1993): Wittgenstein: Rethinking the Inner, London: Routledge.

Jones, Edgar (1999): ‘The Phenomenology of Abnormal Belief: A Philosophical and Psychiatric Inquiry’, Philosophy, Psychology and Psychiatry 6 (1): 1–16.

Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky, (1982): Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, New York: Cambridge University Press.

Keating, Laura (1993): ‘Un-Locke-ing Boyle: Boyle on Primary and Secondary Qualities’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 10 (4): 305–333.

Kenny, Anthony (2004): ‘Philosophy States Only What Everyone Admits’, in: E. Ammereller & E. Fischer (eds.): Wittgenstein at Work, London: Routledge, pp.

Kindermann, P. & R.P. Bentall (1996): ‘The Development of a Novel Measure of Causal Attributions: The Internal Personal and Situational Attributions Questionnaire’, Personality and Individual Differences 20: 261–264.

Kingdon, D. & D. Turkington (1994): Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy of Psychosis, Chichester: Wiley.

Knobe, Joshua & Shaun Nichols (2008): ‘An Experimental Philosophy Manifesto’ in their (eds.): Experimental Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.

Kövesces, Zoltan (1990): Emotion Concepts, New York: Springer.

. (2002): Metaphor. A Practical Introduction, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson (1980): Metaphors We Live By, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Levin, Janet (2009): ‘Functionalism’, in: N. Zalta (ed.): The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2009 Edition) http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/ sum2009/ entries/functionalism/. (last accessed July 13, 2009)

Lewis, David (1972): ‘Psychophysical and Theoretical Identification’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 50 (3): 249–258.

Locke, John (1700/1975): An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 4th edition, ed. by P. Nidditch, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975.

MacDonald, Paul (2003): History of the Concept of Mind, Abingdon: Ashgate.

Macintosh, John J. (1976): ‘Primary and Secondary Qualities’, Studia Leibnitiana 8 (1): 88–104.

Mackie, John L. (1976): Problems from Locke, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Mandelbaum, Maurice (1964): Philosophy, Science, and Sense Perception, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

McCann, E. (1994): ‘Locke’s Philosophy of Body’, in: V. Chappell (ed.): The Cambridge Companion to Locke, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

Moore, George Edward (1939): ‘Proof of an External World’, Proceedings of the British Academy 25: 273–300.

Moreau, C.P., A.B. Markman & D.R. Lehmann (2001): ‘“What Is It?” Categorization Flexibility and Consumers’ Responses to Really New Products’, Journal of Consumer Research 27: 489–498.

Nelson, Hazel (2005): Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy with Delusions and Hallucinations: A Practice Manual, 2nd ed., Cheltenham: Nelson Thornes.

Nickerson, Raymond (1998): ‘Confirmation Bias. An Ubiquitous Phenomenon in Many Guises’, Review of General Psychology 2: 175–220.

Nisbett, Richard & Timothy DeCamp Wilson (1977): ‘Telling More Than We Can Know: Verbal Reports on Mental Processes’, Psychological Review 84 (3): 231–59.

Nussbaum, Martha (1996): The Therapy of Desire. Theory and Practice in Hellenistic Ethics, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Oswald, Margit & Stefan Grosjean (2004): ‘Confirmation Bias’, in: Rüdiger Pohl (ed.): Cognitive Illusions, Hove: Psychology Press, pp.

O’Toole, Frederick J. (1974): ‘Qualities and Powers in the Corpuscular Philosophy of Robert Boyle’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 12 (3): 295–315.

Paden, Roger (1998): ‘Defining Philosophical Counselling’, International Journal of Applied Philosophy 12 (1): 1–17.

Peacocke, Christopher (1986): ‘Explanation in Computational Psychology: Language, Perception and Level 1.5’, Mind and Language 1: 101–123.

Perrott, David, Dedre Gentner & Galen Bodenhausen (2005): ‘Resistance Is Futile: The Unwitting Insertion of Analogical Inferences in Memory’, Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 12 (4): 696–702.

Peterman, James (1992): Philosophy as Therapy. An Interpretation and Defence of Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophical Project, Albany: State University of New York Press.

Pitcher, George (1964): The Philosophy of Wittgenstein, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

. (1977): Berkeley, London; Routledge.

Plant, Bob (2004): “The End(s) of Philosophy: Rhetoric, Therapy and Wittgenstein’s Pyrrhonism”, Philosophical Investigations 27: 222–254.

Pohl, Rüdiger (ed.) (2004): Cognitive Illusions:. A Handbook on Fallacies and Biases in Thinking, Judgement, and Memory, Hove: Psychology Press.

Price, Henry H. (1932): Perception, London: Methuen.

Prudovsky, Gad (1995): ‘Arguments from Conceivability’, Ratio (ns) 8 (1): 63–69. Putnam, Hilary (1967): ‘Psychological Predicates’, in: W.H. Capitan & D.D. Merrill (eds.): Art, Mind and Religion, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

Reddy, Michael (1979): ‘The Conduit Metaphor’, in: Andrew Ortony (ed.): Metaphor and Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 284–324.

Reid, Thomas (1764/1997): An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense, ed. by D. Brookes, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1997.

Rickless, Samuel C. (1997): ‘Locke on Primary and Secondary Qualities’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 78 (3): 297–319.

Robinson, Howard (2001): Perception, 2nd ed., London: Routledge.

Rorty, Richard (1980): Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Oxford: Blackwell. Ryle, Gilbert (1949/1990): The Concept of Mind, London: Penguin.

Sass, Louis Arnorsson (2004): ‘Some Reflections on the (Analytic) Philosophical Approach to Delusion’, Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 11 (1): 71–80.

Savigny, Eike von (1994): Wittgensteins “Philosophische Untersuchungen”, vol. 1, 2nd rev. ed., Frankfurt: Klostermann.

Schmidt, G. (1940): ‘Der Wahn im deutschsprachigen Schriftum der letzten 25 Jahre’, Zentralblatt für die Gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie 97: 113–143.

Schneider, W. & R.M. Shiffrin (1977): ‘Controlled and Automatic Human Information Processing: I. Detection, Search, and Attention’, Psychological Review, 84 (1): 1–66.

Schroeder, Severin (2006): Wittgenstein. The Way out of the Fly-Bottle, Cambridge: Polity.

Searle, John (1984): Minds, Brains, and Science, London: Penguin.

Simpson, J.A. & E.C.S.Weiner (1989): The Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Sloman, S.A. (1996). ‘The Empirical Case for Two Systems of Reasoning’, Psychological Bulletin 119: 322.

Smart, J.J.C. (1959): ‘Sensations and Brain Processes’, The Philosophical Review 68 (2): 141–156.

Smith, E.R., & J. DeCoster (2000): ‘Dual Process Models in Social and Cognitive Psychology: Conceptual Integration and Links to Underlying Memory Systems’, Personality and Social Psychology Review 4: 108–131.

Sorabji, Richard (2000): Emotion and Peace of Mind: From Stoic Agitation to Christian Temptation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Spitzer, Manfred (1990): ‘On Defining Delusions’, Comprehensive Psychiatry 31 (5): 377–397.

Steen, Gerard (2007): Finding Metaphor in Grammar and Usage, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Strack, Fritz & Roland Deutsch (2004): ‘Reflective and Impulsive Determinants of Social Behaviour’, Personality and Social Psychology Review 8 (3): 220–247. Strauss, J.S. (1969): ‘Hallucinations and Delusions as Points on Continua Functions’, Archives of General Psychiatry 21 (5): 581–586.

Sweetser, Eve (1990): From Etymology to Pragmatics. Metaphorical and Cultural Aspects of Semantic Structure, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Toulmin, Stephen & June Goodfield (1961): The Fabric of the Heavens, London; Penguin.

Traugott, Elizabeth C. & Richard B. Dasher (2005): Regularity in Semantic Change, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Trim, Richard (2007): Metaphor Networks. The Comparative Evolution of Figurative Language, Basingstoke: Palgrave.

Trumble, William & Angus Stevenson (2002): The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Principles, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Waismann, Friedrich (1956/1968): ‘How I See Philosophy’, in: H.D. Lewis (ed.): Contemporary British Philosophy, London, repr. in his: How I See Philosophy, ed. by R. Harré, London: Macmillan.

Wakefield, Jerome (1992): ‘The Concept of Mental Disorder: On the Boundary between Biological Facts and Social Values’, American Psychologist 47: 373–388.

Warnock, Geoffrey J. (1989): Austin, London: Routledge.

Weinrich, Harald (1976): Sprache in Texten, Stuttgart: Ernst Klett.

Williamson, Timothy (2007): The Philosophy of Philosophy, Oxford: Blackwell. Winograd, Terry (1972): Understanding Natural Language, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Wisdom, John (1937): ‘Philosophical Perplexity’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 37: 71–88.

. (1952): Other Minds, Oxford: Blackwell.

Wisnewski, Jeremy (2003): ‘Five Forms of Philosophical Therapy’, Philosophy Today 47: 53–79.

Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1998): Culture and Value, rev. ed., Oxford: Blackwell.

. (1953/2001a): Philosophical Investigations, 3rd German-English ed., trans. by G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford: Blackwell.

. (1953/2001b): Philosophische Untersuchungen. Kritisch-genetische Edition, ed. by J. Schulte, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

. (2005): The Big Typescript: TS213, German-English ed., ed. and trans. by C.G. Luckhardt & M.A.E. Aue, Oxford: Blackwell.

Wittgenstein, Ludwig & Friedrich Waismann (2003): The Voices of Wittgenstein, ed. by G.P. Baker, London: Routledge.

WordNet 3.0 (2006): http://wordnet.princeton.edu, Princeton University (last accessed February 11, 2009).

Wright, Crispin (1986): ‘How Can the Theory of Meaning Be a Philosophical Project?’ Mind and Language 1: 31–44.

. (1989): ‘Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy of Mind: Sensation, Privacy and Intentions’, Journal of Philosophy 86: 222–234.

Xenakis, Iason (1969): Epictetus. Philosopher-Therapist, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.





