££ SUSANNE K.                          *j



PHILOSOP
IN A NEW KE
A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite/am




          tjtfujMewfoi £Bcefc
The Symbolism of
                 Reason, Rite, and Art

   Few people today, says Susanne Langer, are bom
to an environment which gives them spiritual support
Even as we are conquering nature, there is "little we
see in nature that is ours."   We   have lost our life-
symbols, and our   actions  no longer have ritual value;
this is the most disastrous  hindrance to the free func-
tioning of the human mind.
   For, as Mrs. Langer observes, ". . . the human
brain is constantly carrying on a process of symbolic
transformation" of experience, not as a poor substi-
tute for action, but as a basic human need. This con-
cept of symbolic transformation strikes a "new key in
philosophy." It is a new generative idea, variously re-
flected even in such diverse fields as psychoanalysis
and symbolic logic. Within it lies the germ of a com-
plete reorientation to life, to art, to action. By posing
a whole new world of questions in this key, Mrs.
Langer presents a new world-view in which the limits
of language do not appear as the last limits of rational,
meaningful experience, but things inaccessible to dis-
cursive language have their own forms of conception.
Her examination of the logic of signs and symbols,
and her account of what constitutes meaning, what
characterizes symbols, forms the basis for her further
elaboration of the significance of language, ritual,
myth and music, "and the integration of all these ele-
ments into human mentality.

   Irwin Edman says:    A .subtly reasoned book this,
full of a wide sweep of exact learning in fields as
different as the semantics and comparative of reli-
gion. And the vista Mrs. Langer opens of an approach
to the whole of life through the rationalities of art
and music as well as the explicit logic of words con-
stitutes a really generative idea.




THIS IS A REPRINT OF THE HARD-COVER EDITION
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED BY HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS.
            To
  Alfred North Whitehead
my great Teacher and Friend
          Philosophy
                   in a

               New Key
        A STUDY IN THE SYMBOLISM
        OF REASON, RITE, AND ART



        SUSANNE K. LANGER




      5^°^ A MENTOR BOOK
Published by   THE NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY
Copyright, 1942, 1951
by the President and Fellows of Harvard College

All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced
without permission. For information address
Harvard University Press,
79 Garden St., Cambridge 38, Mass,

Published as a MENTOR BOOK
By Arrangement with Harvard University Press

FIRST PRINTING, FEBRUARY, 1948
TENTH PRINTING, OCTOBER, 1959

MENTOR BOOKS are published by
The New American Library of World Literature, Inc.
$01 Madison Avenue, New York 22, New York

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
          Preface to the Second Edition


In offering Philosophy in a New Key to the public once more,
this time tO a larger part of the English-speaking world, I have
made no changes (except tor small corrections) in the original
text. After nine \ears one naturally sees the imperfections of
a work and wishes it were better; but so long as one can still
subscribe to its contents as a whole it is more important, per-
haps, to cury the intellectual venture forward than to revise
small details of its first formulation.
   Modern theory of knowledge, leading naturally to a critique
of science, represents the best philosophical work of our time.
But "knowledge" is not synonymous with "human mentality."
It is the intent of this book to establish a theory of mind which

shall support that excellent treatment of science, and further-
more lead to an equally serious and detailed critique of art.
Chapters 8 and 9
                   —     "On Significance in Music" and "The
Genesis of Artistic Import" —    purport to point the way to that
second inquiry. They are, of course, no more than preliminary
and limited studies, and do not establish the power of the
premises here assumed to cope with the entire problem of the
nature and structure of art; but they assay the new ground.
  A    book which is the beginning of a line of thought can be
judged only in retrospect, when the relative importance of its
several ideas emerges by virtue of the further developments
of which they show themselves capable and any major>defecty
in their foundations have had time to come to light. In the
years which have elapsed since the first edition of this book
appeared, I have put its general tenets to the test by working
out the philosophy of art they promised, and so far I have
found them amazingly fertile, leading from novelty to novelty
in a realm of theory that has long been imponderable or
purely academic. It is with this pragmatic assurance, there-
fore, that I reaffirm my little work by offering it to the public
once more in unaltered form.
   If, however, I were writing it now, there would be at least
one difference in terminology, affecting especially Chapter
3, "The Logic of Signs and Symbols"; that chapter heading
would read "The Logic of Signals and Symbols." Charles
Morris, in his Signs, Language and Behavior, employed a
usage which I find superior to my own and have accordingly
 adopted since the publication of his book. Morris uses the
word "signal" for what 1 called "sign." The term "signal" is
vi                           Preface
stretched, of course, to cover not only explicitly recognized
signals—  red lights, bells, et cetera—but also those phenom-
ena which we tacitly respect as signals to our sense, e.g. the
sight of objects and windows whereby we are oriented in a
room, the sensation evoked by a fork in a person's hand that
guides him in raising it to his mouth; in short, to cover every-
thing that I called "sign." But such a stretching of a semi-
technical term is easily accepted and perfectly legitimate.
The great advantage of Morris's usage is that it leaves us the
word "sign" to denote any vehicle of meaning, signal or
symbol, whereas in my own vocabulary there was no generic
term, and the need of it was sometimes obvious.
   Another, intellectually much more important, change I
should like to make, if I could have twenty-four hours' "sec-
ond chance" like Sartre's shades from Limbo, is to replace the
unsatisfactory notion of music as an essentially ambiguous
symbol by a much more precise, though somewhat difficult,
concept of musical significance, involving a theory (not yet
quite completed) of artistic abstraction in general. This I
would consider a distinct advance in the theory of art as "ex-
pressive form"; but it has to wait upon the later elaboration
of certain ideas that are still young and therefore half poetic
in Philosophy in a New Key. The process of philosophical
thought moves typically from a first, inadequate, but ardent
apprehension of some novel idea, figuratively expressed, to
more and more precise comprehension, until language catches
up to logical insight, the figure is dispensed with, and literal
expression takes its place. Really new concepts, having no
names in current language, always make their earliest appear-
ance in metaphorical statements; therefore the beginning of
any theoretical structure is inevitably marked by fantastic in-
ventions. There is an air of such metaphor, or "philosophical
myth," in the treatment of musical "meaning," which I think
I could improve on were I given another fling at it today.
   Yet perhaps not; perhaps, in the course of rendering that
mild extravaganza more literally and logically, one would
necessarily raise new issues, which again would invite the
imagination to project their answers in a tentative, figurative
                                                   —
way; for all the vastly ramified questions of art of creation,
abstraction, and import  —   are still in the offing. So it may be
wiser to let the book go out just as it was before, even with its
unfinished thoughts and half -spoken answers, instead of tink-
ering with any part. A book is like a life: all that is in it is
really of a piece. Les jeux sont fait.
                                                        S. K. L.
Columbus, Ohio
May 7, 1951
           Preface to the First Edition


The "new key" in Philosophy is not one which I have struck.
Other people have struck it, quite clearly and repeatedly. This
book purports merely to demonstrate the unrecognized fact
that it ij a new key, and to show how the main themes of our
thought tend to be transposed into it. As every shift of tonal-
ity gives a new sense to previous passages, so the reorientation
of philosophy which is taking place in our age bestows new
aspects on the ideas and arguments of the past. Our thinking
stems from that past, but does not continue it in the ways that
were foreseen. Its cleavages cut across the old lines, and sud-
denly bring out new motifs that were not felt to be implicit
in the premises of the schools at all; for it changes the ques-
tions of philosophy.
   The universality of the great key-change in our thinking
is shown by the fact that its tonic chord could ring true
for a mind essentially preoccupied with logic, scientific lan-
guage, and empirical fact, although that chord was actually
first sounded by thinkers of a very different school. Logic
and science had indeed prepared the harmony for it, un-
wittingly; for the study of mathematical "transformations"
and "projections," the construction of alternative descriptive*
systems, etc.,^aad raised the issue of symbolic modes and of the
variable relationship of form and content. But the people
who recognized the importance of expressive forms for all
human understanding were those who saw that not only
science, but myth, analogy, metaphorical thinking, and art
are intellectual activities determined by "symbolic modes";
and those people were for the most part of the idealist school.
The relation of art to epistemology was first revealed to them
through reflection on the phenomenal character of experience,
in  the course of the great transcendentalist "adventure of
ideas" launched by Immanuel Kant. And, even now, prac-
tically all serious and penetrating philosophy of art is related
somehow to the idealistic tradition. Most studies of artistic
significance, of art as a symbolic form and a vehicle of con-
ception, have been made in the spirit of post-Kantian meta-
physics.
   Yet I do not believe an idealistic interpretation of Reality
                              vii
viii                              Preface
is necessary to the recognition of art as a symbolic form. Pro-
fessor Urban speaks of "the assumption that the more richly
and energetically the human spirit builds its languages and
symbolisms, the nearer it comes ... to its ultimate being
and reality," as "the idealistic minimum necessary for any
adequate theory of symbolism." If there be such a "Reality"
as the idealists assume, then access to it, as to any other in-
tellectual goal, must be through some adequate symbolism;
but I cannot see that any access to the source or "principle"
of man's being is presupposed in the logical and psychological
study of symbolism itself.        We
                                 need not assume the presence
of a transcendental "human spirit," if we recognize, for in-
stance, the function of symbolic transformation as a natural
activity, a high form of nervous response, characteristic of
man among the animals. The study of symbol and meaning is
a starting-point of philosophy, not a derivative from Car-
tesian,  Humean, or Kantian premises; and the recognition
of its fecundity and depth may be reached from various posi-
tions, though it is a historical fact that the idealists reached
it       and have given us the most illuminating literature
     first,
                                       —
on non-discursive symbolisms myth, ritual, and art. Their
studies, however, are so intimately linked with their meta-
physical speculations that the new key they have struck in
philosophy impresses one, at first, as a mere modulation within
their old strain. Its real vitality is most evident when one
realizes that even studies like the present essay, springing
from      logical   rather than   from     ethical   or metaphysical in-
terests, may be actuated by the same generative idea, the
essentially transformational nature of human understanding.
   The scholars to whom I owe, directly or indirectly, the
material of my thoughts represent many schools and even
many fields of scholarship; and the final expression of those
thoughts does not always give credit to their influence. The
writings of the sage to whom this book is dedicated receive
but scant explicit mention; the same thing holds for the
works of Ernst Cassirer, that pioneer in the philosophy of
symbolism, and of Heinrich Schenker, Louis Arnaud Reid,
Kurt Goldstein, and many others. Sometimes a mere article
or essay, like Max Kraussold's "Musik und Mythus in ihrem
Verhaltnis" (Die Musik, 1925), Etienne Rabaud's "Les
hommes au point de vue biologique" (Journal de Psychologic,
1931), Sir Henry Head's "Disorders of Symbolic Thinking
and Expression" (British Journal of Psychology, 1920), or
Hermann Nohl's Stil und Weltanschauung, can give one's
thinking a new slant or suddenly organize one's scattered
knowledge into a significant idea, yet be completely swallowed
up in the theories it has influenced so that no specific reference
                                Preface                               ix

    can be made to it at any particular point of their exposition.
    Inevitably, the philosophical ideas of every thinker stem from
    all he has read as well as all he has heard and seen, and if
    consequently little of his material is really original, that only
t
    lends his doctrines the continuity of an old intellectual heritage.
    Respectable ancestors, after all, are never to be despised.
       Though I cannot acknowledge all       my  literary debts, I do
    wish to express  my   thanks to several friends who have given
    me the benefit of their judgment or of their aid:       to Miss
    Helen Sewell for the comments of an artist on the whole
    theory of non-discursive symbolism, and especially on chap-
    ters 8 and 9; to Mr. Carl Schorske for his literary criti-
    cism of those same long chapters; to my sister, Mrs. Dunbar,
    for some valuable suggestions; to Mrs. Dan Fenn for reading
    the page proofs, and to Miss Theodora Long and my son
    Leonard for their help with the index. Above all I want to
    thank Mrs. Penfield Roberts, who has read the entire manu-
    script, even after every extensive revision, and given me
    not only intellectual help, but the constant moral support
    of enthusiasm and friendship, confirming for me the truth
    of what one lover of the arts, J. M. Thorburn, has said
    that "all the genuine, deep delight of life is in showing
    people the mud-pies you have made; and life is at its best when
    we confidingly recommend our mud-pies to each other's
    sympathetic consideration."
                                                           S. K. L.

    Cambridge, 1941


                                                                s+
                                  Contents


1.   THE NEW KEY                                             15
  Every epoch characterized by         questions
                                                 —
                                               its  "generative
ideas": their rise and       —examples from Greek
                                decline                                     philos-
ophy —      and exhaustion of Christian philosophy —
          rise                                              and            rise
exhaustion       modern philosophy — philosophical
                  of                                                       interests
stifledby technological —only mathematics remains both "ab-
stract" and respectable — mathematics              of symbols
                                                     a science
and meanings — sense-data and                    science—data
                                          interpretation in
   symbols and laws           meanings —power        symbols
new theme — "dynamic" psychology — symbolic
as                             as their                          of         a
                                                      —       logic   extrav-
agance    young "generative
          of                      —   ideas"                 an
                                                  limits of the "field" of
idea— promise  of     "new key."
                         the

2.   SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                                                      33
   Influence of semantic problems on genetic psychology
suppositions of genetic theory: identity of animal and human
                                                            pre-            —
needs, and derivation of symbol-responses from sign-responses
—  the mind as a transmitter          —
                                sources of error   error grows—
with complication        —
                     impractical effects of symbol-using     ab-             —
surdity of a theory that reduces intelligence to folly     such             —
theory contradicted by the persistence of impractical ritual
                                 —
by the seriousness of art by the phenomenon of drearrf— in-
ventory of human needs^reconsidered                  —
                                         special functions pre-
                               —
suppose special needs need of symbolization the human         —
                               —
mind as a transformer impractical behavior symbolistic this                  —
                                                         —
view explains many anthropological puzzles several uses of
symbolism        call for   separate investigations.

3.   THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                                               54
     Existing analyses of meaning-relation mainly acceptable
historical survey
                 —    "quality" of meaning elusive— meaning a
            terms —
      — "meanings
function    of                  contexts
                            patterns as  —         symbol, and
                                                      subject,
                                           " relative to
object              of 'meaning'              choice   terms          of          in
a pattern — and symbols—wide scope
                 signs                                   of sign-relations
mistake —                           —symbols and conceptions
               logical simplicity of signs
—names—             and
                 as signs   symbols —
                                 as                          by
                                                  distinction illustrated
case of  Helen Keller —               denotation, and connota-
                                 signification,
tion— relatedness  of denotation and connotation — proper
                         —
names excepted symbols and discourse literal meanings and  —
propositions         —
                syntactical structures                   —
                                         the "logical picture" as
a symbol         —
            progressive abstraction                     —
                                       conceptions and concepts
—  abstraction the basis of rationality                   —
                                          logical virtues of lan-
       —
guage truth and falsity.
4.   DISCURSIVE FORMS AND PRESENTATIONAL
       FORMS                                                                                75
   "Logical projection"              —
                             discursive form a "projection"
Carnap's conclusion: syntax of language the limit of conceiv-
ability—  non-literal symbolism "emotive"      Russell and Witt-—
genstein on metaphysics
ings  —                              —
                             philosophy a development of mean-
        symbolic function wider than language limitation to             —
language leaves too much of mentality nonsensical       rationality         —
begins with articulation              —
                              sense-experience  an  articulation
conceptual character of "things"      "Gestalt" the forerunner of
                       —
symbolic uses apprehension of non-discursive forms such                            —
forms not "linguistic" even in a derived sense logical char-            —
acteristics of language            —
                           of presentational symbolisms      primi-               —
tive understanding             —
                       forms of feeling progressive         —
                                                       articulation
of presentational forms            —
                            key to major developments of culture.
5.    LANGUAGE                                                                               94
     All    men have completely articulate language                         —no beasts
have any language— animal communication—                                mutism of apes
—lack of babbling-impulse        young —enigma of
                                               in the                             linguistic
origins—sometimes sought                      —deaf children
                                           in "speech-instinct"
and "wild" children do not speak—problem              by                rejected            phi-
        —
lologists         reason:
                   Sapir's          general theory of symbol-
                                          it   requires
ism —      its  always sought
                 roots           communication — should be
                                                  in
sought         symbol-functions —
            in early                       symbolic behavior
                                                        primitive
of apes —lack of                  precludes speech —symbols
                               "lalling-instinct"
and       forms —
       free                 view    mistake— Furness' ape
                               utilitarian              a
the Wild Boy of Aveyron —human             a            "lalling"      transient instinct
—conditions              forlanguage — Donovan's theory of
                                learning
origin—connotation probably before denotation—use—always
propositional —        and Wegener on development —emen-
                        Biihler
dation —            through metaphor— Wegener on "faded
                 generality
metaphors" —evolution of conceptual thinking—              of             universality
language explained.
6.    LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF SACRAMENT                                                  127
                           —metaphorical —
     Sense-images and concepts                                          uses      primitive
                   —               —
    —confusion of symbol and meaning — dream— savage
abstraction            fantasies      desire and dream
                                                 imagina-             primitive
tion                                                             in               in
thought—power of "sacra" —            excitement     con-
                                                  intellectual                         in
templation —emotional expression and        — —mi-               gesture       ritual
metic      —mimicry play—Dewey's theory
            rites                    in                                         rejected
ritual as assent to sacred concepts          —
                                     magic not essentially prac-
tical   —
       familiar acts acquire strictest forms                —
                                               sacrament der-              —
ivation of divinities from "sacra"            —
                                       animal forms totemism         —
—  Jane Harrison on the making of gods.
7.    LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                                           148
   Ritual and myth have different origins             —
                                          dream and story
primitive story     —
                 characters and acts symbolical  growth of       — —
fairytale   —   fairytale    and myth   —
                                  difference of functions   real-
istic elements in fairytale
of "nature myths"       —         —
                              generalization of forms
                      the "culture hero"             —
                                                        problem
                                           link between fairytale
                                                                  —
             —                                       —
and myth nature symbols in his story evolution of a lunar
deity   —
        personification of moon is lunarization of
                              —
                                                                     Woman
mythical elaboration     influence of poetic formulation     the           —
                                       —
Kaleyala as transitional form epic phase the consummation
of myth.
8. ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                               174
                        —              —
  Art and artifact "Significant Form" meaning as central
                            —
problem of modern aesthetics problem of artistic significance
—psychoanalytic theory not           —form
                                    helpful       source of
                                                      the
artisticmerit—music           example —
                         the best               of music
                                               theories              as
pleasure— emotional stimulus— communication of
             as                         as                        feel-
ing—                         theory —music not symptom but
      fallacy of self-expression
symbol—                            problem of
           its "significance" a logical          —language
                                                       art
of music — program music—language            —
                                           of feeling    logical struc-
ture of music and          —analogy language misleading
                     of feeling             of
—Huber on semantic elements music—  in                 sym-
                                                presentational
bol not           —Urban's theory of
         translatable                             —
                                              art rejected    difficul-
ties of analysis—emotional            of
                                  attitudes    —autonomy
                                                  critics
defended — music     "algebra of
                        as               —          —music
                                              feelings"      fallacies
an unconsummated symbol— assignment       meanings    of             a cjjitch-
to musical thinking—musical meaning        but        real       "implicit"
form and content experienced as one.
9.    THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                                            208
                                       —
                                                                ——
   Origins of music not artistic sources of folk music    genetic
fallacy  —materials furnished by casual sounds        benefit of
                   —                  —
models in plastic arts danger of models confusion of stand-
ards    —                       —
        articulation the aim of art    artistic vision   late de-—
                   —                       —
velopment of music due to lack of models rhythms and
                    — —
words its only guides airs emancipation from models
       import —
artistic              dictum — no comparison of
                       Pater's                        im-                arts
    —content of various —
plied                                 sought
                                      arts    unity             in   "aesthetic
emotion" — nature       emotion — not
     and audience
artist
                  —         of that       content of
                                    adequacy of symbol
                              "artistic truth" as
                                                       the                  art


distinguishedfrom           —
                            literal truth   —standards
                                             artistic insight                     of
artnot         —new forms not — forms become
            absolute                         lucid    old                       ex-
hausted   —literal interpretation   and artistic vision   —mysticism
the limit of meaning.

10.   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                                         224
  Practical vision   —
                    appreciation of fact       —
                                            propositional form
of fact
       ——truth and falsity   —
                            interest in fact the destruction of
                                    —
myth "discoveries" secondary tendency toward realism de-
velops with maturity     —
                        systematization of facts an intellectual
challenge  —fact as standard of reality    —
                                         history its typical ex-
pression   —                               —          —
           more factual than science causation and verifi-
cation—                                 —
         combination of symbols and signs power of realistic
thought—change     man's world — nature-symbols outgrown
                    in
modern      — and symbols warp and woof thought
           life  signs               the                       of
—              —symbol-functions—complexity meanings
—"charged" symbols
     sign-functions                                       of
                    —complexity mental —hardships
                                        of          life
of moral    —need
           life                 —
                      of orientation    lack of potent life-symbols
—modern              new
            reality too            new
                             to furnish       —freedom
                                              "sacra"            of
action depends on            —
                     fixed values     depend on symbols
                                    values
          — meaninglessness modern —
ritual acts                      in           life  reorientation a
rational need—modern barbarism                new emergent
                                      the effect of
mythologies.


SUGGESTED FURTHER READING                                           249

INDEX                                                               250
                       i.    The New Key


Every age in the history of philosophy has its own preoccu-
pation. Its problems are peculiar to it, not for obvious prac-
tical reasons— political or social     —
                                   but for deeper reasons of
intellectual growth. we look back on the slow formation
                        If
and accumulation of doctrines which mark that history, we
may see certain groupings of ideas within it, not by subject-
matter, but by a subtler common factor which may be called
their "technique." It is the mode of handling problems, rather
than what they are about, that assigns them to an age. Their
subject-matter may be fortuitous, and depend on conquests,
discoveries, plagues, or governments; their treatment derives
from a steadier source.
   The "technique," or treatment, of a problem begins with its
first expression as a question. The way a question is asked
limits and disposes the ways in which any answer to it  —right
or wrong —   may be given. If we are asked: "Who made the
world?" we may answer:     "God made it," "Chance made it,"
"Love and hate made it," or what you will. We may be right
or we may be wrong. But if we reply: "Nobody made it," we
will be accused of trying to be cryptic, smart, or "unsympa-
thetic." For in this last instance, we have only seemingly
given an answer; in reality we have rejected the question. The
questioner feels^called upon to repeat his problem. "Therr'tlow
did the world become as. it is?" If now we answer: "It has
not 'become' at all," he will be really disturbed. This "answer"
clearly repudiates the very framework of his thinking, the
orientation of his mind, the basic assumptions he has always
entertained as common-sense notions about things in general.
Everything has become what it is; everything has a cause;
every change must be to some end; the world is a thing, and
must have been made by some agency, out of some original
stuff, for some reason. These are natural ways of thinking.
Such implicit "ways" are not avowed by the average man,
but simply followed. He is not conscious of assuming any
basic principles. They are what a German would call his
"Weltanschauung," his attitude of mind, rather than specific
articles of faith. They constitute his outlook; they are deeper
than facts he may note or propositions he may moot.
   But, though they are not stated, they find expression in
the forms of his questions.   A question is really an ambiguous
                                  15
16                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
proposition; the answer is its determination. 1 There can be only
a certain number of alternatives that will complete its sense.
In this way the intellectual treatment of any datum, any ex-
perience, any subject, is determined by the nature of our
questions, and only carried out in the answers.
   In philosophy this disposition of problems is the most im-
portant thing that a school, a movement, or an age contributes.
This is the "genius" of a great philosophy; in its light, systems
arise and rule and die. Therefore a philosophy is characterized
more by the formulation of its problems than by its solution
of them. Its answers establish an edifice of facts; but its ques-
tions make the frame in which its picture of facts is plotted.
They make more than the frame; they give the angle of per-
spective, the palette, the style in which the picture is drawn
everything except the subject. In our questions lie our prin-
ciples of analysis, and our answers may express whatever
those principles are able to yield.
   There is a passage in Whitehead's Science and the Modern
World, setting forth this predetermination of thought, which
is at once its scaffolding and its limit. "When you are criti-
cizing the philosophy of an epoch," Professor Whitehead says,
"do not chiefly direct your attention to those intellectual
positions which its exponents feel it necessary explicitly to
defend. There will be some fundamental assumptions which
adherents of all the variant systems within the epoch uncon-
sciously presuppose. Such assumptions appear so obvious that
people do not know what they are assuming because no other
way of putting things has ever occurred to them. With these
assumptions a certain limited number of types of philosophic
systems are possible, and this group of systems constitutes
the philosophy of the epoch." 2
   Some years ago, Professor C. D. Burns published an ex-
cellent little article called "The Sense of the Horizon," in
which he made a somewhat wider application of the same
principle; for here he pointed out that every civilization has
its limits of knowledge      —
                             of perceptions, reactions, feelings,
and ideas. To quote his own words, "The experience of any
moment has its horizon. Today's experience, which is not
tomorrow's, has in it some hints and implications which are
tomorrow on the horizon of today. Each man's experience
may be added to by the experience of other men, who are
living in his day or have lived before; and so a common
world of experience, larger than that of his own observation,

  i Cf. Felix Cohen,   "What is a Question?" The Monist, XXXIX (1929),
3: 350-364.
  2 From Chapter III The Century of Genius. By permission of The
                        :


Macmillan Company, publishers.
                        THE NEW KEY                             17
can be lived in by each man. But however wide it may be,
that common world also has its horizon; and on that horizon
new experience is always appearing.     ." 3
                                        .   .


   "Philosophers in every age have attempted to give an ac-
count of as much experience as they could. Some have indeed
pretended that what they could not explain did not exist;
but all the great philosophers have allowed for more than
they could explain, and have, therefore, signed beforehand,
if not dated, the death-warrant of their philosophies." 4
   "..   The history of Western philosophy begins in a period
         .


in which the sense of the horizon lifts men's eyes from the
myths and rituals, the current beliefs and customs of the
Greek tradition in Asia Minor. ... In a settled civilization,
the regularity of natural phenomena and their connection over
large areas of experience became significant. The myths were
too disconnected; but behind them lay the conception of Fate.
This perhaps provided Thales and the other early philosophers
with the first hint of the new formulation, which was an
attempt to allow for a larger scale of certainty in the current
attitude toward the world. From this point of view the early
philosophers are conceived to have been not so much disturbed
by the contradictions in the tradition as attracted by certain
factors on the horizon of experience, of which their tradition
gave no adequate account. They began the new formulation
in order to include the new factors, and they boldly said that
                                          5
'all' was water or 'all' was in flux."

    The formulation of experience which is contained within
the intellectual horizon of an age and a society is determined,
I believe, not so much by events and desires, as by the basic
concepts at people's disposal for analyzing and describing*theuf
adventures to uieir own understanding. Of course, such con-
cepts arise as they are needed, to deal with political or domes-
tic experience; but the same experiences could be seen in
many different lights, so the light in which they do appear
depends on the genius of a people as well as on the demands
of the external occasion. Different minds will take the same
events in very different ways.   A   tribe of Congo Negroes will
react quite differently to (say) its first introduction to the story
of Christ's passion, than did the equally untutored descendants
of Norsemen, or the American Indians. Every society meets a
new idea with its own concepts, its own tacit, fundamental
way of seeing things; that is to say, with its own questions,
its peculiar curiosity.


  3 Philosophy, VIII (1933), 31: 301-317. This preliminary essay was
followed by his book, The Horizon of Experience (1934). See p. 301.
  * "The Sense of the Horizon," pp. 303-304.
  5 Ibid., pp. 306-307.
18                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   The horizon to which Professor Burns makes reference is
the limit of clear and sensible questions that we can ask.
When the Ionian philosophers, whom he cites as the inno-
vators of Greek thought, asked what "all" was made of, or
how "all" matter behaved, they were assuming a general no-
tion, namely that of a parent substance, a final, universal
matter to which all sorts of accidents could happen. This
notion dictated the terms of their inquiries: what things were,
and how they changed. Problems of right and wrong, of
wealth and poverty, slavery and freedom, were beyond their
scientific horizon. On these matters they undoubtedly adopted
the wordless, unconscious attitudes dictated by social usage.
The concepts that preoccupied them had no application in
those realms, and therefore did not give rise to new, interest-
ing, leading questions about social or moral affairs.
   Professor Burns regards all Greek thought as one vast for-
mulation of experience. "In spite of continual struggles with
violent reversals in conventional habits and in the use of
words," he says, "work upon the formulation of Greek ex-
perience culminated in the magnificent doctrines of Plato and
Aristotle. Both had their source in Socrates. He had turned
from the mere assertions of the earlier philosophers to the
question of the validity of any assertion at all. Not what the
world was but how one could know what it was, and therefore
what one could know about one's self seemed to him to be
the fundamental question.       .  The formulation begun by
                                    .   .



Thales was comoleted by Aristotle." 6
   I think the historical continuity and compactness of Hel-
lenic civilization influences this judgment. Certainly between
Thales and the Academy there is at least one further shift of
the horizon, namely with the advent of the Sophists. The
questions Socrates asked were as new to Greek thought in his
day as those of Thales and Anaximenes had been to their ear-
lier age. Socra f es did not continue and complete Ionian
thought; he cared very little about the speculative physics that
was the very breath of life to the nature-philosophers, and
his lifework did not further that ancient enterprise by even a
step. He had not new answers, but new questions, and there-
with he brought a new conceptual framework, an entirely
different perspective, into Greek philosophy. His problems had
arisen in the law-courts and the Sophists' courses of oratory;
they were, in the main, and in their significant features, irrel-
evant to the academic tradition. The validity of knowledge
was only one of his new puzzles; the value of knowing, the
purpose of science, of political life, practical arts, and finally

  e Ibid., p.   307.
                       THE NEW KEY                           19
of the course of nature, all became problematical to him. For
he was operating with a new idea. Not prime matter and its
disguises, its virtual products, its laws of change and its ulti-
mate identity, constituted the terms of his discourse, but the
notion of value. That everything had a value was too obvious
to require statement. It was so obvious that the Ionians had
not even given it one thought, and Socrates did not bother to
state it; but his questions centered on what values things had
—   whether they were good or evil, in themselves or in their
relations to other things, for all men or for few, or for the
gods alone. In the light of that newly-enlisted old concept,
value, a whole world of new questions opened up. The phil-
osophical horizon widened in all directions at once, as hori-
zons do with every upward step.
    The limits of thought are not so much set from outside, by
the fullness or poverty of experiences that meet the mind, as
from within, by the power of conception, the wealth of for-
mulative notions with which the mind meets experiences. Most
new discoveries are suddenly-seen things that were always
there.  A   new idea is a light that illuminates presences which
simply had no form for us before the light fell on them.    We
turn the light here, there, and everywhere, and the limits of
 thought recede before it.A   new science, a new art, or a young
and vigorous system of philosophy, is generated by such a basic
innovation. Such ideas as identity of matter and change of
 form, or as value, validity, virtue, or as outer world and inner
 consciousness, are not theories; they are the terms in which
theories are conceived; they give rise to specific questions, and
 are articulated only in the form of these questions. Therefore
 one may call^hem generative ideas in the history of ttfdughtT
    A   tremendous philosophical vista opened when Thales, or
 perhaps one of his predecessors not known to us, asked:
 "What is the world made of?" For centuries men turned their
 eyes upon the changes of matter, the problem of growth and
 decay, the laws of transformation in nature. When the possi-
 bilities of that primitive science were exhausted, speculations
 deadlocked, and the many alternative answers were stored in
 every learned mind to its confusion, Socrates propounded his
 simple and disconcerting questions  —    not, "Which answer is
 true?" but: "What is Truth?" "What is Knowledge, and why
 do we want to acquire it?" His questions were disconcerting
 because they contained the new principle of explanation, the
 notion of value. Not to describe the motion and matter of a
 thing, but to see its purpose, is to understand it. From this
 conception a host of new inquiries were born. What is the
 highest good of man? Of the universe? What are the proper
 principles of art, education, government, medicine? To what
20                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
purpose do planets and heavens revolve, animals procreate,
empires rise? Wherefore does man have hands and eyes and
the gift of language?
   To the physicists, eyes and hands were no more interesting
than sticks and stones. They were all just varieties of Prime
Matter. The Socratic conception of purpose went beyond the
old physical notions in that it gave importance to the differ-
ences between men's hands and other "mixtures of elements."
Socrates was ready to accept tradition on the subject of ele-
ments, but asked in his turn: "Why are we made of fire and
water, earth and air? Why have we passions, and a dream of
                                               —
Truth? Why do we live? Why do we die?" Plato's ideal
commonwealth and Aristotle's science rose in reply. But no
one stopped to explain what "ultimate good" or "purpose"
meant; these were the generative ideas of all the new, vital,
philosophical problems, the measures of explanation, and be-
longed to common sense.
   The end of a philosophical epoch comes with the exhaus-
tion of its motive concepts. When all answerable questions
that can be formulated in its terms have been exploited, we
are left with only those problems that are sometimes called
"metaphysical" in a slurring sense—   insoluble problems whose
very statement harbors a paradox. The peculiarity of such
pseudo-questions is that they are capable of two or more
equally good answers, which defeat each other. An answer
once propounded wins a certain number of adherents who
subscribe to it despite the fact that other people have shown
conclusively how wrong or inadequate it is; since its rival
solutions suffer from the same defect, a choice among them
really restson temperamental grounds. They are not intellec-
tual discoveries, like good answers to appropriate questions,
but doctrines. At this point philosophy becomes academic; its
watchword henceforth is Refutation, its life is argument rather
than private thinking, fair-mindedness is deemed more im-
portant than single-mindedness, and the whole center of
gravity shifts from actual philosophical issues to peripheral
subjects—  methodology, mental progress, the philosopher's
place in society, and apologetics.
   The eclectic period in Greco-Roman philosophy was just
such a tag-end of an inspired epoch. People took sides on old
questions instead of carrying suggested ideas on to their fur-
ther implications. They sought a reasoned belief, not new
things to think about. Doctrines seemed to lie around all
ready-made, waiting to be adopted or rejected, or perhaps dis-
sected and recombined in novel aggregates. The consolations
of philosophy were more in the spirit of that time than the
disturbing whispers of a Socratic daemon.
                        THE NEW KEY                            21
  Yet the human mind is always active. When philosophy lies
fallow,  other fields bring abundance of fruit. The end of
Hellenism was the beginning of Christianity, a period of deep
emotional life, military and political enterprise, rapid civiliza-
tion of barbarous hordes, possession of new lands. Wild
northern Europe was opened to the Mediterranean world. Of
course the old cultural interests flagged, and old concepts
paled, in the face of such activity, novelty, and bewildering
challenge. A footloose, capricious modernity took the place of
deep-rooted philosophical thought. All the strength of good
minds was consumed by the practical and moral problems of
the day, and metaphysics seemed a venerable but bootless re-
finement of rather sheltered, educated people, a peculiar and
lonely amusement of old-fashioned scholars. It took several
centuries before the great novelties became an established
order, the emotional fires burned themselves out, the modern
notions matured to something like permanent principles; then
natural curiosity turned once more toward these principles of
life, and sought their essence, their inward ramifications, and
the grounds of their security. Interpretations of doctrines and
commandments became more and more urgent. But interpre-
tation of general propositions is nothing more nor less than
philosophy; and so another vital age of Reason began.
   The wonderful flights of imagination and feeling inspired
by the rise and triumph of Christianity, the questions to which
its profound revolutionary attitude gave rise, provided for
nearly a thousand years of philosophical growth, beginning
with the early Church Fathers and culminating in the great
Scholastics. But, at last, its generative ideas — sin and salva--.
tion, nature arfid grace, unity, infinity, and kingdom     — had
done their work. Vast systems of thought had been formulated,
and all relevant problems had been mooted. Then came the
unanswerable puzzles, the paradoxes that always mark the
limit of what a generative idea, an intellectual vision, will do.
The exhausted Christian mind rested its case and philosophy
became a reiteration and ever-weakening justification of faith.
   Again "pure thought" appeared as a jejune and academic
business. History teachers like to tell us that learned men in
the Middle Ages would solemnly discuss how many angels
could dance on the point of a needle. Of course that question,
and others like it, had perfectly respectable deeper meanings
—  in this case the answer hinged on the material or im-
material nature of angels (if they were incorporeal, then an
infinite number of them could occupy a dimensionless point).
Yet such problems, ienorantly or maliciously misunderstood,
undoubtedly furnished jokes in the banquet hall when they
were still seriously propounded in the classroom. The fact
22                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
that the average person who heard them did not try to under-
stand them but regarded them as cryptic inventions of an
                 —
academic class "too deep for us," as our Man in the Street
             —
would say shows that the issues of metaphysical speculation
were no longer vital to the general literate public. Scholastic
thought was gradually suffocating under the pressure of new
interests,                 —
             new emotions the crowding modern             ideas   and
artistic inspirationwe call the Renaissance.
   After several centuries of    sterile tradition,   logic-chopping,
and partisanship in philosophy, the wealth of nameless, hereti-
cal, often inconsistent notions born of the Renaissance crystal-
lized into general  and ultimate problems.      A  new outlook on
life challenged the human mind to make sense out of its
bewildering world; and the Cartesian age of "natural and
mental philosophy" succeeded to the realm.
   This new epoch had a mighty and revolutionary generative
idea: the dichotomy of all reality into inner experience and
outer world, subject and object, private reality and public
truth. The very language of what is now traditional epis-
temology betrays this basic notion; when we speak of the
"given," of "sense-data," "the phenomenon," or "other selves,"
we take for granted the immediacy of an internal experience
and the continuity of the external world. Our fundamental
questions are framed in these terms: What is actually given
to the mind? What guarantees the truth of sense-data? What
lies behind the observable order of phenomena? What is the
relation of the mind to the brain? How can we know other
selves?—  All these are familiar problems of today. Their
answers have been elaborated into whole systems of thought:
empiricism, idealism, realism, phenomenology, Existenz-Phi-
losophie, and logical positivism. The most complete and
characteristic of all these doctrines are the earliest ones:
empiricism and idealism. They are the full, unguarded, vigor-
ous formulations of the new generative notion, Experience;
their proponents were the enthusiasts inspired by the Cartesian
method, and their doctrines are the obvious implications de-
rived by that principle, from such a starting-point. Each
school in its turn took the intellectual world by storm. Not
only the universities, but all literary circles, felt the liberation
from time-worn, oppressive concepts, from baffling limits of
inquiry, and hailed the new world-picture with a hope of
truer orientation in life, art, and action.
   After a while the confusions and shadows inherent in the
new vision became apparent, and subsequent doctrines sought
in various ways to escape between the horns of the dilemma
created by the subject-object dichotomy, which Professor
Whitehead has called "the bifurcation of nature." Since then,
                        THE NEW KEY                          23
our theories have become more and more refined, circum-
spect, and clever; no one can be quite frankly an idealist, or
go the whole way with empiricism; the early forms of realism
are now known as the "naive" varieties, and have been super-
seded by "critical" or "new" realisms. Many philosophers
vehemently deny any systematic Weltanschauung, and re-
pudiate metaphysics in principle.
   The springs of philosophical thought have run dry once
more. For fifty years at least, we have witnessed all the char-
acteristic symptoms that mark the end of an epoch     — the in-
corporation of thought in more and more variegated "isms,"
the clamor of their respective adherents to be heard and
judged side by side, the defense of philosophy as a respectable
and important pursuit, the increase of congresses and sym-
posia, and a flood of text-criticism, surveys, popularizations,
and collaborative studies. The educated layman does not
pounce upon a new philosophy book as people pounced upon
Leviathan or the great Critiques or even The World as Will
and Idea. He does not expect enough intellectual news from
a college professor. What he expects is, rather, to be argued
into accepting idealism or realism, pragmatism or irrational-
ism, as his own belief. We have arrived once more at that
counsel of despair, to find a reasoned faith.
   But the average person who has any faith does not really
care whether it is reasoned or not. He uses reason only to
                    —
satisfy his curiosity   and philosophy, at present, does not
even arouse, let alone satisfy, his curiosity. It only confuses
him with impractical puzzles. The reason is not that he is
dull, or really too busy (as he says he is) to enjoy philosophy..^

    —
It is simply that the generative ideas of the seventeenth cen-
tury    "the century of genius," Professor Whitehead calls it
have served their term. The difficulties inherent in their con-
stitutive concepts balk us now; their paradoxes clog our
thinking. If we would have new knowledge, we must get us
a whole world of new questions!
   Meanwhile, the dying philosophical epoch is eclipsed by
a tremendously active age of science and technology. The
roots of our scientific thinking reach far back, through the
whole period of subjective philosophy, further back than any
explicit empiricism, to the brilliant, extravert genius of the
Renaissance. Modern science is often said to have sprung
from empiricism; but Hobbes and Locke have given us no
physics, and Bacon, who expressed the scientists' creed to
perfection, was neither an active philosopher nor a scientist;
he was essentially a man of letters and a critic of current
thought. The only philosophy that rose directly out of a con-
templation of science is positivism, and it is probably the
24                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
least interesting of all doctrines,   an appeal to common-sense
against the difficulties of establishing metaphysical or logical
"first principles."
   Genuine empiricism is above all a reflection on the validity
of sense-knowledge, a speculation on the ways our concepts
and beliefs are built up out of the fleeting and disconnected
reports our eyes and ears actually make to the mind. Posi-
tivism, the scientists' metaphysic, entertains no such doubts,
and raises no epistemological problems; its belief in the
veracity of sense is implicit and dogmatic. Therefore it is
really out of the running with post-Cartesian philosophy. It
repudiates the basic problems of epistemology, and creates
nothing but elbow-room for laboratory work. The very fact
that it rejects problems, not answers, shows that the growing
physical sciences were geared to an entirely different outlook
on reality. They had their own so-called "working notions";
and the strongest of these was the concept of fact.
   This central concept effected the rapprochement between
science and empiricism, despite the latter's subjective tend-
encies. No matter what problems may lurk in vision and
hearing, there is something final about the guarantees of
sense. Sheer observation is hard to contradict, for sense-data
have an inalienable semblance of "fact." And such a court of
last appeal, where verdicts are quick and ultimate, was ex-
actly what scientists needed if their vast and complicated work
was to go forward. Epistemology might produce intriguing
puzzles, but it could never furnish facts for conviction to rest
upon. A naive faith in sense-evidence, on the other hand,
provided just such terminals to thought. Facts are something
we can all observe, identify, and hold in common; in the last
resort, seeing is believing. And science, as against philosophy
even in that eager and active philosophical age, professed to
look exclusively to the visible world for its unquestioned pos-
tulates.
  The results were astounding enough to lend the new atti-
tude   full force. Despite the objections of philosophical
thinkers, despite the outcry of moralists and theologians
against the "crass materialism" and "sensationalism" of the
         physical science grew like Jack's beanstalk, and
scientists,
overshadowed everything else that human thought produced
to rival it.  A passion for observation displaced the scholarly
love of learned dispute, and quickly developed the experi-
mental technique that kept humanity supplied thrice over with
facts. Practical applications of the new mechanical knowledge
soon popularized and established it beyond the universities.
Here the traditional interests of philosophy could not follow
it any more; for they had become definitely relegated to that
                       THE NEW KEY                           25

haven of unpopular lore, the schoolroom. No one really cared
much about consistency or definition of terms, about precise
conceptions, or formal deduction. The senses, long despised
and attributed to the interesting but improper domain of the
devil, were recognized as man's most valuable servants, and
were rescued from their classical disgrace to wait on him in
his new venture. They were so efficient that they not only
supplied the human mind with an incredible amount of food
for thought, but seemed presently to have most of its cogni-
tive business in hand. Knowledge from sensory experience
was deemed the only knowledge that carried any affidavit of
truth; for truth  became identified, for all vigorous modern
minds, with empirical fact.
   And so, a scientific culture succeeded to the exhausted
philosophical vision. An undisputed and uncritical empiri-
    —                                —
cism not skeptical, but positivistic became its official meta-
physical creed, experiment its avowed method, a vast hoard
of "data" its capital, and correct prediction of future occur-
rences its proof. The programmatic account of this great
adventure, beautifully put forth in Bacon's Novum Organum
was followed only a few centuries later by the complete,
triumphant summary of all that was scientifically respectable,
in J. S. Mill's Canons of Induction — a sort of methodological
manifesto.
   As the physical world-picture grew and technology ad-
vanced, those disciplines which rested squarely on "rational"
instead of "empirical" principles were threatened with com-
plete extinction, and were soon denied even the honorable
name of science. Logic and metaphysics, aesthetics and ethics,
seemed to have seen their day. One by one the vaffous
branches of philosophy—natural, mental, social, or religious
—  -set up  as autonomous sciences; the natural ones with
miraculous success, the humanistic ones with more hope and
fanfare than actual achievement. The physical sciences found
their stride without much hesitation; psychology and sociology
tried hard and seriously to "catch the tune and keep the
step," but with mathematical laws they were never really
handy. Psychologists have probably spent almost as much time
and type avowing their empiricism, their factual premises,
their experimental techniques, as recording experiments and
making general inductions. They still tell us that their lack of
laws and calculable results is due to the fact that psychology
is but young. When physics was as old as psychology is now,

it was a definite, systematic body of highly general facts, and

the possibilities of its future expansion were clearly visible in
every line of its natural progress. It could say of itself, like
Topsy, "I wasn't made, I growed." But our scientific psy-
26               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
chology is made in the laboratory, and especially in the
methodological forum. A good deal has, indeed, been made;
but the synthetic organism still does not grow like a wild
plant; its technical triumphs are apt to be discoveries in physi-
ology or chemistry instead of psychological "facts."
   Theology, which could not possibly submit to scientific
methods, has simply been crowded out of the intellectual
arena and gone into retreat in the cloistered libraries of its
seminaries. As for logic, once the very model and norm of
science, its only salvation seemed to lie in repudiating its most
precious stock-in-trade, the "clear and distinct ideas," and
professing to argue only from empirical facts to equally fac-
tual implications. The logician, once an investor in the greatest
enterprise of human thought, found himself reduced to a sort
of railroad linesman, charged with the task of keeping the
tracks and switches of scientific reasoning clear for sensory
reports to make their proper connections. Logic, it seemed,
could never have a life of its own; for it had no foundation
of facts, except the psychological fact that we do think thus
and so, that such-and-such forms of argument lead to correct
or incorrect predictions of further experience, and so forth.
Logic became a mere reflection on tried and useful methods
of fact-finding, and an official warrant for that technically
fallacious process of generalizing known as "induction."
   Yes, the heyday of science has stifled and killed our rather
worn-out philosophical interests, born three and a half cen-
turies ago from that great generative idea, the bifurcation
of nature, into an inner and an outer world. To the gener-
ations of Comte, Mill, and Spencer, it certainly seemed as
though all human knowledge could be cast in the new mold;
certainly as though nothing in any other mold could hope
to jell. And indeed, nothing much has jelled in any other
mold; but neither have the non-physical disciplines been
able to adopt and thrive on the scientific methods that did
such wonders for physics and its obvious derivatives. The
truth is that science has not really fructified and activated
all human thought. If humanity has really passed the philo-
sophical stage of learning, as Comte hopefully declared, and
is evolving no more fantastic ideas, then we have certainly
left many interesting brain-children stillborn along the way.
   But the mind of man is always fertile, ever creating and
discarding, like the earth. There is always new life under
old decay. Last year's dead leaves hide not merely the seeds,
but the full-fledged green plants of this year's spring, ready
to bloom almost as soon as they are uncovered. It is the
same with the seasons of civilization: under cover of a weary
Greco-Roman eclecticism, a baffled cynicism, Christianity
                       THE NEW KEY                          27
grew to its conquering force of conception and its clear
interpretation of life; obscured by creed, canon, and curricu-
lum, by learned disputation and demonstration, was born the
great ideal of personal experience, the "rediscovery of the
inner life," as Rudolph Eucken termed it, that was to inspire
philosophy from Descartes's day to the end of German
idealism. And beneath our rival "isms," our methodologies,
conferences, and symposia, of course there is something
brewing, too.
   No one observed, amid the first passion of empirical fact-
finding, that the ancient science of mathematics still went its
undisturbed way of pure reason. It fell in so nicely with the
needs of scientific thought, it fitted the observed world of
fact so neatly, that those who learned and used it never
stopped to accuse those who had invented and evolved it of
being mere reasoners, and lacking tangible data. Yet the few
conscientious empiricists who thought that factual bases
must be established for mathematics made a notoriously
poor job of it. Few mathematicians have really held that
numbers were discovered by observation, or even that geo-
metrical relationships are known to us by inductive reason-
ing from many observed instances. Physicists may think of
certain facts in place of constants and variables, but the
same constants and variables will serve somewhere else to
calculate other facts, and the mathematicians themselves
give no set of data their preference. They deal only with
items whose sensory qualities are quite irrelevant: their
"data" are arbitrary sounds or marks called symbols.
   Behind these symbols lie the boldest, purest, coolest ab-
stractions manl^nd has ever made. No schoolman speculating
on essences and attributes ever approached anything like
the abstractness of algebra. Yet those same scientists who
prided themselves on their concrete factual knowledge, who
claimed to reject every proof except empirical evidence,
never hesitated to accept the demonstrations and calculations,
the bodiless, sometimes avowedly "fictitious" entities of the
mathematicians. Zero and infinity, square roots of negative
numbers, incommensurable lengths and fourth dimensions,
all found unquestioned welcome in the laboratory, when the
average thoughtful layman, who could still take an invisible
soul-substance on faith, doubted their logical respectability.
   What is the secret power of mathematics, to win hard-
headed empiricists, against their most ardent beliefs, to its
purely rational speculations and intangible "facts"? Mathe-
maticians are rarely practical people, or good observers of
events. They are apt to be cloistered souls, like philosophers
and theologians. Why are their abstractions taken not only
28                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
seriously, but as indispensable, fundamental facts, by men
who   observe the stars or experiment with chemical com-
pounds?
   The secret lies in the fact that a mathematician does not
profess to say anything about the existence, reality, or effi-
cacy of things at all. His concern is the possibility of symbol-
izing things, and of symbolizing the relations into which
they might enter with each other. His "entities" are not
"data," but concepts. That is why such elements as "im-
aginary numbers" and "infinite decimals" are tolerated by
scientists to whom invisible agents, powers, and "principles"
are anathema. Mathematical constructions are only sym-
bols; they have meanings in terms of relationships, not of
substance; something in reality answers to them, but they
are not supposed to be items in that reality. To the true
mathematician, numbers do not "inhere in" denumerable
things, nor do circular objects "contain" degrees. Numbers
and degrees and all their ilk only mean the real properties
of real objects. It is entirely at the discretion of the scientist
to say, "Let x mean this, let v mean that." All that mathe-
matics determines is that then x and y must be related thus
and thus. If experience belies the conclusion, then the
formula does not express the relation of this x and that y;
then x and y may not mean this thing and that. But no
mathematician in his professional capacity will ever tell us
that this is x, and has therefore such and such properties.
   The faith of scientists in the power and truth of mathe-
matics is so implicit that their work has gradually become less
and less observation, and more and more calculation. The
promiscuous collection and tabulation of data have given
way to a process of assigning possible meanings, merely sup-
posed real entities, to mathematical terms, working out the
logical results,and then staging certain crucial experiments
to check the hypothesis against the actual, empirical results.
But the facts which are accepted by virtue of these tests are
not actually observed at all. With the advance of mathe-
matical technique in physics, the tangible results of experi-
ment have become less and less spectacular; on the other
hand, their significance has grown in inverse proportion. The
men in the laboratory have departed so far from the old
                           —
forms of experimentation typified by Galileo's weights and
Franklin's kite    —
                  that they cannot be said to observe the ac-
tual objects of their curiosity at all; instead, they are watch-
ing index needles, revolving drums, and sensitive plates. No
psychology of "association" of sense-experiences can relate
these data to the objects they signify, for in most cases the
objects have never been experienced. Observation has be-
                          THE   NEW KEY                          29
come almost entirely indirect; and readings take the place of
genuine witness. The sense-data on which the propositions
of modern science rest are, for the most part, little photo-
graphic spots and blurs, or inky curved lines on paper. These
data are empirical enough, but of course they are not them-
selves the phenomena in question; the actual phenomena
stand behind them as their supposed causes. Instead of
watching the process that interests us, that is to be verified
say, a course of celestial events, or the behavior of such ob-
jects as molecules and ether-waves    —  we really see only the
fluctuations of a tiny arrow, the trailing path of a stylus, or
the appearance of a speck of light, and calculate to the "facts"
of our science. What is directly observable is only a sign of
the "physical fact"; it requires interpretation to yield scien-
tific propositions. Not simply seeing is believing, but seeing
and calculating, seeing and translating.
   This is bad, of course, for a thoroughgoing empiricism.
Sense-data certainly do not make up the whole, or even the
major part, of a scientist's material. The events that are given
for his inspection could be "faked" in a dozen ways      —
                                                         that is,
the same visible events could be made to occur, but with a
different significance. We may at any time be wrong about
their significance,    even where no one   is   duping us; we   may
be nature's   fools.Yet if we did not attribute an elaborate,
purely reasoned, and hypothetical history of causes to the
little shivers and wiggles of our apparatus, we really could
not record them as momentous results of experiment. The
problem of observation is all but eclipsed by the problem of
meaning. And the triumph of empiricism in science is jeopar-
dized by the surprising truth that our sense-data are primarily
                *•
symbols.
   Here, suddenly, it becomes apparent that the age of sci-
ence has begotten a new philosophical issue, inestimably
more profound than its original empiricism: for in all
quietness, along purely rational .lines, mathematics has de-
veloped just as brilliantly and vitally as any experimental
technique, and, step by step, has kept abreast of discovery
and observation; and all at once, the edifice of human knowl-
edge stands before us, not as a vast collection of sense re-
ports, but as a structure of facts that are symbols and laws
that are their meanings.        A  new philosophical theme has
been set forth to a coming age: an epistemological theme,
the comprehension of science. The power of symbolism is
its cue, as the finality of sense-data was the cue of a former
epoch.
   In epistemology    —really all that is left of a worn-out philo-
sophical heritage     —
                      a new generative idea has dawned. Its
30                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
power is hardly recognized yet, but if we look at the actual
trend of thought   —   always the surest index to a general pros-
pect —  the growing preoccupation with that new theme is
quite apparent. One needs only to look at the titles of some
philosophical books that have appeared within the last fifteen
or twenty years: The Meaning of Meaning; 7 Symbolism and
Truth; 8 Die Philosophie der symbolischen Formen; 9 Lan-
guage, Truth and Logic; 10 Symbol und Existenz der Wissen-
schaft; X1 The Logical Syntax of Language; l2 Philosophy and
Logical Syntax; 13 Meaning and Change of Meaning; 14 Sym-
bolism: Its Meaning and Effects; 15 Foundations of the
Theory of Signs; 16 Seele als Ausserung; 17 La pensee con-
crete: essai sur le symbolisme intellectuel; 18 Zeichen, die
Fundamente des Wissens; 19 and recently, Language and
Reality. 20 The list is not nearly exhaustive. There are many
books whose titles do not betray a preoccupation with se-
mantic, for instance Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philo-
sophicus, 21 or Grudin's A Primer of Aesthetics. 22 And were
we to take an inventory of articles, even on the symbolism
of science alone, we would soon have a formidable bibli-
ography.
    But it is not only in philosophy proper that the new key-
note has been struck. There are at least two limited and
technical fields, which have suddenly been developed be-
yond all prediction, by the discovery of the all-importance
of symbol-using or symbol-reading. They are widely separate
fields, and their problems and procedures do not seem to
belong together in any way at all: one is modern psychology,
the other modern logic.
    In the former we are disturbed       —   thrilled or irritated, ac-
cording to our temperaments          —  by the advent of psycho-
analysis. In the latter we witness the rise of a new technique
known as symbolic logic. The coincidence of these two pur-
suits seems entirely fortuitous; one stems from medicine
and the other from mathematics, and there is nothing what-
ever on which they would care to compare notes or hold
debate. Yet I believe they both embody the same generative
   7 C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards (1923).
  8 Ralph Munroe Eaton (1925).
  e Ernst Cassirer, 3 vols. (1923, 1924, 1929).     io A. J. Aver (1936).
  11 H. Noack, Symbol und Existenz der Wissenschaft: Untersuchungen
zur Grundlegung einer philosophischen Wissenschaftslehre (1936).
   12 Rudolf Carnap (1935; German ed. 1934).
  is Rudolf Carnap (1935; German ed. 1934).
  i^Gustav Stern (1931).                    is A. N. Whitehead (1927).
  is Charles W. Morris (1938).                  i? Paul Helwig (1936).
  isA. Spaier (1927).                    is R, Gatschenberger (1932).
  20 Wilbur M. Urban, Language and Reality; the Philosophy of Lan-
guage and the Principles of Symbolism (1939).
  2iLudwig Wittgenstein (1922).                22 Louis Grudin (1930).
                       THE NEW KEY                          31
idea, which is to preoccupy and inspire our philosophical age:
for each in its own fashion has discovered the power of sym-
bolization.
  They have different conceptions of symbolism and its func-
tions. Symbolic logic is not "symbolic" in the sense of Freud-
ian psychology, and The Analysis of Dreams makes no
contribution to logical syntax. The emphasis on symbolism
derives from entirely different interests, in their respective
contexts. As yet, the cautious critic may well regard the one
as a fantastic experiment of "mental philosophy," and the
other as a mere fashion in logic and epistemology.
   When we speak of fashions in thought, we are treating
philosophy lightly. There is disparagement in the phrases,
"a fashionable problem," "a fashionable term." Yet it is the
most natural and appropriate thing in the world for a new
problem or a new terminology to have a vogue that crowds
out everything else for a little while.A    word that everyone
snaps up, or a question that has everybody excited, probably
carries a generative idea—  the germ of a complete reorienta-
tion in metaphysics, or at least the "Open Sesame" of some
new positive science. The sudden vogue of such a key-idea
is due to the fact that all sensitive and active minds turn at
once to exploiting it; we try it in every connection, for every
purpose, experiment with possible stretches of its strict mean-
ing, with generalizations and derivatives. When we become
familiar with the new idea our expectations do not outrun
its actual uses quite so far, and then its unbalanced popu-
larity is over. We settle down to the problems that it has
really generated, and these become the characteristic issues
of our time.                                               'm
   The rise of technology^ is the best possible proof that the
basic concepts of physical science, which have ruled our
thinking for nearly two centuries, are essentially sound. They
have begotten knowledge, practice, and systematic under-
standing; no wonder they have .given us a very confident
and definite Weltanschauung. They have delivered all physi-
cal nature into our hands. But strangely enough, the so-
called "mental sciences" have gained very little from the
great adventure. One attempt after another has failed to
apply the concept of causality to logic and aesthetics, or even
sociology and psychology. Causes and effects could be found,
of course, and could be correlated, tabulated, and studied;
but even in psychology, where the study of stimulus and re-
action has been carried to elaborate lengths, no true science
has resulted. No prospects of really great achievement have
 opened before us in the laboratory. If we follow the meth-
 ods of natural science our psychology tends to run into
32                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
physiology, histology, and genetics; we move further and fur-
ther away from those problems which we ought to be ap-
proaching. That signifies that the generative idea which gave
rise to physics and chemistry and all their progeny       —
                                                         tech-
nology, medicine, biology   — does not contain any vivifying
concept for the humanistic sciences. The physicist's scheme,
so faithfully emulated by generations of psychologists, epis-
temologists, and aestheticians, is probably blocking their
progress, defeating possible insights by its prejudicial force.
The scheme is not         —
                       false it is perfectly reasonable —   but it
is bootless for the study of mental phenomena. It does not

engender leading questions and excite a constructive imagina-
tion, as it does in physical researches. Instead of a method,
it inspires a militant methodology.

   Now, in those very regions of human interest where the
age of empiricism has caused no revolution, the preoccupa-
tion with symbols has come into fashion. It has not sprung
directly from any canon of science. It runs at least two dis-
tinct and apparently incompatible courses. Yet each course
is a river of life in its own field, each fructifies its own har-

vest; and instead of finding mere contradiction in the wide
difference of forms and uses to which this new generative
idea is put, I see in it a promise of power and versatility,
and a commanding philosophical problem. One conception
of symbolism leads to logic, and meets the new problems in
theory of knowledge; and so it inspires an evaluation of
science and a quest for certainty. The other takes us in the
opposite direction —   to psychiatry, the study of emotions,
religion, fantasy, and everything but knowledge. Yet in both
we have a central theme: the human response, as a construc-
tive, not a passive thing. Epistemologists and psychologists
agree that symbolization is the key to that constructive pro-
cess, though they may be ready to kill each other over the
issue of what a symbol is and how it functions. One studies
the structure of science, the other of dreams; each has his
                  —                      —
own assumptions that is all they are regarding the nature
of symbolism itself. Assumptions, generative ideas, are what
we fight for. Our conclusions we are usually content to
demonstrate by peaceable means. Yet the assumptions are
philosophically our most interesting stock-in-trade.
   In the fundamental notion of symbolization         —  mystical,
practical, or mathematical, it makes no difference    —   we have
the keynote of all humanistic problems. In it lies a new con-
ception of "mentality," that may illumine questions of life
and consciousness, instead of obscuring them as traditional
"scientific methods" have done. If it is indeed a generative
idea, it will beget tangible methods of its own, to free the
                      SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                    33
deadlocked paradoxes of mind and body, reason and impulse,
autonomy and law, and will overcome the checkmated argu-
ments of an earlier age by discarding their very idiom and
shaping their equivalents in more significant phrase. The
philosophical study of symbols is not a technique borrowed
from other disciplines, not even from mathematics; it has
arisen in the fields that the great advance of learning has
left fallow. Perhaps it holds the seed of a new intellectual
harvest, to be reaped in the next season of the human under-
standing.




                 2.     Symbolic Transformation


        The vitality and energies of the imagination do not
        operate at will; they are fountains, not machinery.
                          D. G. James, Skepticism and Poetry.

A changed approach to the theory of knowledge naturally
has   its   effect    upon psychology,   too.   As long as sense was
supposed to be the chief factor in knowledge, psychologists
took a prime interest in the organs that were the windows of
the mind, and in the details of their functioning; other
things were accorded a sketchier and sometimes vaguer
treatment. If scientists demanded, and philosophers dutifully
admitted, that all true belief must be based on sense-evi-
dence, then the activity of the mind had to be conceived
purely as a matter of recording and combining; then jm\elli-,
gence had to«be a product of impression, memory, and as-
sociation. But now, an -epistemological insight has uncovered
a more potent, howbeit more difficult, factor in scientific
             —
procedure the use of symbols to attain, as well as to or-
ganize, belief. Of course, this alters our conception of in-
telligence at a stroke. Not higher sensitivity, not longer
memory or even quicker association sets man so far above
other animals that he can regard them as denizens of a
                                                         —
lower world: no, it is the power of using symbols the power
of speech    —
             that makes him lord of the earth. So our inter-
est in the mind has shifted more and more from the acquisi-
tion of experience, the domain of sense, to the uses of
sense-data, the realm of conception and expression.
   The importance of symbol-using, once admitted, soon be-
comes paramount in the study of intelligence. It has lent a
new orientation especially to genetic psychology, which
traces the growth of the mind; for this growth is paralleled,
34                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
in large measure, by the observable uses of language, from
the first words in infancy to the complete self-expression of
maturity, and perhaps the relapse into meaningless verbiage
that accompanies senile decline. Such researches have even
been extended from the development of individuals to the
evolution of mental traits in nations and races. There is an
increasing rapprochement between philology and psychology
—  between the science of language and the science of what
we do with language. The recent literature of psychogenetics
bears ample witness to the central position which symbol-
using, or language in its most general sense, holds in
our conception of human mentality. Frank Lorimer's The
Growth of Reason bears the sub-title: "A Study of the Role
of Verbal Activity in the Growth and Structure of the Hu-
man Mind." Grace De Laguna's Speech: Its Function and
Development treats the acquisition of language as not only
indicative of the growth of concepts, but as the principal
agent in this evolution. Much the same view is held by Pro-
fessor A. D. Ritchie, who remarks, in The Natural History
of the Mind: "As far as thought is concerned, and at all
levels of thought, it [mental life] is a symbolic process. It is
mental not because the symbols are immaterial, for they are
often material, perhaps always material, but because they
are symbols.     .  The essential act of thought is symboliza-
                      .     .



tion." x There is, I think, more depth in this statement than
its author realized; had he been aware of it, the proposition
would have occurred earlier in the book, and given the whole
work a somewhat novel turn. As it is, he goes on to an ex-
cellent account of sign-using and sign-making, which stand
forth clearly as the essential means of intellection.
   Quotations could be multiplied almost indefinitely, from
an imposing          list           —
                            of sources from John Dewey and Ber-
trand   Russell,          from Brunschwicg and Piaget and Head,
Kohler and Koffka, Carnap, Delacroix, Ribot, Cassirer,
             —
Whitehead from philosophers, psychologists, neurologists,
                                —
and anthropologists to substantiate the claim that symbol-
ism is the recognized key to that mental life which is char-
acteristically human and above the level of sheer animality.
Symbol and meaning make man's world, far more than sen-
sation; Miss Helen Keller, bereft of sight and hearing, or
even a person like the late Laura Bridgman, with the single
sense of touch, is capable of living in a wider and richer
world than a dog or an ape with all his senses alert.
   Genetic psychology grew out of the study of animals, chil-
dren, and savages, both from a physiological and from a

 i Pages   278-279.
                    SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                     35
behavioristic angle. Its fundamental standpoint is that the
responses of an organism to the environment are adaptive,
and are dictated by that organism's needs. Such needs may
be variously conceived; one school reduces them all to one
basic requirement, such as keeping the metabolic balance,
                                    2
persisting in an ideal status;         others distinguish as ele-
                                    —
mentary more specific aims e.g., nutrition, parturition, de-
fense—   or even such differentiated cravings as physical comfort,
companionship, self-assertion, security, play. 3 The tenor of
these primary concepts is suggested largely by the inves-
tigator's starting point.       A
                               biologist tends to postulate only
the obvious    needs   of  a  clam    or even an infusorian; an
animal-psychologist generalizes somewhat less, for he makes
distinctions that are relevant, say, to a white rat, but hardly
to a clam. An observer of childhood conceives the cardinal
interests on a still higher level. But through the whole hier-
archy of genetic studies there runs a feeling of continuity,
a tendency to identify the "real" or "ultimate" motive con-
ditions of human action with the needs of primitive life, to
trace all wants and aims of mankind to some initial proto-
plasmic response. This dominant principle is the most im-
portant thing that the evolutionist school has bestowed upon
             —
psychology the assumption, sometimes avowed, more often
tacit, that "Nihil est in homine quod non prius in amoeba
erat."
   When students of mental evolution discovered how great
a role in science is played by symbols, they were not slow
to exploit that valuable insight. The acquisition of so de-
cisive a tool must certainly be regarded as one of the great
landmarks in human progress, probably the starting point of
all genuinely intellectual growth. Since symbol-using appears
at a late stage, it is presumably a highly integrated form of
simpler animal activities. It must spring from biological
needs, and justify itself as a practical asset. Man's conquest
of the world undoubtedly rests «on the supreme development
of his brain, which allows him to synthesize, delay, and
modify his reactions by the interpolation of symbols in the
gaps and confusions of direct experience, and by means of
"verbal signs" to add the experiences of other people to his
own.
   There is a profound difference between using symbols and
merely using signs. The use of signs is the very first mani-
festation of mind. It arises as early in biological history as


  2Cf. Eugenio Rignano, The Psychology of Reasoning (1927).
  3 Cf William James, The Principles of Psychology (1899; first pub-
         .


lished in 1890),   II,   348.
36                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
 the famous "conditioned reflex," by which a concomitant
 of a stimulus takes over the stimulus-function. The concom-
 itant becomes a sign of the condition to which the reaction
 is really appropriate. This is the real beginning of mentality,
 for here is the birthplace of error, and therewith of truth.
 If truth and error are to be attributed only to belief, then
 we must recognize in the earliest misuse of signs, in the in-
 appropriate conditioned reflex, not error, but some proto-
 type of error. We might call it mistake. Every piano player,
 every typist, knows that the hand can make mistakes where
 consciousness entertains no error. However, whether we
 speak of truth and error, or of their respective prototypes,
 whether we regard the creature liable to them as conscious
 or preconscious, or dispense with such terms altogether, the
 use of signs is certainly a mental function. It is the beginning
of intelligence. As soon as sensations function as signs of
 conditions in the surrounding world, the animal receiving
them is moved to exploit or avoid those conditions. The
 sound of a gong or a whistle, itself entirely unrelated to the
process of eating, causes a dog to expect food, if in past
experience this sound has always preceded dinner; it is a
 sign, not a part, of his food. Or, the smell of a cigarette, in
itself not necessarily displeasing, tells a wild animal that
there is danger, and drives it into hiding. The growth of
this sign-language runs parallel with the physical develop-
ment of sense organs and synaptic nerve-structure. It con-
sists in the transmission of sense messages to muscles and
glands—   to the organs of eating, mating, flight and defense
and obviously functions in the interest of the elementary
biological requirements: self-preservation, growth, procrea-
tion, the preservation of the species.
    Even animal mentality, therefore, is built up on a primi-
tive semantic; it is the power of learning, by trial and error,
that certain phenomena in the world are signs of certain
others, existing or about to exist; adaptation to an environ-
ment is its purpose, and hence the measure of its success.
The environment may be very narrow, as it is for the mole,
whose world is a back yard, or it may be as wide as an
eagle's range and as complicated as a monkey's jungle pre-
serve. That depends on the variety of signals a creature can
receive, the variety of combinations of them to which he can
react, and the fixity or adjustability of his responses. Ob-
viously, if he has very fixed reactions, he cannot adapt him-
self to a varied or transient environment; if he cannot easily
combine and integrate several activities, then the occur-
rence of more than one stimulus at a time will throw him
into confusion; if he be poor in sensory organs      —   deaf, or
                SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                       37
blind, hard-shelled, or otherwise limited   —he cannot   receive
many signals to begin with.
   Man's superiority    in the race for self-preservation was
first ascribed to his wider range of signals, his greater power
of integrating reflexes, his quicker learning by trial and error;
but a little reflection brought a much more fundamental
trait to light, namely his peculiar use of "signs." Man, un-
like all other animals, uses "signs" not only to indicate
things, but also to represent them. To a clever dog, the name
of a person is a signal that the person is present; you say
the name, he pricks up his ears and looks for its object. If
you say "dinner," he becomes restive, expecting food. You
cannot make any communication to him that is not taken as
a signal of something immediately forthcoming. His mind
is a simple and direct transmitter of messages from the world

to his motor centers. With man it is different.          We   use
certain "signs" among ourselves that do not point to anything
in our actual surroundings. Most of our words are not signs
in the sense of signals. They are used to talk about things,
not to direct our eyes and ears and noses toward them. In-
stead of announcers of things, they are reminders. They have
been called "substitute signs," for in our present experience
they take the place of things that we have perceived in the
past, or even things that we can merely imagine by combin-
ing memories, things that might be in past or future experi-
ence. Of course such "signs" do not usually serve as
vicarious stimuli to actions that would be appropriate to their
meanings; where the objects are quite normally not present,
that would result in a complete chaos of behavior. They
serve, rather, to let us develop a characteristic attitude* to-
ward objects   m   absentia, which is called "thinking of" or
"referring to" what is not here. "Signs" used in this capacity
are not symptoms of things, but symbols.
   The development of language is the history of the gradual
accumulation and elaboration of verbal symbols. By means
of this phenomenon, man's whole behavior-pattern has un-
dergone an immense change from the simple biological
scheme, and his mentality has expanded to such a degree
that it is no longer comparable to the minds of animals. In-
stead of a direct transmitter of coded signals, we have a
system that has sometimes been likened to a telephone-
exchange, 4 wherein messages may be relayed, stored up if
a line is busy, answered by proxy, perhaps sent over a line
that did not exist when they were first given, noted down

  * The simile of the telephone-exchange has been used by Leonard
Troland in The Mystery of Mind (1926), p. 100 ff.
38                                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and kept if the desired number gives no answer. Words are
the plugs                in    this         super-switchboard;     they    connect impres-
sions and     them function together; sometimes they cause
                         let
lines to become crossed in funny or disastrous ways.
   This view of mentality, of its growth through trial and
error,    apparently complicated but essentially simple aims
               its

—  namely, to advance the persistence, growth, and procre-
ation of the organism, and to produce, and provide for, its
                   —
progeny brings the troublesome concept of Mind into
line with other basic ideas of biology. Man is doing in his
elaborate way just what the mouse in his simplicity is do-
ing, and what the unconscious or semiconscious jellyfish is
performing after its own chemical fashion. The ideal of
"Nihil est in homine       ." is supported by living example.
                                                 .   .



The speech line between man and beast is minimized by the
recognition that speech is primarily an instrument of social
control, just like the cries of animals, but has acquired a
representative function, allowing a much greater degree of
cooperation among individuals, and the focussing of per-
sonal attention on absent objects. The passage from the sign-
function of a word to its symbolic function is gradual, a
result of social organization, an instrument that proves in-
dispensable once it is discovered, and develops through suc-
cessful use.
   If the theoretic position here attributed to students of
genetic psychology requires any affidavit, we can find it in
the words of a psychologist, in Frank Lorimer's The Growth
of      Reason:
   "The apes described by Kohler," he says, "certainly have
quite elaborate 'ape-ways' into which a newcomer is gradu-
ally acculturated, including among other patterns ways of
using          available            instruments          for reaching and climbing, a
sort of rhythmic play or dance,                            and types of murmurs, wails
and rejoicings.                 .   .   .



     "It  not surprising that still more intelligent animals
               is
should have developed much more definite and elaborate
'animal ways,' including techniques of tool-uses and specific
mechanisms of vocal social control, which gradually de-
veloped into the 'folk-ways' of the modern anthropolo-
gist.      .   .     .



   "Vocal acts are originally involved in the intellectual cor-
relation of behaviour just as other physiological processes
are. During the whole course of meaningless vocal chatter,
vocal processes gradually accumulate intensity and domi-
nance in behaviour.        Specific vocables become dominant
                                             .   .   .



foci of fixed reactions to various situations and the instru-
ments of specific social adjustments.       The gradual differ-.   .   .
                   SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                          39
entiation   and expansion of the     social functions of vocal
activity, among a race of    animals   characterized by increas-
ingly complex   nervous  systems, is  the fundamental principle
of the historic trend of vocal activity to verbal activity, and
the emergence of language." 5
   An interpretation of observed facts that adjusts them to
a general scientific outlook, a theory that bridges what used
to appear as a saltus naturae, a logical explanation displacing
a shamefaced resort to miracle, has so much to recommend it
that one hates to challenge it on any count. But the best
ideas are also the ones most worth reflecting on. At first
glance it seems as though the genetic conception of language,
which regards the power of symbol-using as the latest and
highest device of practical intelligence, an added instrument
for gaining animal ends, must be the key to all essential
features of human mentality. It makes rationality plausible,
and shows at once the relationship of man and brute, and
the gulf between them as a fairly simple phenomenon.
   The difficulty of the theory arises when we consider how
people with synaptic switchboards between their sense organs
and their muscles should use their verbal symbols to make
the telephone-exchange work most efficiently. Obviously the
only proper use of the words which "plug in" the many
complicated wires is the denotation of facts. Such facts
may be concrete and personal, or they may be highly general
and universal; but they should be chosen for the sake of
orientation in the world for better living, for more advan-
tageous practice. It is easy to see how errors might arise,
just as they occur in overt action; the white rat in a maze
makes mistakes, and so does the trout who bites at a feajt&er-
and-silk fly. In^so complicated an organ as the human cor-
tex, a confusion of messages or of responses would be even
more likely than in the reflex arcs of rodents or fish. But
of course the mistakes should be subject to quick correction
by the world's punishments; behavior should, on the whole,
be rational and realistic. Any other response must be chalked
up as failure, as a miscarriage of biological purposes.
  There     are,   indeed,   philosophical   and   scientific   thinkers
who have accepted the biogenetic     theory of mind on its
great merits, and drawn just the conclusions indicated above.
They have looked at the way men really use their power of
symbolic thinking, the responses they actually make, and
have been forced to admit that the cortical telephone-ex-
change does business in most extraordinary ways. The results
of their candid observations are such books as W. B. Pit-

  6 Pages 76-77.
40                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
kin's Short Introduction to the History of Human Stupidity,
Charles Richet's L'homme Stupide (which deals not with
men generally regarded as stupid, but with the impractical
customs and beliefs of aliens, and the folly of religious con-
victions), and Stuart Chase's The Tyranny of Words. To
contemplate the unbelievable folly of which symbol-using
animals are capable is very disgusting or very amusing, ac-
cording to our mood; but philosophically it is, above all,
confounding. How can an instrument develop in the inter-
ests of better practice, and survive, if it harbors so many
dangers for the creature possessed of it? How can language
increase a man's efficiency if it puts him at a biological
disadvantage beside his cat?
   Mr. Chase, watching his cat Hobie Baker, reflects:
   "Hobie can never learn to talk. He can learn to respond
to my talk, as he responds to other signs. ... He can utter
cries indicating pain, pleasure, excitement. He can announce
that he wants to go out of doors.        .But he cannot master
                                             .   .


words and language. This in some respects is fortunate for
Hobie, for he will not suffer from hallucinations provoked
by bad language. He will remain a realist all his life.    .   .   .


He is certainly able to think after a fashion, interpreting
signs in the light of past experience, deliberately deciding his
course of action, the survival value of which is high.
   "Instead of words, Hobie sometimes uses a crude gesture
language. We know that he has a nervous system corres-
ponding to that of man, with messages coming into the re-
ceptors in skin, ear and eye and going over the wires to the
cortex, where memories are duly filed for reference. There
are fewer switchboards in his cortex than in mine, which
may be one of the reasons why he cannot learn to talk.         .
                                                               .   .


   "Meaning comes to Hobie as it comes to me, through past
experience.       ...
   "Generally speaking, animals tend to learn cumulatively
through experience. The old elephant is the wisest of the
herd. This selective process does not always operate in the
case of human beings. The old are sometimes wise, but more
often they are stuffed above the average with superstitions,
misconceptions, and irrational dogmas. One may hazard the
guess that erroneous identifications in human beings are
pickled and preserved in words, and so not subject to the
constant check of the environment, as in the case of cats and
elephants.    .   .   .


   "I find Hobie a useful exhibit along this difficult trail of
semantics. What 'meaning' connotes to him is often so clear
and simple that I have no trouble in following it. I come
from a like evolutionary matrix. 'Meaning' to me has like
                       SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                            41
roots, and a like mechanism of apprehension. I have a six-
cylinder brain and he has a one-lunger, but they operate
on like principles.
   ".    Most children do not long maintain Hobie Baker's
         .   .


realistic appraisal       of the environment. Verbal identifications
and confused abstractions begin at a tender age.          Lan-.   .   .


guage is no more than crudely acquired before children be-
gin to suffer from it, and to misinterpret the world by reason
of    it." 6
     A
     cat with a "stalking-instinct," or other special equip-
ment, who could never learn to use that asset properly, but
was forever stalking chairs or elephants, would scarcely rise
in animal estate by virtue of his talent. Men who can use
symbols to facilitate their practical responses, but use them
constantly to confuse and inhibit, warp and misadapt their
actions, and gain no other end by their symbolic devices,
have no prospect of inheriting the earth. Such an "instinct"
would have no chance to develop by any process of success-
ful exercise.        The error-quotient is too great. The commonly
recognized biological needs         —food and     shelter, security, sex-
ual satisfaction, and the safety of young ones             —
                                                      are prob-
ably better assuaged by the realistic activities, the meows
and gestures, of Hobie Baker than by the verbal imagination
and reflection of his master. The cat's world is not falsified by
the beliefs and poetic figments that language creates, nor his
behavior unbalanced by the bootless rites and sacrifices that
characterize religion, art, and other vagaries of a word-
mongering mind. In fact, his vital purposes are so well served
without the intervention of these vast mental constructions,
these flourishes and embellishments of the cerebral switch-
board, that it ^s hard to see why such an overcomplication
of the central exchange "was ever permitted, in man's "higher
centers," to block the routes from sensory to motor organs
and garble all the messages.
   The dilemma for philosophy js bad enough to make one
reconsider the genetic hypothesis that underlies it. If our
basic needs were really just those of lower creatures much
refined, we should have evolved a more realistic language
than in fact we have. If the mind were essentially a recorder
and transmitter, typified by the simile of the telephone-ex-
change, we should act very differently from the way we
actually do. Certainly no "learning-process" has caused man
to believe in magic; yet "word-magic" is a common practice
among primitive peoples, and so is vicarious treatment
burning in effigy, etc.        —
                           where the proxy is plainly a mere

     e Stuart    Chase, The Tyranny of Words (1938), pp. 46-56.
42                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
symbol of the desired victim. Another strange, universal
phenomenon is ritual. It is obviously symbolic, except where
it   is   aimed at concrete results, and then it may be regarded
as a communal form of magic. Now, all magical and ritual
practices are hopelessly inappropriate to the preservation
and increase of life.        My
                        cat would turn up his nose and his
tail      at   them.   To regard them as mistaken attempts to con-
trol nature, as a result of wrong synapses, or     "crossed wires,"
in the brain,  seems to me to leave the most rational of ani-
mals too deep in the slough of error. If a savage in his ig-
norance of physics tries to make a mountain open its caverns
by dancing round it, we must admit with shame that no rat
in a psychologist's maze would try such patently ineffectual
methods of opening a door. Nor should such experiments
be carried on, in the face of failure, for thousands of years;
even morons should learn more quickly than that.
   Another item in human behavior is our serious attitude
toward art. Genetic psychology usually regards art as a form
of play, a luxury product of the mind. This is not only a
scientific theory, it is a common-sense view; we play an in-
strument, we act a play. Yet like many common-sense doc-
trines, it is probably false. Great artists are rarely recruited
from the leisure class, and it is only in careless speech that
we denote music or tragedy as our "hobby"; we do not
really class them with tennis or bridge. We condemn as bar-
barous people who destroy works of art, even under the stress
of war         —
          blame them for ruining the Parthenon, when only a
recent, sentimental generation has learned to blame them
for ruining the homes that surrounded the sanctuary of
Beauty! Why should the world wail over the loss of a play
product, and look with its old callousness on the destruction
of so much that dire labor has produced? It seems a poor
economy of nature that men will suffer and starve for the
sake of play, when play is supposed to be the abundance of
their strength after their needs are satisfied. Yet artists as a
class are so ready to sacrifice wealth and comfort and even
health to their trade, that a lean and hollow look has become
an indispensable feature in the popular conception of genius.
   There is a third factor in human life that challenges the
utilitarian doctrine of symbolism. That is the constant, in-
effectual process of dreaming during sleep. The activity of
the mind seems to go on all the time, like that of the heart
and lungs and viscera; but during sleep it serves no practical
purpose. That dream-material is symbolic is a fairly estab-
lished fact. And symbols are supposed to have evolved from
the advantageous use of signs. They are representative signs,
that help to retain things for later reference, for comparing,
               SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                      43
planning, and generally for purposive thinking. Yet the sym-
bolism of dreams performs no such acquired function. At
best it presents us with the things we do not want to think
about, the things which stand in the way of practical living.
Why should the mind produce symbols that do not direct
the dreamer's activities, that only mix up the present with
unsuitable past experiences?
   There are several theories of dream, notably, of course,
the Freudian interpretation. But those which   —   like Freud's
—  regard it as more than excess mental energy or visceral
disturbance do not fit the scientific picture of the mind's
growth and function at all.  A      mind whose semantic powers
are evolved from the functioning of the motor arc should
only think; any vagaries of association are "mistakes." If
our viscera made as many mistakes in sleep as the brain, we
should all die of indigestion after our first nursing. It may
be replied that the mistakes of dream are harmless, since
they have no motor terminals, though they enter into waking
life as memories, and we have to learn to discount them. But
why does the central switchboard not rest when there is
no need of making connections? Why should the plugs be
popped in and out, and set the whole system wildly ringing,
only to end with a universal "Excuse it, please"?
   The love of magic, the high development of ritual, the
seriousness of art, and the characteristic activity of dreams,
are rather large factors to leave out of account in construct-
ing a theory of mind. Obviously the mind is doing some-
thing else, or at least something more, than just connecting
experiential items. It is not functioning simply in the inter-
est of those biological needs which genetic psychology recog-
nizes. Yet it is a natural ^org an, and presumably does nothing
that is not relevant to the total behavior, the response to
nature that constitutes human life. The moral of this long
critique is, therefore, to reconsider the inventory of human
needs, which scientists have established on a basis of ani-
mal psychology, and somewhat hastily set up as the measure
of a man. An unrecorded motive might well account for
many an unexplained action. I propose, therefore, to try
a new general principle: to conceive the mind, still as an
organ in the service of primary needs, but of characteristi-
cally human needs; instead of assuming that the human mind
tries to do the same things as a cat's mind, but by the use of
a special talent which miscarries four times out of five, I
shall assume that the human mind is trying to do something
else; and that the cat does not act humanly because he does
not need to. This difference in fundamental needs, I believe,
determines the difference of function which sets man so far
44               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
apart from all his zoological brethren; and the recognition
of it is the key to those paradoxes in the philosophy of mind
which our too consistently zoological model of human in-
telligence has engendered.
   It is generally conceded that men have certain "higher"
aims and desires than animals; but what these are, and in
what sense they are "higher," may still be mooted without
any universal agreement. There are essentially two schools
of opinion: one which considers man the highest animal,
and his supreme desires as products of his supreme mind;
and another which regards him as the lowest spirit, and his
unique longings as a manifestation of his otherworldly ad-
mixture. To the naturalists, the difference between physical
and mental interests, between organismic will and moral
will, between hungry meows and harvest prayers, or between
faith in the mother cat and faith in a heavenly father, is a
difference of complexity, abstractness, articulateness, in short:
a difference of degree. To the religious interpreters it seems
a radical distinction, a difference, in each case, of kind and
cause. The moral sentiments especially are deemed a sign
of the ultimate godhead in man; likewise the power of prayer,
which is regarded as a gift, not a native and natural power
like laughter, tears, language, and song. The Ancient Mar-
iner, when suddenly he could pray, had not merely found
his speech; he had received grace, he was given back the di-
vine status from which he had fallen. According to the re-
ligious conception, man is at most half-brother to the beast.
No matter how many of his traits may be identified as simian
features, there is that in him yet which springs from a different
source and is forever unzoological. This view is the antithesis
of the naturalistic; it breaks the structure of genetic psychol-
ogy in principle. For, the study of psychogenesis has grown
                                 —
up on exactly the opposite creed that man is a true-blooded,
full-franchised denizen of the animal kingdom, without any
alien ancestors, and therefore has no features or functions
which animals do not share in some degree.
   That man is an animal I certainly believe; and also, that he
has no supernatural essence, "soul" or "entelechy" or "mind-
stuff," enclosed in his skin. He is an organism, his substance
is chemical, and what he does, suffers, or knows, is just what

this sort of chemical structure may do, suffer, or know. When
the structure goes to pieces, it never does, suffers, or knows
anything again. If we ask how physical objects, chemically
analyzable, can be conscious, how ideas can occur to them,
we are talking ambiguously; for the conception of "physical
object" is a conception of chemical substance not biologically
organized. What causes this tremendous organization of sub-
                 SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                         45
stances, is one of the things the tremendous organisms do not
know; but with their organization, suffering and impulse and
awareness arise. It is really no harder to imagine that a
chemically active body wills, knows, thinks, and feels, than
that an invisible, intangible something does so, "animates"
the body without physical agency, and "inhabits" it without
being in any place.
   Now this is a mere declaration of faith, preliminary to a
confession of heresy. The heresy is this: that I believe there
is a primary need in man, which other creatures probably do
not have, and which actuates all his apparently unzoological
aims, his wistful fancies, his consciousness of value, his ut-
terly impractical enthusiasms, and his awareness of a "Be-
yond" filled with holiness. Despite the fact that this need
gives rise to almost everything that we commonly assign to
the "higher" life, it is not itself a "higher" form of some
"lower" need; it is quite essential, imperious, and general,
and may be called "high" only in the sense that it belongs
exclusively (I think) to a very complex and perhaps recent
genus. It may be satisfied in crude, primitive ways or in con-
scious and refined ways, so it has its own hierarchy of
"higher" and "lower," elementary and derivative forms.
   This basic need, which certainly is obvious only in man,
is the need of symbolization. The symbol-making function is
one of man's primary activities, like eating, looking, or mov-
ing about. It is the fundamental process of his mind, and
goes on all the time. Sometimes we are aware of it, some-
times we merely find its results, and realize that certain ex-
periences have passed through our brains and have been
digested there w
                                                            ym
                                                             '




   Hark back, now, to a. passage already quoted above, from
Ritchie's The Natural History of the Mind: "As far as
thought is concerned, and at all levels of thought, it is a
symbolic process.   .   . The essential act of thought is sym-
                            .


bolization." 7 The significance of this statement strikes us
more forcibly now. For if the material of thought is sym-
bolism, then the thinking organism must be forever furnish-
ing symbolic versions of its experiences, in order to let
thinking proceed. As a matter of fact, it is not the essential act
of thought that is symbolization, but an act essential to thought,
and prior to it. Symbolization is the essential act of mind;
and mind takes in more than what is commonly called
thought. Only certain products of the symbol-making brain
can be used according to the canons of discursive reasoning.
In every mind there is an enormous store of other symbolic

  i See p. 34.
46                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
material,which is put to different uses or perhaps even to
                —
no use at all a mere result of spontaneous brain activity, a
reserve fund of conceptions, a surplus of mental wealth.
   The brain works as naturally as the kidneys and the
blood vessels. It is not dormant just because there is no
conscious purpose to be served at the moment. If it were,
indeed, a vast and intricate telephone-exchange, then it
should be quiescent when the rest of the organism sleeps, or
at most transmit experiences of digestion, of wanted oxygen
or itching toes, of after-images on the retina or little throb-
bings in pressed arteries. Instead of that, it goes right on
                       —
manufacturing ideas-; streams and deluges of ideas, that the
sleeper is not using to think with about anything. But the
brain is following its own law; it is actively translating ex-
periences into symbols, in fulfilment of a basic need to do so.
It carries on a constant process of ideation.
   Ideas are undoubtedly made out of impressions        —out of
sense messages from the special organs of perception, and
vague visceral reports of feeling. The law by which they are
made, however, is not a law of direct combination. Any at-
tempt to use such principles as association by contiguity or
similarity soon runs into sheer unintelligible complication
and artifice. Ideation proceeds by a more potent principle,
which seems to be best described as a principle of symboliza-
tion. The material furnished by the senses is constantly
wrought into symbols, which are our elementary ideas. Some
of these ideas can be combined and manipulated in the
manner we call "reasoning." Others do not lend themselves
to this use, but are naturally telescoped into dreams, or vapor
off in conscious fantasy; and a vast number of them build
the most typical and fundamental edifice of the human mind
—   religion.
  Symbolization    is pre-rationative, but not pre-rational. It is
the starting point of all intellection in the human sense, and
is more general than thinking, fancying, or taking action.

For the brain is not merely a great transmitter, a super-switch-
board; it is better likened to a great transformer. The current
of experience that passes through it undergoes a change of
character, not through the agency of the sense by which the
perception entered, but by virtue of a primary use which is
made of it immediately: it is sucked into the stream of sym-
bols which constitutes a human mind.
   Our overt acts are governed by representations whose
counterparts can nowhere be pointed out, whose objects are
"percepts" only in a Pickwickian sense. The representations
on which we act are symbols of various kinds. This fact is
recognized in a vague and general way by most epistemolo-
                    SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                          47
gists;but what has not received their due recognition is the
enormous importance of the kinds. So long as we regard
sensations as signs of the things which are supposed to give
rise to them, and perhaps endow such signs with further
reference to past sensations that were similar signs, we have
not even       scratched   the   surface   of   the   symbol-mongering
human mind. It is only when we penetrate into the varieties
of symbolific activity     —
                         as Cassirer, for instance, has done
that we begin to see why human beings do not act as super-
intelligent cats, dogs, or apes would act. Because our brain
is only a fairly good transmitter, but a tremendously power-
ful transformer, we do things that Mr. Chase's cat would
reject as too impractical, if he were able to conceive them.
So they would be, for him; so are they for the psychologist
who deems himself a cat of the nth degree.
   The fact that the human brain is constantly carrying on
a process of symbolic transformation of the experiential data
that come to it causes it to be a veritable fountain of more
or less spontaneous ideas. As all registered experience tends
to terminate in action, it is only natural that a typically
human function should require a typically human form of
overt activity; and that is just what we find in the sheer ex-
pression of ideas. This is the activity of which beasts appear
to have no need. And it accounts for just those traits in man
which he does not hold in common with the other animals
—  ritual, art, laughter, weeping, speech, superstition, and
scientific genius.
    Only a part    —howbeit a very important          part   —of our be-
havior   is         Only some of our expressions are signs,
              practical.
indicative or mnemonic, and belong to the heightened animal
wisdom called common >ense; and only a small and relatively
unimportant part are immediate signs of feeling. The remain-
der serve simply to express ideas that the organism yearns
to express, i.e. to act upon, without practical purpose, with-
out any view to satisfying other needs than the need of
completing in overt action the brain's symbolic process.
  How    else shall we account for man's love of talk? From
the first dawning recognition that words can express some-
thing, talk is a dominant interest, an irresistible desire. As
soon as this avenue of action opens, a whole stream of sym-
bolic process is set free in the jumbled outpouring of words
—  often repeated, disconnected, random words            —
                                                   that we ob-
serve in the "chattering" stage of early childhood. Psychol-
ogists generally, and perhaps correctly, regard such babble
as verbal play, and explain it through its obvious utilitarian
function of developing the lines of communication that will
be needed later in life. But an explanation by final causes
48                             PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
does not really account for the occurrence of an act. What
gives a child the present stimulus to talk? Surely not the
prospect of acquiring a useful tool toward his future social
relations! The impulse must be motivated by a present need,
not a prospective one. Mr. Chase, who sees no use in words
except their practical effect on other people, admits the puz-
zling fact that "children practice them with as much gusto
as Hobie stalks a mouse." 8 But we can hardly believe that
they do so for the sake of practice. There must be immediate
satisfaction in this strange exercise, as there is in running
and kicking. The effect of words on other people is only a
secondary consideration. Mrs. De Laguna has pointed this
out in her book on the general nature of speech: "The little
child," she says there, "spends many hours and much energy
in vocal play. It is far more agreeable to carry on this play
with others        but the little child indulges in language-play
                   .   .   .



even when he is alone.           Internal speech, fragmentary or
                                     .   .   .



continuous, becomes the habitual accompaniment of his ac-
tive behaviour and the occupation of his idle hours." 9 Speech
is, in fact, the readiest active termination of that basic pro-

cess in the human brain which may be called symbolic trans-
formation of experiences. The fact that it makes elaborate
communication with others possible becomes important at a
somewhat later stage. Piaget has observed that children of
kindergarten age pay little attention to the response of others;
they talk just as blithely to a companion who does not un-
derstand them as to one who gives correct answers. 10 Of
course they have long learned to use language practically;
but the typically infantile, or "egocentric," function persists
side by side with the progressively social development of
communication. The sheer symbolific use of sounds is the
more primitive, the easier use, which can be made before
conventional forms are really mastered, just as soon as any
meaning-experience has occurred to the vociferous little hu-
man animal. The practical use, though early, is more dif-
ficult, for it is not the direct fulfilment of a craving; it is
an adaptation of language for the satisfaction of other needs.
   Words are certainly our most important instruments of
expression, our most characteristic, universal, and enviable
tools in the conduct of life. Speech is the mark of humanity.
It is the normal terminus of thought.                  We
                                             are apt to be so
impressed with its symbolistic mission that we regard it as

   8 Op. cit., p.      54.
   *>   Grace De Laguna, Speech: Its Function and Development (1927),
p. 307.
  10 Jean Piaget,          Le langage et la pensee chez Venfant (1923). See esp.
chaps, i and ii.
                SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                        49
the only important expressive act, and assume that all other
activity must be practical in an animalian way, or else irra-
     —
tional    playful, or atavistic (residual) past recognition, or
mistaken, i.e., unsuccessful. But in fact, speech is the natural
outcome of only one kind of symbolic process. There are
transformations of experience in the human mind that have
quite different overt endings. They end in acts that are neither
practical nor communicative, though they may be both ef-
fective and communal; I mean the actions we call ritual.
   Human life is shot through and through with ritual, as it
is also with animalian practices. It is an intricate fabric of
reason and rite, of knowledge and religion, prose and poetry,
fact and dream. Just as the results of that primitive process
of mental digestion, verbal symbolism, may be used for the
satisfaction of other needs than symbolization, so all other
instinctive acts may serve the expressive function. Eating,
traveling, asking or answering questions, construction, de-
struction, prostitution—    any or all such activities may enter
into rites; yet rites in themselves are not practical, but ex-
pressive. Ritual, like art, is essentially the active termination
of a symbolic transformation of experience. It is born in the
cortex, not in the "old brain"; but it is born of an elementary
need of that organ, once the organ has grown to human estate.
   If the "impractical" use of language has mystified philoso-
phers and psychologists who measured it by standards it is
not really designed to meet, the apparent perversity of ritual
from the same point of view has simply overcome them. They
have had to invent excuses for its existence, to save the
psychogenetic theory of mind. They have sought its explana-
tion in social purposes, in ulterior motivations of the^most
unlikely sort, m    "mistakes" of sense and reason that verge
on complete imbecility; "they have wondered at the incor-
rigibility of religious follies, at the docility of the poor dupes
who let themselves be misled, and at the disproportionate
cost of the supposed social advantages; but they have not
been led to the assumption of a peculiarly human need which
is fed, as every need must be, at the expense of other interests.
   The ethnologists who were the first white men to interest
themselves in the ritual of primitive races for any other
purpose than to suppress or correct it were mystified by the
high seriousness of actions that looked purely clownish and
farcical to the European beholder; just as the Christian mis-
sionaries had long reported the difficulty of making the gos-
pels plausible to men who were able to believe stories far more
mysterious and fantastic in their own idiom. Andrew Lang,
for instance, discussing the belief in magic, makes the follow-
ing observation:
50                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
     "The theory requires for its existence an almost boundless
credulity. This credulity appears to    Europeans to prevail in
full force among savages.        .   But it is a curious fact that
                                     .   .



while savages are, as a rule, so credulous, they often 'laugh
consumedly' at the religious doctrines taught them by mis-
sionaries. Savages and civilized men have different standards
of credulity. Dr. Moffat remarks, 'To speak of the Creation,
the Fall, and the Resurrection, seemed more fabulous, ex-
travagant, and ludicrous to them than their own vain stories
of lions and hyaenas.' ... It is, apparently, in regard to
imported and novel opinions about religion and science alone
that savages imitate the conduct of the adder which, accord-
ing to St. Augustine, is voluntarily deaf.       ." lx
                                                   .   .



   Frobenius, also a pioneer in the study of primitive society,
describes an initiation ceremony in New South Wales, in the
course of which the older men performed a dog-dance, on all
fours, for the benefit of the young acolytes who watched
these rites, preliminary to the painful honor of having a tooth
knocked out. Frobenius refers to the ritual as a "comedy,"
a "farce," and is amazed at the solemnity with which the
boys sat through the "ridiculous canine display." "They acted
as if they never caught sight of the comical procession of
men." 12         A
              little later he describes a funeral among the Bou-
gala, in theSouthern Congo; again, each step in the per-
formance seems to him a circus act, until at last "there now
followed, if possible, a still more clownish farce. The de-
ceased had now himself to declare what was the cause of his
death." 13 The professor is at a loss to understand how even
the least intelligent of men can reach such depths of folly.
Perhaps the savages who "laughed consumedly" at a tonsured
father's sacraments with Holy Water, his God-eating and his
scriptural explanations, were having a similar difficulty!
   Later scholars gradually realized that the irrationality of
customs and rites was so great that they could not possibly
be "mistakes" of practice, or rest on "erroneous" theories of
nature. Obviously they serve some natural purpose to which
their practical justification or lack of justification is entirely
irrelevant. Mrs. De Laguna seeks this purpose in the social
solidarity which a prescribed ritual imparts: "Those elaborate
and monstrous systems of belief," she says, "cannot possibly
be accounted for by any simple theory that beliefs are deter-
mined by their successful 'working' in practice.   The truth
                                                           .   .   .



is   .that some more or less organized system of beliefs and
         .   .




  11 Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2 vols. (1887), I, 91.
  12 Leo Frobenius, The Childhood of         Man(1909; first published in
1901 under the title, Aus den Flegeljahren der Menschheit) , p. 41 ff.
  13 Ibid., p. 148.
                      SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                           51
sentiments      an absolute necessity for the carrying on of
                 is
social       So long as group solidarity is secured by some
         life.
such system, the particular beliefs which enter into it may
to an indefinite degree lead to behaviour ill-adapted to the
objective order of nature." 14 But why should this social
purpose not be served by a sensible dogma which the mem-
bers of the society could reasonably be called on to believe,
instead of "elaborate and monstrous" creeds issuing in all
sorts of cruel rites, mutilations, and even human sacrifices,
such as Baal or the Aztec gods demanded? Why did the Cults
of Reason set up in post-Revolutionary France and in early
Soviet Russia not serve the purpose of social solidarity every
bit as well as the "Christian hocus-pocus" they displaced, and
much better than the dog-dances and interrogation of the
dead that disturbed Frobenius by their incredibility? Why
should a priesthood primarily interested in accomplishing a
social  end demand that its laity should believe in immoral
and unreasonable gods? Plato, who treated religion in just
this sociological spirit, found himself confronted with this
question. The established religion of Greece was not only
irrational, but the social unity that might be achieved by
participating in one form of worship and following one divine
example was off-set by the fact that this worship was often
degrading and the example bad. How could any wise ruler
or rulers prescribe such ritual, or indorse such a mythology?
   The answer is, of course, that ritual is not prescribed for
a practical purpose, not even that of social solidarity. Such
solidarity may be one of its effects, and sophisticated war-
lords may realize this fact and capitalize on it by emphasizing
national religion or holding compulsory prayers before^Jpat-
tle; but neitha* myth nor ritual arose originally for this
purpose. Even the pioneers in anthropology, to whom the
practices of savage society must have been more surprising
than to us who are initiated through their reports, realized
that the "farces" and "antics" of primitive men were pro-
foundly serious, and that their wizards could not be accused
of bad faith. "Magic has not its origin in fraud, and seems
seldom practiced as an utter imposture," observed Tylor,
seventy years ago. "It is, in fact, a sincere but fallacious sys-
tem of philosophy, evolved by the human intellect by pro-
cesses still in great measure intelligible to our minds, and it
had thus an original standing-ground in the world." 15 Its
roots lie much deeper than any conscious purpose, any trick-
ery, policy, or practical design; they lie in that substratum

  14 Speech, pp. 345-346.
  is E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 2 vols. (6th ed., 1920; first published
in 1871), I, 134.
52                         PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of the mind, the realm of fundamental ideas, and bear their
strange if not poisonous fruits, by virtue of the human need
for expressing such ideas. Whatever purpose magical practice
may serve, its direct motivation is the desire to symbolize
great conceptions. It is the overt action in which a rich and
savage imagination automatically ends. Its origin is probably
not practical at all, but ritualistic; its central aim is to sym-
bolize a Presence, to aid in the formulation of a religious
universe. "Show us a miracle, that we may believe thou art
God." Magic is never employed in a commonplace mood,
like ordinary causal agency; this fact belies the widely ac-
cepted belief that the "method of magic" rests on a mistaken
view of causality. After all, a savage who beats a tom-tom
to drive off his brother's malaria would never make such a
practical mistake as to shoot his arrow blunt end forward or
bait his fishline with flowers. It is not ignorance of causal
relations, but the supervention of an interest stronger than
his practical interest, that holds him to magical rites. This
stronger interest concerns the expressive value of such mystic
acts.
   Magic, then, is not a method, but a language; it is part and
parcel of that greater phenomenon, ritual, which is the lan-
guage of religion. Ritual is a symbolic transformation of
experiences that no other medium can adequately express.
Because it springs from a primary human need, it is a spon-
                          —
taneous activity that is to say, it arises without intention,
without adaptation to a conscious purpose; its growth is un-
designed, its pattern purely natural, however intricate it may
be. It was never "imposed" on people; they acted thus quite
of themselves, exactly as bees swarmed and birds built nests,
squirrels           hoarded food, and cats washed their faces.   No one
made up ritual, any more than anyone made up Hebrew or
Sanskrit or Latin. The forms of expressive acts          —
                                                speech and
gesture, song and sacrifice           —
                                are the symbolic transforma-
tions which minds of certain species, at certain stages of their
development and communion, naturally produce.
   Franz Boas remarked, even in one of his early works, that
ritual resembled language in the unconscious development of
its forms; and furthermore he saw, though less clearly, that
it had certain symbolistic functions. After a discussion of the

role played by language in the actual division and arrange-
ment of sense experience, he says: "The behavior of primitive
man makes it perfectly clear that all these linguistic classes
have never risen to consciousness, and that consequently
their origin must be sought, not in rational, but in entirely
unconscious, processes of the mind. ... It seems very plaus-
ible    .  that the fundamental religious notions ... are in
            .   .
                   SYMBOLIC TRANSFORMATION                       53
their origin just as little conscious as the       fundamental ideas
of language." 16   And a few pages later he touches, howbeit
only tentatively and vaguely, upon the expressive nature of
those practices which seem "impractical" to us:
   "Primitive man views each action not only as adapted to
its main object, each thought related to its main end, as we
should perceive them, but ... he associates them with other
ideas, often of a religious or at least a symbolic nature. Thus
he gives them a higher significance than they seem to us to
deserve. Every taboo is an example of such associations of
apparently trifling actions with ideas that are so sacred that
a deviation from the customary mode of performance creates
the strongest emotions of abhorrence. The interpretation of
ornaments as charms, the symbolism of decorative art, are
other examples of association of ideas that, on the whole, are
foreign to our mode of thought." 17
  A   year after Boas' book, there appeared the articles by
Sigmund Freud which are now collected under the title of
Totem and Taboo.™ It was Freud who recognized that ritual
acts are not genuine instrumental acts, but are motivated
primarily a tergo, and carry with them, consequently, a feel-
ing not of purpose, but of compulsion. They must be per-
formed, not to any visible end, but from a sheer inward need;
and he is familiar enough with such compulsive acts in other
settings to suspect at once that in the religious sphere, too,
they are best interpreted as expressive behavior. Empirically
senseless, they are none the less important and justified when
we regard them as symbolic presentations rather than prac-
tical measures. They are spontaneous transformations of ex-
perience, and J^he form they take is normal for the primitive*
mind. In civilized society, the same phenomena are apt to be
pathological; there is a good reason for this, but that must be
postponed to a later chapter.
   The great contribution of Freud to the philosophy of mind
has been the realization that human behavior is not only a
food-getting strategy, but is also a language; that every move
is at the same time a gesture. Symbolization is both an end

and an instrument. So far, epistemology has treated it only
in the latter capacity; and philosophers have ample reason
to wonder why this purely utilitarian trait of man's mind so
frequently plays him false, why nature permitted it to grow
beyond the limits of usefulness, to assume a tyrant role and
lure him into patently impractical ventures. The fact is, I
believe, that it did not originate purely in the service of other
activities. It is a primary interest, and may require a sacrifice
  i6 77ie Mind of Primitive   Man (1911), pp. 198-199.
  17 Ibid., p. 209.                is Published in 1918.
54                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of other ends, just as the imperative demand for food or sex-
life may necessitate sacrifices under difficult conditions. This
                      —                      —
fundamentally not adventitiously symbolific function of
the mind was suggested to Freud by his psychiatric studies,
but in later works he has given it a very general development,
notably in the book already cited, Totem and Taboo. 19 Cer-
tainly he has carried his theories far enough to make a phil-
osophical study of "impractical" actions            —
                                               rites, formalities,
dramatizations, and above all, the unapplied arts         relevant —
and promising in the light of them. Yet few epistemologists
have seriously taken advantage of the new ideas that fairly
cry to be explored.
   The reason is, probably, that traditional theory of mind is
                    —
epistemology theory of knowledge; and Freud's psychology
is not directly applicable to the problems which compose this

field.    Symbolism, as it enters into the structure of knowledge,
is   better typified by mathematical "expressions" than by swas-
tikas or genuflexions.         Language, not ritual,    is   its   main rep-
resentative.
   In order to relate these two distinct conceptions of sym-
bolism, and exhibit the respective parts they play in that gen-
eral human response we call a life, it is necessary to examine
more accurately that which makes symbols out of anything
out of marks on paper, the little squeaks and grunts we inter-
pret as "words," or bended knees             —
                                       the quality of meaning,
in its several aspects and forms. Meaning rests upon a condi-
tion which is, in the last analysis, logical; therefore the next
chapter will have to concern itself mainly with logical struc-
ture, and cannot help being somewhat technical. But without
such a grounding the whole argument would remain intan-
gible,unfounded, and would probably appear more fantastic
than cogent; so a short account of what constitutes meaning,
what characterizes symbols, and also the different kinds of
symbolism and their logical distinctions, will have to precede
any further elaborations of the ideas so far suggested.




            5.       The Logic of Signs and Symbols

So much work has already been done on the logic of mean-
ing that it is not necessary to present long arguments in sup-
port of the theory here employed; let it suffice to outline the
facts, or if you will, the assumptions, on which my further
considerations are to rest.
     ie See also,   Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1922).
            THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                     55
   Meaning has both a logical and a psychological aspect.
Psychologically, any item that is to have meaning must be
employed as a sign or a symbol; that is to say, it must be a
sign or a symbol to someone. Logically, it must be capable of
conveying a meaning, it must be the sort of item that can be
thus employed. In some meaning-relations this logical re-
quirement is trivial, and tacitly accepted; in others it is of
the utmost importance, and may even lead us a merry chase
through the labyrinths of nonsense. These two aspects, the
logical and the psychological, are thoroughly confounded by
the ambiguous verb "to mean"; for sometimes it is proper to
     u
say i$ means," and sometimes "/ mean." Obviously, a word
—  say, "London"  —   does not "mean" a city in just the same
sense that a person employing the word "means" the place.
   Both aspects, the logical and the psychological, are always
present, and their interplay produces the great variety of
meaning-relations over which philosophers have puzzled and
fought for the last fifty years. The analysis of "meaning" has
had a peculiarly difficult history; the word is used in many
different ways, and a good deal of controversy has been
wasted on the subject of the correct way, the meaning of
"meaning." Whenever people find several species of a genus,
they look for the prime form, the archetype that is supposed
to be differently disguised in each special case; so, for a long
time, philosophers hoped to find the true quality of meaning
by collecting all its various manifestations and looking for a
common ingredient. They talked more and more generally
about "symbol-situations," believing that by generalization
they might attain to the essential quality which all such situa-
tions had in common. But generalizing from vague and mud-
dled special theories can never give us a clear general theory.
The sort of generalization that merely substitutes "symbol-
situation" for "denotation-or-connotation-or-signification-or-
association-etc." is scientifically useless; for the whole purpose
of general concepts is to make the distinctions between
special classes clear, to relate all subspecies to each other in
definite ways; but if such general concepts are simply com-
posite photographs of all known types of meaning, they can
only blur, not clarify, the relations that obtain among special-
ized senses of the word.
   Charles Peirce, who was probably the first person to con-
cern himself seriously with semantics, began by making an
inventory of all "symbol-situations," in the hope that when
all possible meanings of "meaning" were herded together,
they would show empirical differentia whereby one could
divide the sheep from the goats. But the obstreperous flock,
instead of falling neatly into a few classes, each according to
56                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
 its kind, divided and subdivided into the most terrifying order
 of icons, qualisigns, legisigns, semes, phemes, and delomes,
 and there is but cold comfort in his assurance that his original
 59,049 types can really be boiled down to a mere sixty-six. 1
      Afew further attempts were made to grasp the essential
quality of meaning by empirical methods, but the more vari-
eties could be found, the less did they promise to reveal a
common essence. Husserl, distinguishing each type of mean-
ing as a special notion, ended with as many theories as there
are "meanings." 2 But we have still the sheep and the goats
and all their several relatives, and are still left wondering
why one family name, Meaning, should apply where no
family likeness can be detected.
    There is in fact no quality of meaning; its essence lies in
the realm of logic, where one does not deal with qualities,
but only with relations. It is not fair to say: "Meaning is a
relation," for that suggests too simple a business. Most people
think of a relation as a two-termed affair      —
                                                "A-in-relation-to-
B"; but meaning involves several terms, and different types
of meaning consist of different types and degrees of relation-
ship. It is better, perhaps, to say: "Meaning is not a quality,
but a function of a term."         A
                                   function is a pattern viewed
with reference to one special term round which it centers;
this pattern emerges when we look at the given term in its
total relation to the other terms about it. The total may be
quite complicated. For instance, a musical chord may be
treated as a function of one note, known as the "written
bass," by writing this one note and indicating its relation to
all the other notes that are to go above it. In old organ music,



the chord      91$= jbz would be written: ^^             J       ,   which
                      '                                  6
                                                         4
                                                         3
means: "The A-chord with the sixth, the fourth and the third
notes above A." The chord is treated as a pattern surround-
ing and including A. It is expressed as a function of A.
  The meaning of a term is, likewise, a function; it rests on
a pattern, in which the term itself holds the key-position.
Even in the simplest kinds of meaning there must be at least
two other things related to the term that "means" an object  —
  i   From two letters to Lady Welby, 1904 and 1908 respectively, first
citedby Ogden and Richards in The Meaning of Meaning (App. D, pp.
435-444), and now published in The Collected Papers of Charles S.
Peirce (1932), II, 330.
   2 Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, 2 vols. (1913 and 1921),
vol. II, part I, passim.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                              57
that is "meant," and a subject who uses the term; just as in
a chord there must be at least two notes besides the "written
bass" to determine what the chord is (one of these may be
merely "understood" by musicians, but without it the com-
bination would not be a determinate chord). The same may
be said for a term with a meaning; the existence of a subject
is often tacitly accepted, but if there is not at least one thing
meant and one mind for which it is meant, then there is not
a complete meaning      —only a partial pattern which might be
completed in different ways.
  Any term in a pattern may be taken as a key-term to which

the others are related.      For   instance, the chord


may be regarded as a function of its lowest note, and ex-

pressed by the description rS " —±z           ;   or   it   may be treated


with reference to the note on which it is built harmonically,
which happens to be D. A musician analyzing the harmony
would call this chord "the second inversion of the seventh-
chord on the dominant, in the key of G." The "dominant"
of that key is D, not A. He would treat the whole pattern as
a function of D; that sounds more complicated than the other
treatment, which fixed the notes from the              A
                                              upward, but of
course it is not really so, because it comes to just the same
pattern.                                                            ,*
  Similarly,   we may view a meaning-pattern from the point
of view of any term in "it, and our descriptions of the same
pattern will differ accordingly.       We
                                        may say that a certain
symbol "means" an object to a person, or that the person
"means" the object by the symbol. The first description treats
meaning in the logical sense, the second in the psychological
sense. The former takes the symbol as the key, and the latter
the subject. 3 So, the two most controversial kinds of meaning
—  the logical and the psychological      —
                                        are distinguished and at
the same time related to each other, by the general principle
of viewing meaning as a function, not a property, of terms.
   In the further analyses that follow, "meaning" will be taken
in the objective sense, unless some other is specified; that is
to say, I shall speak of terms (such as words) as "meaning"

  3 Where the object is taken as the key, the resulting description begins
with the "knowledge-content" postulated in some epistemologies.
58                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
something, not of people as "meaning" this or that. Later we
shall  have to distinguish various subjective functions; but at
present let us consider the relations of terms to their objects.
What relates the terms to their objects is, of course, a subject;
that is always to be understood.
   There are, first of all, two distinct functions of terms,
which have both a perfectly good right to the name "mean-
ing": for a significant sound, gesture, thing, event (e.g. a
flash, an image), may be either a sign or a symbol.
    A sign indicates the existence      —
                                     past, present, or future
of a thing, event, or condition. Wet streets are a sign that it
has rained.   A  patter on the roof is a sign that it is raining.
A  fall of the barometer or a ring round the moon is a sign
that it is going to rain. In an unirrigated place, abundant
verdure is a sign that it often rains there.       A
                                                 smell of smoke
signifies the presence of fire.     A
                                   scar  is a sign of a past ac-
cident. Dawn is a herald of sunrise. Sleekness is a sign of
frequent and plentiful food.
   All the examples here adduced are natural signs.           A
                                                          natural
sign is a part of a greater event, or of a complex condition,
and to an experienced observer it signifies the rest of that
situation of which it is a notable feature. It is a symptom of
a state of affairs. 4
   The logical relation between a sign and its object is a very
simple one: they are" associated, somehow, to form a pair;
that is to say, they stand in a one-to-one correlation. To each
sign there corresponds one definite item which is its object,
the thing (or event, or condition) signified. All the rest of
that important function, signification, involves the third term,
the subject, which uses the pair of items; and the relation
of the subject to the other two terms is much more interest-
ing than their own bare logical coupling. The subject is re-
lated, essentially, to the other two terms as a pair. What
characterizes them is the fact that they are paired. Thus, a
white bump on a person's arm, as a mere sense-datum, would
probably not be interesting enough even to have a name, but
such a datum in its relation to the past is noted and called a
"scar." Note, however, that although the subject's relation is
to the pair of other terms, he has also a relation to each one
of them individually, which makes one of them the sign and

   * There is a fine distinction between sign and symptom, in that the
object signified by a symptom is the entire condition of which the symp-
tom is a proper part; e.g., red spots are a symptom of measles, and
                                                                       A
"measles" is the entire condition begetting and including the red spots.
sign, on the other hand, may be one part of a total condition, which we
associate with another separate part. Thus a ring round the moon is part
                                                  —
of a weather condition, but what it signifies is rain another proper part
—  and not the entire state of "low-pressure" weather.
              THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                    59
the other the object. What is the difference between a sign
and its object, by virtue of which they are not interchange-
able? Two terms merely associated as a pair, like two socks,
two balances of a scale, two ends of a stick, etc., could be
interchanged without any harm.
   The difference is, that the subject for which they constitute
a pair must find one more interesting than the other, and the
latter more easily available than the former. If we are in-
terested in tomorrow's weather, the events now present, if
coupled with tomorrow's weather-phenomena, are signs for
us.   Aring round the moon, or "mares' tails" in the sky, are
not important in themselves; but as visible, present items
coupled with something important but not yet present, they
have "meaning." If it were not for the subject, or interpretant,
sign and object would be interchangeable. Thunder may just
as well be a sign that there has been lightning, as lightning
may signify that there will be thunder. In themselves they are
merely correlated. It is only where one is perceptible and the
other (harder or impossible to perceive) is interesting, that
we actually have a case of signification belonging to a term. 5
   Now, just as in nature certain events are correlated, so that
the less important may be taken as signs of the more impor-
tant, so we may also produce arbitrary events purposely cor-
related with important ones that are to be their meanings.
A  whistle means that the train is about to start.      A    gunshot
means that the sun is   just setting.   Acrepe   on the  door means
someone has   just died.  These   are artificial signs, for they are
not part of a condition of which they naturally signify the
remainder or something in the remainder. Their logical rela-
tion to their objects, however, is the same as that of natural
signs  —a one-to-one correspondence of sign and object, by
virtue of which the interpretant, who is interested in the lat-
ter and perceives the former, may apprehend the existence of
the term that interests him.
   The interpretation of signs is the basis of animal intel-
ligence. Animals presumably do not distinguish between natu-
ral signs and artificial or fortuitous signs; but they use both
kinds to guide their practical activities.  We    do the same thing
all   day long. We answer bells, watch the clock, obey warning
signals, follow arrows, take off the kettle when it whistles,
come at   the baby's cry, close the windows when we hear
thunder. The logical basis of all these interpretations, the
mere correlation of trivial events with important ones, is
really very simple and common; so much so that there is no
limit to what a sign may mean. This is even more obviously

    e Cf. Whitehead, Symbolism, pp. 9-13.
60                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
true of artificial signs than of natural ones.            A
                                               shot may mean
the beginning of a race, the rise of the sun, the sighting of
danger, the commencement of a parade. As for bells, the
world   is mad with their messages. Somebody at the front
door, the back door, the side door, the telephone    toast is     —
         —                                 —
ready typewriter line is ended school begins, work begins,
                                            —
church begins, church is over street car starts cashbox           —
registers    —
           knife grinder passes            —
                                time for dinner, time to get
up   —        town!
         fire in
     Because a sign may mean so many things, we are very apt
to misinterpret        it,   especially   when it is artificial. Bell signals,
of course, may be either wrongly associated with their objects,
or the sound of one bell may actually be confused with that
of another. But natural signs, too, may be misunderstood.
Wet streets are not a reliable sign of recent rain if the sprin-
kler wagon has passed by. The misinterpretation of signs is
the simplest form of mistake. It is the most important form,
for purposes of practical life, and the easiest to detect; for its
normal manifestation is the experience called disappointment.
   Where we find the simplest form of error, we may expect
to find also, as its correlate, the simplest form of knowledge.
This is, indeed, the interpretation of signs. It is the most el-
ementary and most tangible sort of intellection; the kind of
knowledge that we share with animals, that we acquire en-
tirely by experience, that has obvious biological uses, and
equally obvious criteria of truth and falsehood. Its mechanism
may be conceived as an elaboration of the conditioned-reflex
arc, with the brain doing switchboard duty, and getting the
right or the wrong number for the sense organ that called
up the musculature and expects an answer in terms of altered
sensations. It has all those virtues of simplicity, componability,
and intelligibility that recommend a concept for scientific pur-
poses. So it is not surprising that students of genetic psychol-
ogy have seized upon sign interpretation as the archetype of
all knowledge, that they regard signs as the original bearers


                   —
of meaning, and treat all other terms with semantic properties
as subspecies    "substitute signs," which act as proxy for their
objects and evoke conduct appropriate to the latter instead
of to themselves.
   But "substitute signs," though they may be classed with
symbols, are of a very specialized sort, and play only a mea-
gre and restricted part in the whole process of mental life,
I shall return to them later, in discussing the relationship be-

tween symbols and signs, for they do stand with a foot in
either domain. First, however, the characteristics of symbols
in general, and their essential difference from signs, must go
on record.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                            61
  A   term which is used symbolically and not signally does
not evoke action appropriate to the presence of its object. If
I say: "Napoleon," you do not bow to the conqueror of
Europe as though I had introduced him, but merely think of
him. If I mention a Mr. Smith of our common acquaintance,
you may be led to tell me something about him "behind his
back," which is just what you would not do in his presence.
                                       —
Thus the symbol for Mr. Smith his name may very well —
initiate an act appropriate peculiarly to his absence. Raised
eyebrows and a look at the door, interpreted as a sign that he
is coming, would stop you in the midst of your narrative;
that action would be directed toward Mr. Smith in person.
   Symbols are not proxy for their objects, but are vehicles
for the conception of objects. To conceive a thing or a situa-
tion is not the same thing as to "react toward it" overtly, or
to be aware of its presence. In talking about things we have
conceptions of them, not the things themselves; and it is the
conceptions, not the things, that symbols directly "mean."
Behavior toward conceptions is what words normally evoke;
this is the typical process of thinking.
   Of course a word may be used as a sign, but that is not its
primary role. Its signific character has to be indicated by
                                —
some special modification by a tone of voice, a gesture
(such as pointing or staring), or the location of a placard
bearing the word. In itself it is a symbol, associated with a
conception, 6 not directly with a public object or event. The
fundamental difference between signs and symbols is this dif-
ference of association, and consequently of their use by the
third party to the meaning function, the subject; signs an-
nounce their objects to him, whereas symbols lead him* to
conceive their objects. The fact that the same item say, the —
little mouthy noise we call a "word"          —
                                          may serve in either
capacity, does not obliterate the cardinal distinction between
the two functions it may assume.
   The simplest kind of symbolistic meaning is probably that
which belongs to proper names.           A
                                      personal name evokes a
conception of something given as a unit in the subject's ex-
perience, something concrete and therefore easy to recall in
imagination. Because the name belongs to a notion so ob-
viously and unequivocally derived from an individual object,

  6 Note that I have called the terms of our thinking conceptions, not
concepts. Concepts are abstract forms embodied in conceptions; their
bare presentation may be approximated by so-called "abstract thought,"
but in ordinary mental life they no more figure as naked factors than
skeletons are seen walking the street. Concepts, like decent living skele-
tons, are always embodied  — sometimes rather too much. I shall return
to the topic of pure concepts later on, in discussing communication.
62               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
itis often supposed to "mean" that object as a sign would

"mean" it. This belief is reinforced by the fact that a name
borne by a living person always is at once a symbol by which
we think of the person, and a call-name by which we signal
him. Through a confusion of these two functions, the proper
name is often deemed the bridge from animal semantic, or
sign-using, to human language, which is symbol-using. Dogs,
                                —
we are told, understand names not only their own, but their
masters'. So they do, indeed; but they understand them only
in the capacity of call-names. If you say "James" to a dog
whose master bears that name, the dog will interpret the
sound as a sign, and look for James. Say it to a person who
knows someone called thus, and he will ask: "What about
James?" That simple question is forever beyond the dog; sig-
nification is the only meaning a name can have for him         —
meaning which the master's name shares with the master's
smell, with his footfall, and his characteristic ring of the door-
bell. In a human being, however, the name evokes the con-
ception of a certain man so called, and prepares the mind
for further conceptions in which the notion of that man
figures; therefore the human being naturally asks: "What
about James?"
   There is a famous passage in the autobiography of Helen
Keller, in which this remarkable woman describes the dawn
of Language upon her mind. Of course she had used signs
before, formed associations, learned to expect things and
identify people or places; but there was a great day when
all sign-meaning was eclipsed and dwarfed by the discovery
that a certain datum in her limited sense-world had a denota-
tion, that a particular act of her fingers constituted a word.
This event had required a long preparation; the child had
learned many finger acts, but they were as yet a meaningless
play. Then, one day, her teacher took her out to walk      —
                                                           and
there the great advent of Language occurred.
   "She brought me my hat," the memoir reads, "and I knew
I was going out into the warm sunshine. This thought, if a
wordless sensation may be called a thought, made me hop
and skip with pleasure.
   "We walked down the path to the well-house, attracted by
the fragrance of the honeysuckle with which it was covered.
Some one was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand
under the spout. As the cool stream gushed over my hand
she spelled into the other the word water, first slowly, then
rapidly. I stood still, my whole attention fixed upon the mo-
tion of her fingers. Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness as
of something forgotten   — a thrill of returning thought; and
somehow the mystery of language was revealed to me. I knew
            THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                            63
then that w-a-t-e-r meant the wonderful cool something that
was flowing over my hand. That living word awakened my
soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it free! There were barriers
still, it is true, but barriers that in time could be swept away.

    "I left the well-house eager to learn. Everything had a
name, and each name gave birth to a new thought. As we
returned to the house every object which I touched seemed
to quiver with life. That was because I saw everything with
the strange, new sight that had come to me." 7
   This passage is the best affidavit we could hope to find for
the genuine difference between sign and symbol. The sign is
something to act upon, or a means to command action; the
symbol is an instrument of thought. Note how Miss Keller
      —
qualifies the mental process just preceding her discovery of
words "This thought, // a wordless sensation may be called
a thought.'" Real thinking is possible only in the fight of genu-
ine language, no matter how limited, how primitive; in her
case, it became possible with the discovery that "w-a-t-e-r"
was not necessarily a sign that water was wanted or expected,
but was the name of this substance, by which it could be
mentioned, conceived, remembered.
   Since a name, the simplest type of symbol, is directly asso-
ciated with a conception, and is employed by a subject to
realize the conception, one is easily led to treat a name as a
"conceptual sign," an artificial sign which announces the pres-
ence of a certain idea. In a sense this is quite justified; yet it
strikes a strained and unnatural note, which is usually a fair
warning that the attempted interpretation misses the most im-
portant feature in its material. In the present case, it misses
the relation of conceptions to the concrete world, which -iy so
close and so important that it enters into the very structure of
"names."   A name, above all, denotes something. "James"
may represent a conception, but it names a certain person. In
the case of proper nouns this relation of the symbol to what
it denotes is so striking that denotation has been confused

with the direct relation of sign and object, signification. As
a matter of fact, "James" does not, without further ado, sig-
nify a person; it denotes him      —
                                 it is associated with a concep-

tion which "fits" the actual person. The relation between a
symbol and an object, usually expressed by "S denotes O,"
is not a simple two-termed relation which S has to O; it is a
complex affair: S is coupled, for a certain subject, with a con-
ception that fits O, i.e. with a notion which         O
                                                   satisfies.
   In an ordinary sign-function, there are three essential terms:
subject, sign, and object. In denotation, which is the com-

  i Helen Keller,   The Story of My Life (1936; 1st ed. 1902), pp. 23-24.
64                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
monest kind of symbol-function, there have to be four: sub-
ject, symbol, conception, and object. The radical difference
between sign-meaning and symbol-meaning can therefore be
logically exhibited, for it rests on a difference of pattern, it is
strictly a different function. 8
     Denotation is, then, the complex relationship which a name
has to an object which bears it; but what shall the more direct
relation of the name, or symbol, to its associated concept
be called? It shall be called by its traditional name, connota-
tion. The connotation of a word is the conception it conveys.
Because the connotation remains with the symbol when the
object of its denotation is neither present nor looked for, we
are able to think about the object without reacting to it overtly
at   all.

   Here, then, are the three most familiar meanings of the one
word, "meaning": signification, denotation, and connotation.
All three are equally and perfectly legitimate, but in no pos-
sible way interchangeable.
   In every analysis of sign-using or symbol-using, we must
be able to account not only for the genesis of knowledge, but
also of that most human characteristic, error. How sign-
interpretation can miscarry, has already been shown; but
failures of denotation, or confusions of connotation, are un-
fortunately just as common, and have a claim to our attention,
too.
     There is a psychological act involved in every case of deno-
tation,  which might be called the application of a term to an
object. The word "water," for instance, denotes a certain
substance because people conventionally apply it to that sub-
stance. Such application has fixed its connotation. We may
ask, quite reasonably, whether a certain colorless liquid is or
is not water, but hardly whether water "really" means that

substance which is found in ponds, falls from the clouds, has
the chemical constitution        H
                               2 0, etc. The connotation of the
word, though derived from an age-long application, is more
definite now than some cases of the word's applicability.
When we have misapplied a term, i.e. applied it to an object
that does not satisfy its connotation, we do not say that the
term "denoted" that object; one feature in the tetradic mean-
ing-relation is missing, so there is no real denotation  only a  —
psychological act of application, and that was a mistake. The
word "water" was never guilty of denoting the drink that
   8 If a symbol could be said normally to "signify" anything, its object
would be the occurrence of an act of conception. But such a function of
a symbol is casual, and crosses with its use as a symbol. In the latter
function it is not the act of conception, but what is conceived, that enters
into the meaning-pattern. We shall avoid much confusion and quibbling
by recognizing that signification does not figure in symbolization at all.
              THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                     65
undid   little   Willy,   in   the   pathetic   laboratory   rhyme:

                   We had a little Willy,
                   Now Willy is no more,
                  For what he thought was        H   2
                  Was H 2 S0 4

Willy had mistaken one object for another; he misapplied a
term of which he knew the connotation well enough. But
since connotations are normally fixed upon a word, originally,
by its application to certain things, whose properties are but
vaguely known, we may also be mistaken about the connota-
tion, when we use the term as a vehicle of thought. We may
know that the symbol "James" applies to our next-door neigh-
bor, and quite mistakenly suppose it connotes a man with all
sorts of virtues or frailties. This time we are not mistaking
James for someone else, but we are mistaken about James.
    It is a peculiarity of proper names that they have a different
connotation for every denotation. Because their connotation
 is not fixed, they can be arbitrarily applied. In itself, a proper
name has no connotation at all; sometimes it acquires a very
 general sort of conceptual meaning     —it connotes a gender, or

 race, or confession (e.g. "Christian," "Wesley," "Israel")
 but there is no actual mistake involved in calling a boy
 "Marion," a girl "Frank," a German "Pierre," or a Jew "Lu-
 ther." In civilized society the connotation of a proper name is
 not regarded as a meaning applying to the bearer of the name;
 when the name is used to denote a certain person it takes on
 the connotation required by that function. In primitive soci-
 eties this is less apt to be the case; names are often changed^
 because their^ccepted connotations do not fit the beareT. The*
 same man may in turn be named "Lightfoot," "Hawkeye,"
 "Whizzing Death," etc. In an Indian society, the class of men
 named "Hawkeye" would very probably be a subclass of the
 class "sharp-eyed men." But in our own communities ladies
 named "Blanche" do not have to be albinos or even platinum
 blondes. A    word that functions as a proper noun is excused
 from the usual rules of application.
    So much, then, for the venerable "logic of terms." It ap-
 pears a little more complicated than in the medieval books,
 since we must add to the long-recognized functions, connota-
 tion and denotation, a third one, signification, which is fun-
 damentally different from the other two; and since, moreover,
 in discussing the semantic functions of terms we have made
 the rare discovery that they really are functions, not powers
 or mysterious properties or what-not, and have treated them
 accordingly. The traditional "logic of terms" is really a meta-
66               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
physic of meaning; the new philosophy of meaning is first
of all a logic of terms—  of signs and symbols —   an analysis of
the relational patterns in which "meaning'* .nay be sought.
   But a semantic of separate symbols is only a rudimentary
foundation for a more interesting aspect of meaning. Every-
thing is mere propaedeutic until we come to discourse. It is
in discursive thinking that truth and falsehood are born. Be-
fore terms are built into propositions, they assert nothing,
preclude nothing; in fact, although they may name things,
and convey ideas of such things, they say nothing. I have dis-
cussed them at such great length simply because most logicians
have given them such cavalier treatment that even so obvious
a distinction as that between sign-functions and symbol-func-
tions passed unnoticed; so that careless philosophers have been
guilty of letting ambitious genetic psychologists argue them
from the conditioned reflex to the wisdom of G. Bernard
Shaw, all in one skyrocketing generalization.
   The logic of discourse has been much more adequately
        —
handled so well, in fact, that practically nothing I have to
say about it is new; yet it must at least be brought to mind
here, because an understanding of discursive symbolism, the
vehicle of propositional thinking, is essential to any theory of
human mentality; for without it there could be no literal
meaning, and therefore no scientific knowledge.
   Anyone who has ever learned a foreign language knows that
the study of its vocabulary alone will not make him master
of the new tongue. Even if he were to memorize a whole
dictionary, he would not be able to make the simplest state-
ment correctly; for he could not form a sentence without
 certain principles of grammar. He must know that some
words are nouns and some are verbs; he must recognize some
 as active or passive forms of verbs, and know the person and
number they express; he must know where the verb stands
 in the sentence in order to make the sense he has in mind.
 Mere separate names of things (even of actions, which are
"named" by infinitives) do not constitute a sentence.          A
string of words which we might derive by running our eye
                                                —
down the left-hand column in the dictionary for instance,
 "especially espouse espringal espry esquire"   —   does not say
anything. Each word has meaning, yet the series of words
has none.
   Grammatical structure, then, is a further source of sig-
nificance. We cannot call it a symbol, since it is not even
a term; but it has a symbolific mission. It ties together several
symbols, each with at least a fragmentary connotation of its
own, to make one complex term, whose meaning is a special
constellation of all the connotations involved. What the
               THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                          67
special constellation is, depends on the syntactical relations
within the complex symbol, or proposition.
   Propositional structure has commanded more interest among
logicians of the present generation than any other aspect of
symbolism. Ever since Bertrand Russell 9 pointed out that the
Aristotelian metaphysic of substance and attribute is a counter-
part of the Aristotelian logic of subject and predicate        that—
the common-sense view of things and properties, agent and
patient, object and action, etc., is a faithful counterpart of
that common-sense logic embodied in our parts of speech                —
the ties between expressibility and conceivability, forms of
language and forms of experience, propositions and facts,
have been drawn closer and closer. It has become apparent
that a proposition fits a fact not only because it contains
names for the things and actions involved in the fact, but also
because it combines them in a pattern analogous, somehow, to
the pattern in which the named objects are "in fact" com-
bined. A proposition is a picture of a structure         —
                                                     the structure
of a state of affairs. The unity of a proposition is the same
sort of unity that belongs to a picture, which presents one
scene, no matter how many items may be distinguishable
within it.
   What property must a picture have in order to represent
its object? Must it really share the visual appearance of the
object? Certainly not to any high degree. It may, for instance,
be black on white, or red on grey, or any color on any other
color; it may be shiny whereas the object is dull; it may be
much larger or much smaller than the object; it is certainly
flat, and although the tricks of perspective sometimes give a
perfect illusion of three-dimensionality, a picture without"
perspective   —e!g. an architect's "elevation drawing"          —
                                                            is still
unmistakably a picture, "representing an object.
    The reason for this latitude is that the picture is essentially
a symbol, not a duplicate, of what it represents. It has certain
salient features by virtue of which it can function as a symbol
for its object. For instance, the childish outline drawing
(fig. 1 ) on page 68 is immediately recognized as a rabbit,
yet it really looks so unlike one that even a person nearly
blind could not for a moment be made to think that he saw
a rabbit sitting on the open page of his book. All it shares
with the "reality" is a certain proportion of parts the posi-—
tion and relative length of "ears," the dot where an "eye"
belongs, the "head" and "body" in relation to each other,
etc. Beside it is exactly the same figure with different ears and
tail (fig. 2); any child will accept it as a cat. Yet cats don't


  »   A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz (1900). See p. 12.
68                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY




                 Fie.   1                         Fig. 2

look like long-tailed, short-eared rabbits, in reality. Neither
are they flat and white, with a papery texture and a black
outline running round them. But all these traits of the pic-
tured cat are irrelevant, because it is merely a symbol, not a
pseudo-cat. 10
   Of course, themore detail is depicted by the image, the
more unequivocal becomes the reference to a particular ob-
ject. A good portrait is "true" to only one person. Yet even
good portraits are not duplications. There are styles in por-
traiture as there are in any other art. We may paint in
heightened, warm, melting colors, or in cool pastels; we may
range from the clean line drawings of Holbein to the shim-
mering hues of French impressionism; and all the time the
object need not change. Our presentation of it is the vari-
able factor.
   The picture is a symbol, and the so-called "medium" is a
type of symbolism. Yet there is something, of course, that
relates the picture to its original, and makes it represent, say,
a Dutch interior and not the crucifixion. What it may repre-
sent is dictated purely by its logic        —
                                         by the arrangement of
its elements.  The disposition of pale and dark, dull and
bright paints, or thin and thick lines and variously shaped
white spaces, yields the determination of those forms that
mean certain objects. They can mean all those and only those
objects in which we recognize similar forms. All other aspects
of the picture  —for instance, what artists call the "distribution
of values," the "technique," and the "tone" of the whole work
—  serve other ends than mere representation. The only charac-
   10 Tolstoi relates a little incident of his childhood which hinges on the
sudden ingression of irrelevant factors into consciousness, to the detri-
ment of artistic appreciation; I quote it here because it is quite the most
charming record I have found of a semantic muddle:
   "We settled ourselves about the round table at our drawing. I had only
blue paint; nevertheless, I undertook to depict the hunt. After represent-
ing, in very lively style, a blue boy mounted on a blue horse, and some
blue dogs, I was not quite sure whether I could paint a blue hare, and
ran to Papa in his study to take advice on the matter. Papa was reading;
and in answer to my question, 'Are there any blue hares?' he said, with-
out raising his head, 'Yes, my dear, there are.' I went back to the round
table and painted a blue hare.  .    .
                                       .'*
                                           L. N. Tolstoi, Childhood, Boyhood
and Youth.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                 69
teristic that a picture must have in order to be a picture of a
certain thing is an arrangement of elements analogous to the
arrangement of salient visual elements in the object. A  repre-
sentation of a rabbit must have long ears; a man must feature
arms and legs.
   In the case of a so-called "realistic" picture, the analogy
goes into great detail, so great that many people believe a
statue or a painting to be a copy of its object. But consider
how we meet such vagaries of style as modern commercial
art produces: ladies with bright green faces and aluminum
hair, men whose heads are perfect circles, horses constructed
entirely of cylinders. We still recognize the objects they de-
pict, as long as we find an element to stand for the head and
one for the eye in the head, a white mark to connote a starched
bosom, a line placed where it may represent an arm. With
amazing rapidity our vision picks up these features and lets
the whole fantasy convey a human form.
   One step removed from the "styled" picture is the diagram.
Here any attempt at imitating the parts of an object has been
given up. The parts are merely indicated by conventional
symbols, such as dots, circles, crosses, or what-not. The only
thing that is "pictured" is the relation of the parts to each
other. A diagram is a "picture" only of a form.
   Consider a photograph, a painting, a pencil sketch, an
architect's elevation drawing, and a builder's diagram, all
showing the front view of one and the same house. With a
little attention, you will recognize the house in each repre-
sentation.   Why?
   Because each one of the very different images expresses
the same relation of parts, which you have fasteneoV^n icr
formulating your conception of the house. Some versions
show more such relations than others; they are more detailed.
But those which do not show certain details at least show
no others in place of these, and so it may be understood that
the details are there left out. The things shown in the sim-
plest picture, the diagram, are all contained in the more
elaborate renderings. Moreover, they are contained in your
conception of the house; so the pictures all answer, in their
several ways, to your conception, although the latter may
contain further items that are not pictured at all. Likewise,
another person's conception of that same house will agree
in its essential pattern with the pictures and with your con-
ception, however many private aspects it may have.
   It is by virtue of such a fundamental pattern, which all
correct conceptions of the house have in common, that we
can talk together about the "same" house despite our private
differences of sense-experience, feeling, and purely personal
 70                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
associations. That which all adequate conceptions of an object
must have in common, is the concept of the object. The same
concept is embodied in a multitude of conceptions. It is a
form that appears in all versions of thought or imagery that
can connote the object in question, a form clothed in different
 integuments of sensation for every different mind. Probably
 no two people see anything just alike. Their sense organs
 differ, their attention and imagery and feelings differ so that
 they cannot be supposed to have identical impressions. But
 if their respective conceptions of a thing (or event, or person,
etc.) embody the same concept, they will understand each other.
   A   concept is all that a symbol really conveys. But just as
 quickly as the concept is symbolized to us, our own imagina-
tion dresses it up in a private, personal conception, which we
can distinguish from the communicable public concept only
by a process of abstraction. Whenever we deal with a concept
we must have some particular presentation of it, through
which we grasp it. What we actually have "in mind" is always
 universalium in re. When we express this universalium we
use another symbol to exhibit it, and still another res will
embody it for the mind that sees through our symbol and
apprehends the concept in its own way.
    The power of understanding symbols, i.e. of regarding
everything about a sense-datum as irrelevant except a certain
form that it embodies, is the most characteristic mental trait
of mankind. It issues in an unconscious, spontaneous process
of abstraction, which goes on all the time in the human mind:
a process of recognizing the concept in any configuration
given to experience, and forming a conception accordingly.
That is the real sense of Aristotle's definition of man as "the
rational animal." Abstractive seeing is the foundation of our
rationality, and is its definite guarantee long before the dawn
of any conscious generalization or syllogism. 11 It is the func-
tion which no other animal shares. Beasts do not read sym-
bols; that is why they do not see pictures. We are sometimes
told that dogs do not react even to the best portraits because
they live more by smell than by sight; but the behavior of
a dog who spies a motionless real cat through the window
glass belies this explanation. Dogs scorn our paintings be-
cause they see colored canvases, not pictures. A representa-
tion of a cat does not make them conceive one.
    Since any single sense-datum can, logically, be a symbol
for any single item, any arbitrary mark or counter may con-
note the conception, or, publicly speaking, the concept, of
any single thing, and thus denote the thing itself. A motion
  11 Cf. Th. Ribot, Essai sur I 'imagination criatrice (1921; 1st ed. 1900),
p. 14.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                      71
of fingers, apprehended as one unit performance, became the
name of a substance to little deaf-and-blind Helen Keller.       A
word, likewise taken as a sound-unit, becomes a symbol to
us, for some item in the world. And now the power of seeing
configurations as symbols comes into play: we make patterns
of denotative symbols, and they promptly symbolize the very
different, but analogous, configurations of denoted things.
A  temporal order of words stands for a relational order of
things.   When pure word-order becomes insufficient, word-
endings and prefixes    "mean"    relationships;   from these are
born prepositions and other purely relational symbols. 12 Just
as mnemonic dots and crosses, as soon as they denote objects,
can also enter into diagrams or simple pictures, so do sounds,
as soon as they are words, enter into word-pictures, or sen-
tences. A sentence is a symbol for a state of affairs, and pic-
tures its character.
   Now, in an ordinary picture, the terms of the represented
complex are symbolized by so many visual items, i.e. areas
of color, and their relations are indicated by relations of these
items. So painting, being static, can present only a momen-
tary state; it may suggest, but can never actually report, a
history. We may produce a series of pictures, but nothing
in the pictures can actually guarantee the conjunction of
their several scenes in one serial order of events. Five baby-
pictures of the little Dionne sisters in various acts may be
taken either as a series representing successive acts of one
child, or as separate views of five little girls in characteristic
activities. There is no sure way of choosing between these
two interpretations without captions or other indications.
   But most of our interests center upon events, rather* thaDT
upon things Ih static spatial relations. Causal connections,
activities, time, and change are what we want most of all to
conceive and communicate. And to this end pictures are
poorly suited. We resort, therefore, to the more powerful,
supple, and adaptable symbolism of language.
   How are relations expressed in language? For the most
part, they are not symbolized by other relations, as in pic-
tures, but are named, just like substantives. We name two
items, and place the name of a relation between; this means ,
that the relation holds the two items together. "Brutus
killed Caesar" indicates that "killing" holds between Brutus
and Caesar. Where the relation is not symmetrical, the word-
order and the grammatical forms (case, mood, tense, etc.)
of the words symbolize its direction. "Brutus killed Caesar"
  12 See Philip Wegener, Untersuchungen iiber die Grundfragen des
Sprachlebens (1885), esp. pp. 88-89; also Karl Buhler, Sprachtheorie
(1934), chs. iii and iv.
72                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
means something different from "Caesar killed Brutus," and
"Killed Caesar Brutus" is not a sentence at all. The word-
order partly determines the sense of the structure.
   The trick of naming relations instead of illustrating them
gives language a tremendous scope; one word can thus take
care of a situation that would require a whole sheet of draw-
ings to depict it. Consider the sentence, "Your chance of
winning is one among a thousand of losing." Imagine a pic-
torial expression of this comparatively simple proposition!
First, a symbol for "you, winning"; another for "you, losing,"
pictured a thousand times! Of course a thousand anythings
would be far beyond clear apprehension on a basis of mere
visual Gestalt. We can distinguish three, four, five, and perhaps
somewhat higher numbers as visible patterns, for instance:



But  a thousand becomes merely "a great number." Its exact
fixation requires an order of concepts in which it holds a
definite place, as    each number concept does   in   our number
system. But to denote such a host of concepts and keep their
relations to each other straight, we need a symbolism that can
express both terms and relationships more economically than
pictures, gestures, or mnesic signs.
   It was remarked before that symbol and object, having a
common logical form, would be interchangeable save for
some psychological factors, namely: that the object is inter-
esting, but hard to fixate, whereas the symbol is easy of ap-
prehension though in itself perhaps quite unimportant. Now
the little vocal noises out of which we make our words are
extremely easy to produce in all sorts of subtle variations,
and easy to perceive and distinguish. As Bertrand Russell
has put it, "It is of course largely a matter of convenience that
we do not use words of other kinds (than vocal). There is the
deaf-and-dumb language; a Frenchman's shrug of the shoul-
ders is a word; in fact, any kind of externally perceptible
bodily movement may become a word, if social usage so
ordains. But the convention which has given the supremacy
to speaking is one which has a good ground, since there is
no other way of producing a number of perceptively different
bodily movements so quickly or with so little muscular effort.
Public speaking would be very tedious if statesmen had to
use the deaf-and-dumb language, and very exhausting if all
words involved as much muscular effort as a shrug of the
shoulders." 13 Not only does speech cost little effort, but
above all it requires no instrument save the vocal apparatus
and the auditory organs which, normally, we all carry about
  13 Philosophy   (1927), p. 44.
             THE LOGIC OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS                          73
as part of our very selves; so words are naturally available
symbols, as well as very economical ones.
   Another recommendation for words is that they have no
value except as symbols (or signs); in themselves they are
completely trivial. This is a greater advantage than philos-
ophers of language generally realize.       A     symbol which inter-
ests us also as an object is distracting. It does not convey its
meaning without obstruction. For instance, if the word
"plenty" were replaced by a succulent, ripe, real peach, few
people could attend entirely to the mere concept of quite
enough when confronted with such a symbol. The more
barren and indifferent the symbol, the greater is its semantic
power. Peaches are too good to act as words; we are too
much interested in peaches themselves. But little noises are
ideal conveyors of concepts, for they give us nothing but their
meaning. That is the source of the "transparency" of lan-
guage, on which several scholars have remarked. Vocables
in themselves are so worthless that we cease to be aware of
their physical presence at all, and become conscious only of
their connotations, denotations, or other meanings. Our con-
ceptual activity seems to flow through them, rather than
merely to accompany them, as it accompanies other experi-
ences that we endow with significance. They fail to impress
us as "experiences" in their own right, unless we have diffi-
culty in using them as words, as we do with a foreign lan-
guage or a technical jargon until we have mastered it.
   But the greatest virtue of verbal symbols is, probably, their
tremendous readiness to enter into combinations. There is
practically no limit to the selections and arrangements we can
make of them. This is largely due to the economy Lord
Russell remarked, the speed with which each word is "pro-
duced and presented and- finished, making way for another
word. This makes it possible for us to grasp whole groups of
meanings at a time, and make a new, total, complex concept
out of the separate connotations of rapidly passing words.
    Herein lies the power of language to embody concepts
not only of things, but of things in combination, or situations.
A    combination of words connoting a situation-concept is a
descriptive phrase; if the relation-word in such a phrase is
given the grammatical form called a "verb," the phrase
becomes a sentence. Verbs are symbols with a double func-
tion; they express a relation, and also assert that the relation
holds, i.e. that the symbol has a denotation. 14 Logically they
combine the meaning of a function, 0, and an assertion-sign;
a verb has the force of "assert 0( )."
   14 A more detailed discussion of this double function may be found in
my article, "A Logical Study of Verbs," The Journal of Philosophy,
XXIV (1927), 5: 120-129.
74               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   When a word is given an arbitrary denotation (which may
be a simple thing, or a complex affair), it is simply a name;
for instance, in a language of my invention "Moof" might
mean a cat, a state of mind, or the government of a country.
I may give that name to anything I like. A name may be
awkward or convenient, ugly or pretty, but in itself it is
never true or false. But if it already has a connotation, then
it cannot be given an arbitrary denotation, nor vice versa.

I cannot use the word "kitten" with its accepted connotation
to denote an elephant. The application of a word with its
connotation is the equivalent of a statement: "This is a
such-and-such." To call an elephant "kitten," not as a proper
name but as a common noun, is a mistake, because he does
not exemplify the connoted concept. Similarly a word with
a fixed denotation cannot be given an arbitrary connotation,
for once the word is a name (common or proper), to give it
a certain connotation is to predicate the connoted concept of
whatever bears the name. If "Jumbo" denotes an elephant,
it cannot be given the connotation "something furry," be-

cause Jumbo is presumably not furry.
   The relation between connotation and denotation is, there-
fore, the most obvious seat of truth and falsity. Its conven-
tional expressions are sentences asserting that something is a
such-and-such, or that something has such-and-such a prop-
erty; in technical language,       propositions of the forms
"x e y(4>y)," and "<$>x." The distinction between these two
forms lies simply in which aspect of the name we have first
determined, its connotation or its denotation; truth and falsity
have the same basis for both kinds of proposition.
   In a complex symbolic structure, such as a sentence con-
necting several elements with each other by a verb that ex-
presses an elaborate pattern of relations, we have a "logical
picture" whose applicability depends on the denotations of
many words and the connotations of many relation-symbols
(word-order, particles, cases, etc.). If the names have denota-
tions, the sentence is about something; then its truth or
falsity depends on whether any relations actually holding
among the denoted things exemplify the relational concepts
expressed by the sentence, i.e. whether the pattern of things
(or properties, events, etc.) denoted is analogous to the"
syntactical pattern of the complex symbol.
   There are many refinements of logic that give rise to spe-
cial symbol-situations, to ambiguities and odd mathematical
devices, and to the legion of distinctions which Charles
Peirce was able to make. But the main fines of logical struc-
ture in all meaning-relations are those I have just discussed;
the correlation of signs with their meanings by a selective
           DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                75
mental process; the correlation of symbols with concepts and
concepts with things, which gives rise to a "short-cut" rela-
tion between names and things, known as denotation; and
the assignment of elaborately patterned symbols to certain
analogues in experience, the basis of all interpretation and
thought. These are, essentially, the relationships we use in
weaving the intricate web of meaning which is the real fabric
of human life.




     4.      Discursive and Presentational Forms


The logical theory on which this whole study of symbols
is based is essentially that which was set forth by Wittgenstein,
some twenty years ago, in his Tractatus Logic o-Philosophicus:
   "One name stands for one thing, and another for another
thing,    and they are connected together.   And so the whole,
like a living picture, presents the   atomic fact. (4.0311)
                                             —
   "At the first glance the proposition say as it stands
printed on paper    —does not seem to be a picture of the
reality of which it treats. But neither does the musical score
appear at first sight to be a picture of a musical piece; nor
does our phonetic spelling (letters) seem to be a picture of
our spoken language.    .   .(4.015)
                                .



   "In the fact that there is a general rule by which the
musician is able to read the symphony out of the score, and
that there is ap rule by which one could reconstruct Ihe
symphony from the line^on a phonograph record and from
this again  —                            —
              by means of the first rule construct the score,
herein lies the internal similarity between the things which
at first sight seem to be entirely different. And the rule is
the law of projection which projects the symphony into the
language of the musical score. It is the rule of translation of
this language into the language of the gramophone record."
(4.0141)
   "Projection" is a good word, albeit a figurative one, for
the process by which we draw purely logical analogies. Geo-
metric projection is the best instance of a perfectly faithful
representation which, without knowledge of some logical
rule, appears to be a misrepresentation.     A
                                           child looking at a
map of the world in Mercator projection cannot help be-
lieving that Greenland is larger than Australia; he simply
finds it larger. The projection employed is not the usual
76               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
principle of copying which we use in all visual comparisons
or translations, and his training in the usual rule makes him
unable to "see" by the new one. It takes sophistication to
"see" the relative sizes of Greenland and Australia on a
Mercator map. Yet a mind educated to appreciate the pro-
jected image brings the eye's habit with it. After a while, we
genuinely "see" the thing as we apprehend it.
   Language, our most faithful and indispensable picture of
human experience, of the world and its events, of thought
and life and all the march of time, contains a law of projec-
tion of which philosophers are sometimes unaware, so that
their reading of the presented "facts" is obvious and yet
wrong, as a child's visual experience is obvious yet deceptive
when his judgment is ensnared by the trick of the flattened
map. The transformation which facts undergo when they
are rendered as propositions is that the relations in them are
turned into something like objects. Thus, "A killed B" tells
of a way in which   A   and B were unfortunately combined;
but our only means of expressing this way is to name it, and
      —
presto!  a new entity, "killing," seems to have added itself
to the complex of   A and B. The event which is "pictured"
in the proposition undoubtedly involved a succession of acts
by A and B, but not the succession which the proposition
                —
seems to exhibit first A, then "killing," then B. Surely A
and B were simultaneous with each other and with the killing.
But words have a linear, discrete, successive order; they are
strung one after another like beads on a rosary; beyond the
very limited meanings of inflections, which can indeed be in-
corporated in the words themselves, we cannot talk in simul-
taneous bunches of names. We must name one thing and then
another, and symbols that are not names must be stuck be-
tween or before or after, by convention. But these symbols,
holding proud places in the chain of names, are apt to be        I




mistaken for names, to the detriment of many a metaphysical
theory. Lord Russell regrets that we cannot construct a lan-
guage which would express all relations by analogous rela-
tions; then we would not be tempted to misconstrue language,
as a person who knows the meaning of the Mercator map, but
has not used one freely enough to "see" in its terms, mis-
construes the relative sizes of its areas.
   "Take, say, that lightning precedes thunder," he says. "To
express this by a language closely reproducing the structure
of the fact, we should have to say simply: 'lightning, thun-
der,' where the fact that the first word precedes the second
means that what the first word means precedes what the
second word means. But even if we adopted this method for
temporal order, we should still need words for all other rela-
         DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                           77
tions, because we could not without intolerable ambiguity
symbolize them by the order of our words." 1
   It is a mistake, I think, to symbolize things by entities too
much like themselves; to let words in temporal order repre-
sent things in temporal order. If relations such as temporal
order are symbolized at all, let the symbols not be those same
relations themselves. A structure cannot include as part of a
symbol something that should properly be part of the meaning.
But it is unfortunate that names and syntactical indicators
look so much alike in language; that we cannot represent
objects by words, and relations by pitch, loudness, or other
characteristics of speech. 2
   As it is, however, all language has a form which requires
us to string out our ideas even though their objects rest one
within the other; as pieces of clothing that are actually worn
one over the other have to be strung side by side on the
clothesline. This property of verbal symbolism is known as
discursiveness; by reason of it, only thoughts which can be
arranged in this peculiar order can be spoken at all; any idea
which does not lend itself to this "projection" is ineffable,
incommunicable by means of words. That is why the laws of
reasoning, our clearest formulation of exact expression, are
sometimes known as the "laws of discursive thought."
   There is no need of going further into the details of verbal
symbolism and its poorer substitutes, hieroglyphs, the deaf-
and-dumb language, Morse Code, or the highly developed
drum-telegraphy of certain jungle tribes. The subject has been
exhaustively treated by several able men, as the many quota-
tions in this chapter indicate; I can only assent to their find-
ings. The relation between word-structures and their meanings
is, I believe, one*of logical analogy, whereby, in Wittgenstein's

phrase, "we make ourselves pictures of facts." This philosophy
of language lends itself, indeed, to great technical develop-
ment, such as Wittgenstein envisaged:
    "In the language of everyday life it very often happens that
the same word signifies in different ways         —
                                               and therefore be-
longs to two different symbols        —
                                      or that two words, which
signify in different ways, are apparently applied in the same
way in the proposition. (3.323)
  i Philosophy,   p. 264.
  2 In  the same chapter from which I have just quoted, Lord Russell
attributes the power of language to represent events to the fact that, like
events, it is a temporal series. I cannot agree with him in this matter. It
is by virtue of names for relations that we can depict dynamic relations.
We   do not mention past events earlier in a sentence than present ones,
but subject temporal order to the same "projection" as, for instance,
attribution or classification; temporal order is usually rendered by the
syntactical (non-temporal) device of tense.
78               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
    "In order to avoid these errors, we must employ a symbol-
ism which excludes them, by not applying the same sign in
different symbols and by not applying signs in the same way
which signify in different ways. A symbolism, that is to say,
                                            —
which obeys the rules of logical grammar of logical syntax,
    "(The logical symbolism of Frege and Russell is such a lan-
guage, which, however, does still not exclude all errors.)"
(3.325) 3
    Carnap's admirable book, The Logical Syntax of Language,
carries out the philosophical program suggested by Wittgen-
stein. Here an actual, detailed technique is developed for
determining the capacity for expression of any given linguistic
system, a technique which predicts the limit of all combina-
tions to be made in that system, shows the equivalence of
certain forms and the differences among others which might
be mistaken for equivalents, and exhibits the conventions to
which any thought or experience must submit in order to be-
come conveyable by the symbolism in question. The distinc-
tions between scientific language and everyday speech, which
most of us can feel rather than define, are clearly illumined
by Carnap's analysis; and it is surprising to find how little of
our ordinary communication measures up to the standard of
"meaning" which a serious philosophy of language, and hence
a logic of discursive thought, sets before us.
    In this truly remarkable work the somewhat diffuse appre-
hension of our intellectual age, that symbolism is the key to
 epistemology and "natural knowledge," finds precise and prac-
 tical corroboration. The Kantian challenge:      "What can I
 know?" is shown to be dependent on the prior question:
 "What can I ask?" And the answer, in Professor Carnap's
 formulation, is clear and direct. I can ask whatever language
 will express; I can know whatever experiment will answer.      A
 proposition which could not, under any (perhaps ideal, im-
 practicable) conditions, be verified or refuted, is a pseudo-
 proposition, it has no literal meaning. It does not belong to
the framework of knowledge that we call logical conception;
it is not true or false, but unthinkable, for it falls outside the

order of symbolism.
   Since an inordinate amount of our talk, and therefore (we
hope) of our cerebration too, defies the canons of literal
                                            —
meaning, our philosophers of language Russell, Wittgen-
stein, Carnap, and others of similar persuasions     —  are faced
with the new question: What is the true function of those ver-
bal combinations and other pseudo-symbolic structures that
have no real significance, but are freely used as though they
meant something?

  3 Tractatus.
                DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                79
   According to our logicians, those structures are to be treated
as "expressions" in a different sense, namely as "expressions"
of emotions, feelings, desires. They are not symbols for
thought, but symptoms of the inner life, like tears and
laughter, crooning, or profanity.
   "Many linguistic utterances," says Carnap, "are analogous
to laughing in that they have only an expressive function, no
representative function. Examples of this are cries like 'Oh,
Oh,' or, on a higher level, lyrical verses. The aim of a lyrical
poem in which occur the words 'sunshine' and 'clouds,' is not
to inform us of certain meteorological facts, but to express
certain feelings of the poet and to excite similar feelings in
us. .   .                              —
         Metaphysical propositions like lyrical verses have
            .                                                 —
only an expressive function, but no representative function.
Metaphysical propositions are neither true nor false, because
they assert nothing.      . But they are, like laughing, lyrics
                              .   .



and music, expressive. They express not so much temporary
feelings as permanent emotional and volitional dispositions." 4
    Lord Russell holds a very similar view of other people's
metaphysics:
    "I do not deny," he says, "the importance or value, within
its own sphere, of the kind of philosophy which is inspired

by ethical notions. The ethical work of Spinoza, for instance,
appears to me of the very highest significance, but what is
valuable in such a work is not any metaphysical theory as to
the nature of the world to which it may give rise, nor indeed
anything that can be proved or disproved by argument. What
is valuable is the indication of some new way of feeling toward
life and the world, some way of feeling by which our own
existence can acquire more of the characteristics whicfe*we
must deeply deTire." 5
    And Wittgenstein:
    "Most propositions and questions, that have been written
about philosophical matters, are not false, but senseless. We
cannot, therefore, answer questions of this kind at all, but
only state their senselessness. Most questions and propositions
of the philosophers result from the fact that we do not under-
stand the logic of our language. (4.003)
    "A proposition presents the existence and non-existence
of atomic facts. (4.1)
    "The totality of true propositions is the total of natural
science (or the totality of the natural sciences). (4.11)
    "Everything that can be thought at all can be thought
clearly. Everything that can be said can be said clearly."
(4.116) 6
   4 Philosophy and Logical Syntax, p. 28.
   s "Scientific Method in Philosophy," in Mysticism and
                                                         Logic (1918).
P. 109.                               6 Op. cit.
80                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   In their criticism of metaphysical propositions, namely that
such propositions are usually pseudo-answers to pseudo-ques-
tions, these logicians have my full assent; problems of "First
Cause" and "Unity" and "Substance," and all the other time-
honored topics, are insoluble, because they arise from the fact
that we attribute to the world what really belongs to the
"logical projection" in which we conceive it, and by mis-
placing our questions we jeopardize our answers. This source
of bafflement has been uncovered by the philosophers of our
day, through their interest in the functions and nature of
symbolism. The discovery marks a great intellectual advance.
But it does not condemn philosophical inquiry as such; it
merely requires every philosophical problem to be recast, to be
conceived in a different form. Many issues that seemed to
concern the sources of knowledge, for instance, now appear
to turn partly or wholly on the forms of knowledge, or even
the forms of expression, of symbolism. The center of philo-
sophical interest has shifted once more, as it has shifted several
times in the past. That does not mean, however, that rational
people should now renounce metaphysics. The recognition of
the intimate relation between symbolism and experience, on
which our whole criticism of traditional problems is based, is
itself a metaphysical insight. For metaphysics is, like every
philosophical pursuit, a study of meanings. From it spring the
special sciences, which can develop their techniques and verify
their propositions one by one, as soon as their initial concepts
are clear enough to allow systematic handling, i.e. as soon as
the philosophical work behind them is at least tentatively ac-
complished. 7 Metaphysics is not itself a science with fixed pre-
suppositions, but progresses from problem to problem rather
than from premise to consequence. To suppose that we have
outgrown it is to suppose that all "the sciences" are finally
established, that human language is complete, or at least
soon to be completed, and additional facts are all we lack
of the greatest knowledge ever possible to man; and though
this knowledge may be small, it is all that we shall ever have.
   This is, essentially, the attitude of those logicians who have
investigated the limits of language. Nothing that is not "lan-
guage"  in the sense of their technical definition can possess
the character of symbolic expressiveness (though it may be
"expressive" in the symptomatic way). Consequently nothing
that cannot be "projected" in discursive form is accessible to
the human mind at all, and any attempt to understand any-
thing but demonstrable fact is bootless ambition. The know-
able is a clearly defined field, governed by the requirements

  7 I have presented a fuller discussion of philosophy as the "mother of

sciences" in The Practice of Philosophy (1930), ch. ii.
            DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                          81
of   discursive projectability. Outside this domain is the
inexpressible realm of feeling, of formless desires and satisfac-
tions, immediate experience, forever incognito and incommuni-
cando.    A philosopher who looks in that direction is, or should
be, a mystic; from the ineffable sphere nothing but nonsense
can be conveyed, since language, our only possible semantic,
will not clothe experiences that elude the discursive form.
   But intelligence is a slippery customer; if one door is closed
to it, it finds, or even breaks, another entrance to the world.
If one symbolism is inadequate, it seizes another; there is no
eternal decree over its means and methods. So I will go with
the logisticians and linguists as far as they like, but do not
promise to go no further. For there is an unexplored possibil-
ity of genuine semantic beyond the limits of discursive
language.
   This logical "beyond," which Wittgenstein calls the "un-
speakable," both Russell and Carnap regard as the sphere of
subjective experience, emotion, feeling, and wish, from which
only symptoms come to us in the form of metaphysical and
artistic fancies. The study of such products they relegate to
psychology, not semantics. And here is the point of my radical
divergence from them. Where Carnap speaks of "cries like
'Oh, Oh,' or, on a higher level, lyrical verses," I can see only
a complete failure to apprehend a fundamental distinction.
Why should we cry our feelings at such high levels that any-
one would think we were talking? 8 Clearly, poetry means
more than a cry; it has reason for being articulate; and meta-
physics is more than the croon with which we might cuddle
up to the world in a comfortable attitude. We are dealing
with symbolisms here, and what they express is often ^ftjghly-
intellectual. Oftly, the form and function of such symbolisms
are not those investigated by logicians, under the heading of
"language." The field of semantics is wider than that of lan-
guage, as certain philosophers      —
                                  Schopenhauer, Cassirer, Dela-
croix, Dewey, Whitehead, and some others            —
                                                have discovered;
but it is blocked for us by the two fundamental tenets of
current epistemology, which we have just discussed.
   These two basic assumptions go hand in hand: (1) That
language 9 is the only means of articulating thought, and (2)
That everything which is not speakable thought, is feeling.
They are linked together because all genuine thinking is
symbolic, and the limits of the expressive medium are, there-
fore, really the limits of our conceptual powers. Beyond these
we can have only blind feeling, which records nothing and
conveys nothing, but has to be discharged in action or self-
     8 Cf. Urban, Language and Reality, p. 164.
     s Including, of course, its refinements in mathematical   and scientific
symbolisms, and its approximations by gesture, hieroglyphics, or graphs.
82                              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
expression, in deeds or cries or other impulsive demonstrations.
   But if we consider how difficult it is to construct a meaning-
ful language that shall meet neo-positivistic standards, it is
quite incredible that people should ever say anything at all,
or understand each other's propositions. At best, human
thought is but a tiny, grammar-bound island, in the midst of
a sea of feeling expressed by "Oh-oh" and sheer babble. The
island has a periphery, perhaps, of mud             —
                                                factual and hypo-
thetical concepts broken down by the emotional tides into
the "material mode," a mixture of meaning and nonsense.
Most of us live the better part of our lives on this mud-
flat; but in artistic moods we take to the deep, where we
flounder about with symptomatic cries that sound like propo-
sitions about life and death, good and evil, substance, beauty,
and other non-existent topics.
   So long as we regard only scientific and "material" (semi-
scientific) thought as really cognitive of the world, this pecul-
iar picture of mental life must stand. And so long as we
admit only discursive symbolism as a bearer of ideas, "thought"
in this restricted sense must be regarded as our only intellec-
tual activity. It begins and ends with language; without the
elements, at least, of scientific grammar, conception must be
impossible.
        A
      theory which implies such peculiar consequences is itself
a suspicious character. But the error which it harbors is not
in its reasoning. It is in the very premise from which the
doctrine proceeds, namely that all articulate symbolism is dis-
cursive. As Lord Russell, with his usual precision and direct-
ness, has stated the case, "it is clear that anything that can be
said in an inflected language can be said in an uninfected
language; therefore, anything that can be said in language can
be said by means of a temporal series of uninfected words.
This places a limitation upon what can be expressed in words.
It may well be that there are facts which do not lend them-
selves to this very simple schema; if so, they cannot be ex-
pressed in language. Our confidence in language is due to the
fact that it       shares the structure of the physical world,
                    .   .   .



and therefore can express that structure. But if there be a
world which is not physical, or not in space-time, it may have
a structure which we can never hope to express or to know.
.   .Perhaps that is why we know so much physics and so little
         .



of anything else." 10
   Now, I do not believe that "there is a world which is not
physical, or not in space-time," but I do believe that in this
physical, space-time world of our experience there are things

        10 Philosophy, p. 265.
          DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                     83
which do not fit the grammatical scheme of expression. But
they are not necessarily blind, inconceivable, mystical affairs;
they are simply matters which require to be conceived through
some symbolistic schema other than discursive language. And
to demonstrate the possibility of such a non-discursive pattern
one needs only to review the logical requirements for any
symbolic structure whatever. Language is by no means our
only articulate product.
    Our merest sense-experience is a process of formulation.
The world that actually meets our senses is not a world of
"things," about which we are invited to discover facts as
soon as we have codified the necessary logical language to
do so; the world of pure sensation is so complex, so fluid and
full, that sheer sensitivity to stimuli would only encounter
what William James has called (in characteristic phrase) "a
blooming, buzzing confusion." Out of this bedlam our sense-
organs must select certain predominant forms, if they are to
make report of things and not of mere dissolving sensa.
                                                —
The eye and the ear must have their logic their "categories
of understanding," if you like the Kantian idiom, or their
"primary imagination," in Coleridge's version of the same
concept. 11 An object is not a datum, but a form construed by
the sensitive and intelligent organ, a form which is at once
an experienced individual thing and a symbol for the con-
cept of it, for this sort of thing.
  A    tendency to organize the sensory field into groups and
patterns of sense-data, to perceive forms rather than a flux of
light-impressions, seems to be inherent in our receptor appa-
ratus just as much as in the higher nervous centers with
which we do arithmetic and logic. But this unconscious >appre-~
ciation of forms is the primitive root of all abstraction, which
in turn is the keynote of rationality; so it appears that the
conditions for rationality lie deep in our pure animal experi-
      —
 ence in our power of perceiving, in the elementary functions
of our eyes and ears and fingers. Mental life begins with our
 mere physiological constitution.    Alittle reflection shows us
 that, since no experience occurs more than once, so-called
"repeated" experiences are really analogous occurrences, all
 fitting a form that was abstracted on the first occasion.
 Familiarity is nothing but the quality of fitting very neatly
 into the form of a previous experience. I believe our ingrained
 habit of hypostatizing impressions, of seeing things and not
 sense-data, rests on the fact that we promptly and uncon-
 sciously abstract a form from each sensory experience, and

  11 An excellent discussion of Coleridge's philosophy may be found in
D. G. James, Skepticism and Poetry (1937), a book well worth reading
in connection with this chapter.
84                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
use this form to conceive the experience as a whole, as a
"thing."
  No matter what heights the human mind may attain, it can
work only with the organs it has and the functions peculiar
to them. Eyes that did not see forms could never furnish it
with images; ears that did not hear articulated sounds could
never open it to words. Sense-data, in brief, would be useless
to a mind whose activity is "through and through a symbolic
process," were they not par excellence receptacles of meaning.
But meaning, as previous considerations have shown, accrues
essentially to forms. Unless the G^ra//-psychologists are right
in their belief that Gestaltung is of the very nature of percep-
tion, I do not know how the hiatus between perception and
conception, sense-organ and mind-organ, chaotic stimulus and
logical response, is ever to be closed and welded. A mind that
works primarily with meanings must have organs that supply
it primarily with forms.

   The nervous system is the organ of the mind; its center is
the brain, its extremities the sense-organs; and any charac-
teristic function it may possess must govern the work of all
its parts. In other words, the activity of our senses is "mental"

not only when it reaches the brain, but in its very inception,
whenever the alien world outside impinges on the furthest
and smallest receptor. All sensitivity bears the stamp of men-
tality. "Seeing," for instance, is not a passive process, by
which meaningless impressions are stored up for the use of
an organizing mind, which construes forms out of these
amorphous data to suit its own purposes. "Seeing" is itself a
process of formulation; our understanding of the visible world
begins in the eye. 12
   This psychological insight, which we owe to the school of
Wertheimer, Kohler, and Koffka, has far-reaching philosophi-
cal consequences, if we take it seriously; for it carries ration-
ality into processes that are usually deemed pre-rational, and
points to the existence of forms, i.e. of possible symbolic ma-

    !2 For a general account of the Gestalt-theory, see Wolfgang Kohler,
Gestalt Psychology (1929), from which the following relevant passage
is taken:
    "It is precisely the original organization and segregation of circum-
scribed wholes which make it possible for the sensory world to appear so
utterly imbued with meaning to the adult because, in its gradual entry
into the sensory field, meaning follows the lines drawn by natural organi-
zation. It usually enters into segregated wholes. .   .   .



    "Where 'form' exists originally, it acquires a meaning very easily. But
here a whole with its form is given first and then a meaning 'creeps into
it.' That meaning automatically produces a form where beforehand there
is none, has not been shown experimentally in a single case, as far as I
know" (p. 208).
    See also Max Wertheimer, Drei Abhandlungen zur Gestalttheorie
(1925), and Kurt Koffka. Principles of Gestalt Psychology (1935).
          DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                85
terial,at a level where symbolic activity has certainly never
been looked for by any epistemologist. The eye and the ear
make their own abstractions, and consequently dictate their
own peculiar forms of conception. But these forms are de-
rived from exactly the same world that furnished the totally
different forms known to physics. There is, in fact, no such
thing as the form of the "real" world; physics is one pattern
which may be found in it, and "appearance," or the pattern
of things with their qualities and characters, is another. One
construction may indeed preclude the other; but to maintain
that the consistency and universality of the one brands the
other as false is a mistake. The fact that physical analysis
does not rest in a final establishment of irreducible "qualities"
does not refute the belief that there are red, blue, and green
things, wet or oily or dry substances, fragrant flowers, and
shiny surfaces in the real world. These concepts of the
"material mode" are not approximations to "physical" notions
at all. Physical concepts owe their origin and development to
the application of mathematics to the world of "things," and
                   —                        —
mathematics never even in the beginning dealt with quali-
ties of objects. It measured their proportions, but never treated
its concepts —                               —
                 triangularity, circularity, etc. as qualities of
which so-and-so much could become an ingredient of certain
objects. Even though an elliptical race-track may approximate
a circle, it is not to be improved by the addition of more
circularity. On the other hand, wine which is not sweet
enough requires more sweetening, paint which is not bright
enough is given an ingredient of more white or more color.
The world of physics is essentially the real world construed by
mathematical abstractions, and the world of sense is t]?£ real-*
world constrtlfcd by the abstractions which the sense-organs
immediately furnish. To suppose that the "material mode" is
a primitive and groping attempt at physical conception is a
fatal error in epistemology, because it cuts off all interest in
the developments of which sensuous conception is capable,
and the intellectual uses to which it might be put.
   These intellectual uses lie in a field which usually harbors
a  slough  of despond for the philosopher, who ventures into
it because he is too honest to ignore it, though really he knows

no path around its pitfalls. It is the field of "intuition,"
"deeper meaning," "artistic truth," "insight," and so forth.
A   dangerous-looking sector, indeed, for the advance of a
rational spirit! To date, I think, every serious epistemology
that has regarded mental life as greater than discursive reason,
and has made concessions to "insight" or "intuition," has
just so far capitulated to unreason, to mysticism and irra-
tionalism. Every excursion beyond propositional thought has
86               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
dispensed with thought altogether, and postulated some in-
most soul of pure feeling in direct contact with a Reality
unsymbolized, unfocussed, and incommunicable (with the
notable exception of the theory set forth by L. A. Reid in
the last chapter of his Knowledge and Truth, which admits the
facts of non-propositional conception in a way that invites
rather than precludes logical analysis).
                                                    —
   The abstractions made by the ear and the eye the forms
of direct perception —   are our most primitive instruments of
intelligence. They are genuine symbolic materials, media
of understanding, by whose office we apprehend a world of
things, and of events that are the histories of things. To
furnish such conceptions is their prime mission. Our sense-
organs make their habitual, unconscious abstractions, in the
interest of this "reifying" function that underlies ordinary
recognition of objects, knowledge of signals, words, tunes,
places, and the possibility of classifying such things in the
outer world according to their kind. We recognize the ele-
ments of this sensuous analysis in all sorts of combination;
we can use them imaginatively, to conceive prospective
changes in familiar scenes.
   Visual forms —                                 —
                   lines, colors, proportions, etc.   are just as
capable of articulation, i.e. of complex combination, as words.
But the laws that govern this sort of articulation are altogether
different from the laws of syntax that govern language. The
most radical difference is that visual forms are not discursive.
They do not present their constituents successively, but simul-
taneously, so the relations determining a visual structure are
grasped in one act of vision. Their complexity, consequently,
is not limited, as the complexity of discourse is limited, by
what the mind can retain from the beginning of an apper-
ceptive act to the end of it. Of course such a restriction on
discourse sets bounds to the complexity of speakable ideas.
An idea that contains too many minute yet closely related
parts, too many relations within relations, cannot be "pro-
jected" into discursive form; it is too subtle for speech.     A
language-bound theory of mind, therefore, rules it out of the
domain of understanding and the sphere of knowledge.
   But the symbolism furnished by our purely sensory appre-
ciation of forms is a non-discursive symbolism, peculiarly well
suited to the expression of ideas that defy linguistic "projec-
tion." Its primary function, that of conceptualizing the flux
of sensations, and giving us concrete things in place of kalei-
doscopic colors or noises, is itself an office that no language-
born thought can replace. The understanding of space which
we owe to sight and touch could never be developed, in all its
detail and definiteness, by a discursive knowledge of geom-
         DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                87
etry.  Nature speaks to us, first of all, through our senses;
the forms and qualities we distinguish, remember, imagine,
or recognize are symbols of entities which exceed and outlive
our momentary experience. Moreover, the same symbols
                        —
qualities, lines, rhythms    may occur in innumerable presen-
tations; they are abstractable and combinatory. It is quite
natural, therefore, that philosophers who have recognized the
symbolical character of so-called "sense-data," especially in
their highly developed uses, in science and art, often speak of
a "language" of the senses, a "language" of musical tones, of
colors, and so forth.
   Yet this manner of speaking is very deceptive. Language
is a special mode of expression, and not every sort of seman-
tic can be brought under this rubric; by generalizing from
linguistic symbolism to symbolism as such, we are easily led
to misconceive all other types, and overlook their most in-
teresting features. Perhaps it were well to consider, here, the
salient characteristics of true language, or discourse.
    In the first place, every language has a vocabulary and a
syntax. Its elements are words with fixed meanings. Out of
of these one can construct, according to the rules of the syn-
tax, composite symbols with resultant new meanings.
    Secondly, in a language, some words are equivalent to
whole combinations of other words, so that most meanings
can be expressed in several different ways. This makes it
possible to define the meanings of the ultimate single words,
i.e., to construct a dictionary.

    Thirdly, there may be alternative words for the same mean-
ing. When two people systematically use different words for
almost everything, they are said to speak different langi*agesr    >




But the two languages are roughly equivalent; with a little
artifice, an occasional "substitution of a phrase for a single
word, etc., the propositions enunciated by one person, in his
system, may be translated into the conventional system of the
other.
   Now    consider the most familiar sort of non-discursive sym-
bol, a picture. Like language, it is composed of elements that
represent various respective constituents in the object; but
these elements are not units with independent meanings. The
areas of fight and shade that constitute a portrait, a photo-
graph for instance, have no significance by themselves. In
isolation we would consider them simply blotches. Yet they
are faithful representatives of visual elements composing the
visual object. However, they do not represent, item for item,
those elements which have names; there is not one blotch for
the nose, one for the mouth, etc.; their shapes, in quite in-
describable combinations, convey a total picture in which
88               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
nameable features may be pointed out. The gradations of light
and shade cannot be enumerated. They cannot be correlated,
one by one, with parts or characteristics by means of which we
might describe the person who posed for the portrait. The
"elements" that the camera represents are not the "elements"
that language represents. They are a thousand times more
numerous. For this reason the correspondence between a word-
picture and a visible object can never be as close as that be-
tween the object and its photograph. Given all at once to the
intelligent eye, an incredible wealth and detail of information
is conveyed by the portrait, where we do not have to stop to
construe verbal meanings. That is why we use a photograph
rather than a description on a passport or in the Rogues'
Gallery.
   Clearly, a symbolism with so many elements, such myriad
relationships, cannot be broken up into basic units. It is im-
possible to find the smallest independent symbol, and recog-
nize its identity when the same unit is met in other contexts.
Photography, therefore, has no vocabulary. The same is ob-
viously true of painting, drawing, etc. There is, of course,
a technique of picturing objects, but the law governing this
technique cannot properly be called a "syntax," since there
are no items that might be called, metaphorically, the "words"
of portraiture.
   Since we have no words, there can be no dictionary of
meanings for lines, shadings, or other elements of pictorial
technique. We may well pick out some line, say a certain
curve, in a picture, which serves to represent one nameable
item; but in another place the same curve would have an
entirely different meaning. It has no fixed meaning apart
from its context. Also, there is no complex of other elements
that is equivalent to it at all times, as "2+2" is equivalent to
"4." Non-discursive symbols cannot be defined in terms of
others, as discursive symbols can.
   If there can be no defining dictionary, of course we have
no translating dictionary, either. There are different media of
graphic representation, but their respective elements cannot
be brought into one-to-one correlation with each other, as in
languages: "chien" = "dog," "moi" = "me," etc. There is no
standard key for translating sculpture into painting, or draw-
ing into ink-wash, because their equivalence rests on their
common total reference, not on bit-for-bit equivalences of
parts such as underlie a literal translation.
   Furthermore, verbal symbolism, unlike the non-discursive
kinds, has primarily a general reference. Only convention can
assign a proper name  —  and then there is no way of prevent-
ing some other convention from assigning the same proper
           DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                       89
name to a different individual. We may name a child as oddly
as we will, yet we cannot guarantee that no one else will ever
bear that designation. A description may fit a scene ever so
closely, but it takes some known proper name to refer it
without possible doubt to one and only one place. Where the
names of persons and places are withheld, we can never
prove that a discourse refers     —
                                 not merely applies        —
                                                     to a cer-
tain historic occasion. In the non-discursive mode that speaks
directly      to sense, however, there is no intrinsic generality.
It is first    and foremost a direct presentation of an individual
object.    Apicture has to be schematized if it is to be capable
of various meanings. In itself it represents just one object
real or imaginary, but still a unique object. The definition of
a triangle fits triangles in general, but a drawing always pre-
sents a triangle of some specific kind and size.          We
                                                          have to
abstract from the conveyed meaning in order to conceive tri-
angularity in general. Without the help of words this gen-
eralization, if possible at all, is certainly incommunicable.
   It appears, then, that although the different media of non-
verbal representation are often referred to as distinct "lan-
guages," this is really a loose terminology. Language in the
strict sense is essentially discursive; it has permanent units of
meaning which are combinable into larger units; it has fixed
equivalences that make definition and translation possible;
its connotations are general, so that it requires non-verbal acts,
like pointing, looking, or emphatic voice-inflections, to assign
specific denotations to its terms. In all these salient charac-
ters it differs from wordless symbolism, which is non-discur-
sive and untranslatable, does not allow of definitions within
its own system, and cannot directly convey generalities^The

meanings given»through language are successively understood,
and gathered into a whole by the process called discourse;
the meanings of all other symbolic elements that compose a
larger, articulate symbol are understood only through the
meaning of the whole, through their relations within the total
structure. Their very functioning as symbols depends on the
fact that they are involved in a simultaneous, integral pre-
sentation. This kind of semantic may be called "presentational
symbolism," to characterize its essential distinction from
discursive symbolism, or "language" proper. 13
    The recognition of presentational symbolism as a normal
and prevalent vehicle of meaning widens our conception of

   is It is relevant here to note that "picture language," which uses
separate pictures in place of words, is a discursive symbolism, though
each "word" is a presentational symbol; and that all codes, e.g. the con-
ventional gestures of deaf-mutes or the drum communications of African
tribes, are discursive systems.
90                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
rationality far beyond the traditional boundaries, yet never
breaks faith with logic in the strictest sense. Wherever a
symbol operates, there is a meaning; and conversely, differ-
ent classes of experience       —
                             say, reason, intuition, appreciation
—  correspond to different types of symbolic mediation. No
symbol is exempt from the office of logical formulation, of
conceptualizing what it conveys; however simple its import,
or however great, this import is a meaning, and therefore
an element for understanding. Such reflection invites one
to tackle anew, and with entirely different expectations, the
whole problem of the limits of reason, the much-disputed life
of feeling, and the great controversial topics of fact and
truth, knowledge and wisdom, science and art. It brings within
the compass of reason much that has been traditionally rele-
gated to "emotion," or to that crepuscular depth of the mind
where "intuitions" are supposed to be born, without any mid-
wifery of symbols, without due process of thought, to fill the
gaps in the edifice of discursive, or "rational," judgment.
   The symbolic materials given to our senses, the Gestalten
or fundamental perceptual forms which invite us to construe
the pandemonium of sheer impression into a world of things
and occasions, belong to the "presentational" order. They
furnish the elementary abstractions in terms of which ordinary
sense-experience is understood. 14 This kind of understanding
is directly reflected in the pattern of physical reaction, im-

pulse and instinct. May not the order of perceptual forms,
then, be a possible principle for symbolization, and hence the
conception, expression, and apprehension, of impulsive, in-
stinctive, and sentient life? May not a non-discursive sym-
bolism of light and color, or of tone, be formulative of that
life? And is it not possible that the sort of "intuitive" knowl-
edge which Bergson extols above all rational knowledge be-
cause it is supposedly not mediated by any formulating (and
hence deforming) symbol 15 is itself perfectly rational, but
   14 Kant thought that the principles of such formulation were supplied
by a faculty of the mind, which he called Verstand; but his somewhat
dogmatic delimitation of the field of knowledge open to Verstand, and
the fact that he regarded the mind-engendered forms as constitutive of
experience rather than interpretative (as principles must be), prevented
logicians from taking serious note of such forms as possible machinery
of reason. They abode by the forms of Vernunft, which are, roughly
speaking, the forms of discourse. Kant himself exalted Vernunft as the
special gift and glory of man. When an epistemology of medium and
meaning began to crowd out the older epistemology of percept and con-
cept,   his   V erstandesformen, in their role of conceptual ingredients of
phenomena, were lumped with his metaphysical doctrines, and eclipsed
by "metalogical" interests.
   15 See Henri Bergson, La pensee et le mouvement (1934), esp. essays ii
("De la position des problemes") and iv ("L'intuition philosophique");
also his Essai sur les donnees immediates de la conscience (1889), and
Introduction to Metaphysics (1912).
         DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                                     91
                                                —
not to be conceived through language a product of that
presentational symbolism which the mind reads in a flash, and
preserves in a disposition or an attitude?
   This hypothesis, though unfamiliar and therefore somewhat
difficult, seems to me well worth exploring. For, quite apart
from all questions of the authenticity of intuitive, inherited, or
inspired knowledge, about which I do not wish to cavil, the
very idea of a non-rational source of any knowledge vitiates
the concept of mind as an organ of understanding. "The power
of reason is simply the power of the whole mind at its fullest
stretch and compass," said Professor Creighton, in an essay
that sought to stem the great wave of irrationalism and emo-
tionalism following the World War. 16 This assumption appears
to me to be a basic one in any study of mentality. Rationality
is the essence of mind, and symbolic transformation its ele-
mentary process. It is a fundamental error, therefore, to
recognize it only in the phenomenon of systematic, explicit
reasoning. That is a mature and precarious product.
   Rationality, however, is embodied in every mental act, not
only when the mind is "at its fullest stretch and compass." It
permeates the peripheral activities of the human nervous sys-
tem, just as truly as the cortical functions.
  "The facts of perception and memory maintain themselves
only in so far as they are mediated, and thus given significance
beyond their mere isolated existence.     What falls in any
                                            .   .   .



way within experience partakes of the rational form of the
mind. As mental content, any part of experience is something
more than a particular impression having only the attributes
of existence. As already baptized into the life of the mind,
it partakes of its logical nature and moves on the planewof

universality. ..T
  "No matter how strorfgly the unity and integrity of the
mind is asserted, this unity is nothing more than verbal if the
mind is not in principle the expression of reason. For it can
be shown that all attempts to render comprehensible the unity
of the mental life in terms of        an alogical principle               fail   to
attain their goal." 17
  The title of Professor Creighton's trenchant little article is
"Reason and Feeling."       Its   central thesis        is   that   if   there   is
something in our mental life besides "reason," by which he
means, of course, discursive thinking, then it cannot be an
alogical factor, but must be in essence cognitive, too; and
since the only alternative to this reason is feeling (the author
does not question that axiom of epistemology), feeling itself
  is J. E. Creighton, "Reason and Feeling," Philosophical Review,           XXX
(1921), 5: 465-481. See p. 469.
  17 Ibid., pp. 470-472.
92                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
must somehow participate      in   knowledge and understanding.
   All this may be granted. The position is well taken. But
the most crucial problem is barely broached: this problem is
epitomized in the word "somehow." Just how can feelings be
conceived as possible ingredients of rationality?            We
                                                       are not
told, but we are given a generous hint, which in the light of a
broader theory of symbolism points to explanation.
   "In the development of mind," he says, "feeling does not
remain a static element, constant in form and content at all
levels, but ... is transformed and disciplined through its
interplay with other aspects of experience.      .   . Indeed, the
                                                         .




character of the feeling in any experience may be taken as
an index of the mind's grasp of its object; at the lower levels
of experience, where the mind is only partially or superficially
involved, feeling appears as something isolated and opaque,
as the passive accompaniment of mere bodily sensations.           .
                                                                  .   .



In the higher experiences, the feelings assume an entirely
different character, just as do the sensations and the other
contents of mind." 18
   The significant observation voiced in this passage is that
feelings have definite forms, which become progressively artic-
ulated. Their development is effected through their "interplay
with the other aspects of experience"; but the nature of that
interplay is not specified. Yet it is here, I think, that cogency
for the whole thesis must be sought. What character of feeling
is "an index of the mind's grasp of its object," and by what
tokens is it so? If feeling has articulate forms, what are they
like? For what these are like determines by what symbolism
we might understand them. Everybody knows that language
is a very poor medium for expressing our emotional nature.

It merely names certain vaguely and crudely conceived states,
but fails miserably in any attempt to convey the ever-moving
patterns, the ambivalences and intricacies of inner experience,
the interplay of feelings with thoughts and impressions, mem-
ories and echoes of memories, transient fantasy, or its mere
runic traces, all turned into nameless, emotional stuff. If we
say that we understand someone else's feeling in a certain
matter, we mean that we understand why he should be sad or
happy, excited or indifferent, in a general way; that we can
see due cause for his attitude.    We do not mean that we have
insight into the actual flow and balance of his feelings, into
that "character" which "may be taken as an index of the mind's
grasp of its object." Language is quite inadequate to articulate
such a conception. Probably we would not impart our actual,
inmost feelings even if they could be spoken.        We
                                                      rarely speak
in detail of entirely personal things.
  is Ibid., pp.   478-479.
        DISCURSIVE AND PRESENTATIONAL FORMS                   93
  There is, however, a kind of symbolism peculiarly adapted
to the explication of "unspeakable" things, though it lacks
the cardinal virtue of language, which is denotation. The most
highly developed type of such purely connotational semantic
is music. We are not talking nonsense when we say that a
certain musical progression is significant, or that a given
phrase lacks meaning, or a player's rendering fails to convey
the import of a passage. Yet such statements make sense only
to people with a natural understanding of the medium, whom
we describe, therefore, as "musical." Musicality is often re-
garded as an essentially unintellectual, even a biologically
sportive trait. Perhaps that is why musicians, who know that it
is the prime source of their mental life and the medium of
their clearest insight into humanity, so often feel called upon
to despise the more obvious forms of understanding, that claim
practical virtues under the names of reason, logic, etc. But in
fact, musical understanding is not hampered by the possession
of an active intellect, nor even by that love of pure reason
which is known as rationalism or intellectualism; and vice
versa, common-sense and scientific acumen need not defend
themselves against any "emotionalism" that is supposed to be
inherent in a respect for music. Speech and music have essen-
tially different functions, despite their oft-remarked union in
song. Their original relationship lies much deeper than any
such union (of which more will be said in a subsequent chap-
ter), and can be seen only when their respective natures are
understood.
   The problem of meaning deepens at every turn. The longer
we delve into its difficulties, the more complex it appears. But
in a central philosophical concept, this is a sign of health.
Each question answered leads to another which previously
could not be even entertained: the logic of symbolism, the
possible types of representation, the fields proper to them, the
actual functions of symbols according to their nature, their
relationships to each other, and finally our main theme, their
integration in human mentality. '
   Of course it is not possible to study every known phenome-
non in the realm of symbolism. But neither is this necessary
even in an intimate study. The logical structures underlying
all semantic functions, which I have discussed in this chapter,
suggest a general principle of division. Signs are logically dis-
tinct from symbols; discursive and presentational patterns show
a formal difference. There are further natural divisions due to
various ways of using symbols, no less important than the
logical distinctions. Altogether, we may group meaning-situa-
tions around certain outstanding types, and make these several
types the subjects of individual studies. Language, ritual, myth,
94                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and music, representing four respective modes, may serve as
central topics for the study of actual symbolisms; and I trust
that further problems of significance in art, in science or
mathematics, in behavior or in fantasy and dream, may re-
ceive some light by analogy, and by that most powerful
human gift, the adaptation of ideas.




                          /      Language


Language is, without a doubt, the most momentous and at
the same time the most mysterious product of the human
mind. Between the clearest animal call of love or warning or
anger, and a man's least, trivial word, there lies a whole day
of Creation   —or in modern phrase, a whole chapter of evolu-
tion. In language we have the free, accomplished use of
symbolism, the record of articulate conceptual thinking; with-
out language there seems to be nothing like explicit thought
whatever. All races of men         —
                                 even the scattered, primitive
denizens of the deep jungle, and brutish cannibals who have
lived for centuries on world-removed islands         —
                                               have their com-
plete and articulate language. There seem to be no simple,
amorphous, or imperfect languages, such as one would nat-
urally expect to find in conjunction with the lowest cultures.
People who have not invented textiles, who live under roofs
of pleated branches, need no privacy and mind no filth and
roast their enemies for dinner, will yet converse over their
bestial feasts in a tongue as grammatical as Greek, and as
fluent as French! *

   i There are several statements in philological and psychological litera-
ture to the effect that certain primitive races have but a rudimentary
language, and depend on gesture to supplement their speech. All such
statements that I have found, however, can be traced back to one com-
mon source, namely Mary H. Kingsley's Travels in West Africa (1897).
This writer enjoyed so high a reputation in other fields than philology
that her casual and apparently erroneous observations of native lan-
guages have been accepted rather uncritically by men as learned as
Sir Richard Paget, Professor G. F. Stout, and Dr. Israel Latif. Yet Miss
Kingsley's testimony is very shaky. She tells us (p. 504) that "the in-
habitants of Fernando Po, the Bubis, are quite unable to converse
with each other unless they have sufficient light to see the accompanying
gestures of the conversation." But in an earlier part of the book she
writes, "I know nothing of it [the Bubi language] myself save that it
is harsh in sound," and refers the reader to the work of Dr. Baumann
for information about its words and structure; Baumann gives a vocabu-
lary and grammar that would certainly suffice a European to carry on any
ordinary conversation in the dark. (See O. Baumann, "Beitrage zur
Kentniss der Bubesprache auf Fernando Poo," Zeitschrift fur afrikanische
                                LANGUAGE                                  95
   Animals, on the other hand, are one and all without speech.
They communicate, of course; but not by any method that
can be likened to speaking. They express their emotions and
indicate their wishes and control one another's behavior by
suggestion. One ape will take another by the hand and drag
him into a game or to his bed; he will hold out his hand to
beg for food, and will sometimes receive it. But even the
highest apes give no indication of speech. Careful studies
have been made of the sounds they emit, but all systematic
observers agree that none of these are denotative, i.e. none
of them are rudimentary words. 2 Furness, for instance, says:
"If these animals have a language it is restricted to a very
few sounds of a general emotional signification. Articulate
speech they have none and communication with one another
is accomplished by vocal sounds to no greater extent than
                                                   3
it is by dogs, with a growl, a whine, or a bark."    Mr. and
Mrs. Yerkes, who are very reluctant to abandon the search
for pre-human speech-functions in simians, come to the con-
clusion that "although evidence of use of the voice and of
definite word-like sounds to symbolize feelings, and possibly
also ideas, becomes increasingly abundant from lemur to ape,
no one of the infra-human primates exhibits a systematization
of vocal symbols which may approximately be described as
speech." 4
  If the apes really used "definite word-like sounds to sym-

Sprachen, I, 1888, 138-155.) It seems plausible, therefore, that the Bubis
find such conversation personally or socially "impossible" for some other
reason. Her other example is no surer. "When I was with the Fans they
frequently said, 'We will go to the fire so we can see what they say,' when
any question had to be decided after dark   .
                                               ." (p. 504). It is strange that
                                                .

a language in which one can make, in the dark, so complex a statement
as: "We will go to«the fire so we can see what they say," should require
gesture to complete other propositions; moreover, where there is a ques-
tion to decide, it might be awkward for the most civilized congress to
take a majority vote without switching on the lights.
   1 am inclined, therefore, to credit the statement of Edward Sapir, that
"the gift of speech and a well-ordered language are characteristic of
every known group of human beings. No tribe has ever been found which
is without language and all statements to the contrary may be dismissed
as mere folklore." After repudiating specifically the stories just related,
he concludes: "The truth of the matter is that language is an essentially
perfect means of expression and communication among every known
people." (From article "Language," in Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, by permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers. Cf. Otto
Jespersen, Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin, 1922, p. 413.)
   2 In 1892 R. L. Garner published a book, The Speech of Monkeys,
which aroused considerable interest, for he claimed to have learned a
monkey vocabulary of about forty words. The book, however, is so
fanciful and unscientific, and its interpretations so extravagant, that I
think it must be discounted in toto, especially as more careful observa-
tions of later scientists belie its findings.
   3 W. H. Furness, "Observations on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and
Orang-Utans," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, LV
(1916), 281-290.
   *R. M. Yerkes and A. W. Yerkes, The Great Apes (1929), p. 569.
94                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and music, representing four respective modes, may serve as
central topics for the study of actual symbolisms; and I trust
that further problems of significance in art, in science or
mathematics, in behavior or in fantasy and dream, may re-
ceive some light by analogy, and by that most powerful
human gift, the adaptation of ideas.




                                 Language


Language is, without a doubt, the most momentous and at
the same time the most mysterious product of the human
mind. Between the clearest animal call of love or warning or
anger, and a man's least, trivial word, there lies a whole day
of Creation  — or in modern phrase, a whole chapter of evolu-
tion. In language we have the free, accomplished use of
symbolism, the record of articulate conceptual thinking; with-
out language there seems to be nothing like explicit thought
whatever. All races of men         —
                                 even the scattered, primitive
denizens of the deep jungle, and brutish cannibals who have
lived for centuries on world-removed islands         —
                                               have their com-
plete and articulate language. There seem to be no simple,
amorphous, or imperfect languages, such as one would nat-
urally expect to find in conjunction with the lowest cultures.
People who have not invented textiles, who live under roofs
of pleated branches, need no privacy and mind no filth and
roast their enemies for dinner, will yet converse over their
bestial feasts in a tongue as grammatical as Greek, and as
fluent as French! x

   i There are several statements in philological and psychological litera-

ture to the effect that certain primitive races have but a rudimentary
language, and depend on gesture to supplement their speech. All such
statements that I have found, however, can be traced back to one com-
mon source, namely Mary H. Kingsley's Travels in West Africa (1897).
This writer enjoyed so high a reputation in other fields than philology
that her casual and apparently erroneous observations of native lan-
guages have been accepted rather uncritically by men as learned as
Sir Richard Paget, Professor G. F. Stout, and Dr. Israel Latif. Yet Miss
Kingsley's testimony is very shaky. She tells us (p. 504) that "the in-
habitants of Fernando Po, the Bubis, are quite unable to converse
with each other unless they have sufficient light to see the accompanying
gestures of the conversation." But in an earlier part of the book she
writes, "I know nothing of it [the Bubi language] myself save that it
is harsh in sound," and refers the reader to the work of Dr. Baumann
for information about its words and structure; Baumann gives a vocabu-
lary and grammar that would certainly suffice a European to carry on any
ordinary conversation in the dark. (See O. Baumann, "Beitrage zur
Kentniss der Bubesprache auf Fernando Poo," Zeitschrift fiir afrikanische
                                LANGUAGE                                   95
   Animals, on the other hand, are one and all without speech.
They communicate, of course; but not by any method that
can be likened to speaking. They express their emotions and
indicate their wishes and control one another's behavior by
suggestion. One ape will take another by the hand and drag
him into a game or to his bed; he will hold out his hand to
beg for food, and will sometimes receive it. But even the
highest apes give no indication of speech. Careful studies
have been made of the sounds they emit, but all systematic
observers agree that none of these are denotative, i.e. none
of them are rudimentary words. 2 Furness, for instance, says:
"If these animals have a language it is restricted to a very
few sounds of a general emotional signification. Articulate
speech they have none and communication with one another
is accomplished by vocal sounds to no greater extent than
it is by dogs, with a growl, a whine, or a bark." 3 Mr. and

Mrs. Yerkes, who are very reluctant to abandon the search
for pre-human speech-functions in simians, come to the con-
clusion that "although evidence of use of the voice and of
definite word-like sounds to symbolize feelings, and possibly
also ideas, becomes increasingly abundant from lemur to ape,
no one of the infra-human primates exhibits a systematization
of vocal symbols which may approximately be described as
speech." 4
  If the apes really used "definite word-like sounds to sym-

Sprachen, I, 1888, 138-155.) It seems plausible, therefore, that the Bubis
find such conversation personally or socially "impossible" for some other
reason. Her other example is no surer. "When I was with the Fans they
frequently said, 'We will go to the fire so we can see what they say,' when
any question had to be decided after dark    .
                                               ." (p. 504). It is strange that
                                                 .


a language in which one can make, in the dark, so complex a statement
as: "We will go toathe fire so we can see what they say," should require
gesture to complete other propositions; moreover, where there is a ques-
tion to decide, it might be awkward for the most civilized congress to
take a majority vote without switching on the lights.
   1 am inclined, therefore, to credit the statement of Edward Sapir, that
"the gift of speech and a well-ordered language are characteristic of
every known group of human beings. No tribe has ever been found which
is without language and all statements to the contrary may be dismissed
as mere folklore." After repudiating specifically the stories just related,
he concludes: "The truth of the matter is that language is an essentially
perfect means of expression and communication among every known
people." (From article "Language," in Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, by permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers. Cf. Otto
Jespersen, Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin, 1922, p. 413.)
   2 In 1 892 R. L. Garner published a book, The Speech of Monkeys,
which aroused considerable interest, for he claimed to have learned a
monkey vocabulary of about forty words. The book, however, is so
fanciful and unscientific, and its interpretations so extravagant, that I
think it must be discounted in toto, especially as more careful observa-
tions of later scientists belie its findings.
   3 W. H. Furness, "Observations on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and
Orang-Utans," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, LV
(1916), 281-290.
   4R. M. Yerkes and A. W. Yerkes, The Great Apes (1929), p. 569.
98                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
or the motherly care of some large animal. In regions where
it was  (or is) customary to expose undesired infants, babes
in the wood are not a nine days' wonder. Of course they
usually die of neglect very soon, or are devoured; but on a
few known occasions the maternal instinct of a bear or a wolf
has held the foundling more sacred than did man's moral law,
and a child has grown up, at least to pre-adolescence, without
human influence.
     The only well-attested cases are Peter the Wild Boy, found
in the fields  near Hanover in 1723; 9 Victor, known as "the
Savage of Aveyron," captured in that district of Southern
France in 1799; 10 and two little girls, Amala and Kamala,
taken in the vicinity of Midnapur, India, in 1920. 11 Several
other "wild children" have been reported, but all accounts
of them require considerable sifting, and some             —
                                                    like Lukas
the Baboon Boy      —
                    prove to be spurious. Even of the ones
here mentioned, only Victor has been scientifically studied
and described. One thing, however, we know definitely about
all of them  none of these children could speak in any tongue,
             :



remembered or invented. A child without human companions
would, of course, find no response to his chattering; but if
speech were a genuine instinct, this should make little differ-
ence. Civilized children talk to the cat without knowing that
they are soliloquizing, and a dog that answers with a bark
is a good audience; moreover, Amala and Kamala had each

other. Yet they did not talk. Where, then, is "the language-
making instinct of very young children"?
   It probably does not exist at all. Language, though nor-
mally learned in infancy without any compulsion or formal
training, is none the less a product of sheer learning, an art
handed down from generation to generation, and where there
is no teacher there is no accomplishment. Despite the caprices
of the children cited by Professor Hale, it is fairly certain
that these little inventors would not have talked at all if they
had not heard their elders speaking. Whatever talent it is that
helps a baby to learn a language with three or four times (or
any number of times!) the ease of an adult, this talent is
apparently not a "speech instinct." We have no birthright to
vocabularies and syntaxes.
   This throws us back upon an old and mystifying problem.
If we find no prototype of speech in the highest animals, and


    9 See Henry Wilson, Wonderful Characters, 2 vols. (1821), vol. II; also
J. Burnett, Lord Monboddo, Of the Origin and Progress of Language, 6
vols. (1773), vol. I.
   io See E. M. Itard, The Savage of Aveyron (English translation 1802).
     nSee Arnold Gesell, "The Biography of a Wolf-Child," Harper's
Magazine, January 1941.
                                      LANGUAGE                                99
man will not say even the first word by instinct, then how
did all his tribes acquire their various languages? Who began
the art which now we all have to learn? And why is it not
restricted to the cultured races, but possessed by every primi-
tive family, from darkest Africa to the loneliness of the polar
ice? Even the simplest of practical arts, such as clothing,
cooking, or pottery, is found wanting in one human group or
another, or at least found to be very rudimentary. Language
is neither absent nor archaic in any of them.
   The problem is so baffling that it is no longer considered
respectable. There is a paragraph of Sapir's in the Encyclo-
pedia of Social Sciences, repudiating it on excellent grounds.
But in the very passage that warrants the despair of the philol-
ogists, he justifies the present philosophical study in its hope-
fulness, so I quote his words for their peculiar relevance:
    "Many attempts have been made to unravel the origin of
language but most of these are hardly more than exercises of
 the speculative imagination. Linguists as a whole have lost
 interest in the problem and this for two reasons. In the first
 place, it has come to be realized that there exist no truly
 primitive languages in a psychological sense. ... In the sec-
 ond place, our knowledge of psychology, particularly of the
 symbolic process in general, is not felt to be sound enough
 to help materially with the problem of the emergence of
 speech. It is probable that the origin of language is not a
 problem that can be solved out of the resources of linguistics
 alone but that it is essentially a particular case of a much
 wider problem of the genesis of symbolic behavior and of
 the specialization of such behavior in the laryngeal region
 which may be presumed to have had only an expressive func-
 tion to begin with.      .   .   .


    "The primary function of language is generally said to be
 communication.   .   .   The autistic speech of children seems
                              .



 to show that the purely communicative aspect of language has
 been exaggerated. It is best to admit that language is pri-
 marily a vocal actualization of the tendency to see reality
 symbolically, that it is precisely this quality which renders it
 a fit instrument for communication and that it is in the actual
 give and take of social intercourse that it has been compli-
 cated and refined into the form in which it is known today." 12
    If it is true that "the tendency to see reality symbolically"
 is the real keynote of language, then most researches into the

 roots of the speech-function have been misdirected. Com-
 munication by sound is what we have looked for among the

  12 From Sapir, article "Language,"         p.   159.   By   permission of   The
Macmillan Company, publishers.
100              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
apes; a pragmatic use of vocables is the only sign of word-
conception that we have interpreted to their credit, the only
thing we have tried to inspire in them, and in the "wild
 children," to pave their way toward language. What we should
look for is the first indication of symbolic behavior, which is
not likely to be anything as specialized, conscious, or rational
 as the use of semantic. Language is a very high form of sym-
bolism; presentational forms are much lower than discursive,
and the appreciation of meaning probably earlier than its ex-
pression. The earliest manifestation of any symbol-making
tendency, therefore, is likely to be a mere sense of significance
attached to certain objects, certain forms or sounds, a vague
emotional arrest of the mind by something that is neither
dangerous nor useful in reality. The beginnings of symbolic
transformation in the cortex must be elusive and disturbing
experiences, perhaps thrilling, but very useless, and hard on
the whole nervous system. It is absurd to suppose that the
earliest symbols could be invented; they are merely Gestalten
furnished to the senses of a creature ready to give them some
diffuse meaning. But even in such rudimentary new behavior
lies the first break with the world of pure signs. Aesthetic
attraction, mysterious fear, are probably the first manifesta-
tions of that mental function which in man becomes a pe-
culiar "tendency to see reality symbolically," and which issues
in the power of conception, and the life-long habit of speech.
   Something very much like an aesthetic sense of import is
occasionally displayed by the anthropoid apes. It is like a
                     —
dawn of superstition a forerunner of fetishes and demons,
perhaps. Especially in chimpanzees has this unrealistic atti-
tude been observed by the most careful investigators, such as
Yerkes, Kellogg, and Kohler. Gua, the little chimpanzee who
was given the benefits of a human nursery, showed some very
remarkable reactions to objects that certainly had no direct
associations with her past experiences. For instance, the ex-
perimenters report that she stood in mortal fear of toad-
stools. She would run from them, screaming, or if cornered,
hide her face as though to escape the sight of them. This be-
havior proved to be elicited by all kinds of toadstools, and to
be based on no warning smell that might betray their poi-
sonous properties (if, indeed, they are poisonous to apes.
Some animals, e.g. squirrels, seem to eat all kinds with im-
punity). Once the experimenters wrapped some toadstools
lightly in paper and handed her the package which, of course,
smelled of the fungi, and watched her reception of it.
   "She accepts it without the slightest show of diffidence, and
even starts to chew some of the paper. But when the package
is unwrapped before her, she backs away apprehensively and
                          LANGUAGE                            101
will thereafter have none of the paper or its contents. Ap-
parently she is stimulated only visually by toadstools." 13
    By way of comparison, toadstools were then offered to the
thirteen apes at the experimental station near by. Only four
of the subjects showed a similar fear, which they did not show
toward pinecones, sticks, etc. These four were two adult
females and two "children" three years old. Since the reaction
was not universal the observers concluded that it was merely
due to the chimpanzee's natural fear of the unknown. But
surely pinecones are just as strange as toadstools to a caged
chimpanzee. Moreover, they say (in the very same paragraph)
that "Gua herself avoids both plucked and growing toadstools
                                     —
2 l/i months after her original fright or as long as any speci-
mens can be found in the woods. It is quite likely that her
reactions would have remained essentially the same through-
out the entire period of the research." 14 Certainly the plants
cannot have frightened her by their novelty all summer long!
    The reaction on the part of the apes, limited as it was to
about one subject in every three or four, has just that charac-
ter of being common, yet individual, that belongs to aesthetic
experiences. Some are sensitive to the sight, and the rest are
not; to some of them it seems to convey something    —  to others
it is just a thing, a toadstool or what you will.

    Gua had other objects of unreasonable fear: a pair of
blue trousers, of which she was afraid the first time she saw
them and ever after; a pair of leather gloves; a flat and rusty
tin can which she herself had found during her play out-
doors. "It is difficult," say her observers, "to reconcile be-
havior of this sort with the ape's obvious preference for new
toys." 15                                                ••
   Yerkes and^Learned have recorded similar oddities of
simian behavior.
   "The causes of fear or apprehension in the chimpanzees
were various," they report, "and sometimes difficult to under-
stand. Thus Panzee stood in dread of a large burlap bag
filled with hay, which she was obliged to pass frequently.
She would meet the situation bravely, however, holding her
head high, stamping her feet, and raising her fur, as she
passed with an air of injured dignity." 16
   Remembering some of the strange inanimate objects in the
world of early childhood, one may wonder what sort of ex-
pression the burlap bag was showing to Panzee.
   The best account of what may be termed "aesthetic frights"
  is Kellogg, The Ape and the Child, p. 177.
  14 Ibid., p. 178.                  is Ibid., p. 179.
  16 R. M. Yerkes and B. Learned, Chimpanzee Intelligence   and   its
Vocal Expression (1925), p. 143.
102                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
is given by Wolfgang Kohler, who tells, in The Mentality of
Apes, how he showed his chimpanzees "some primitive stuffed
toys, on wooden frames, fastened to a stand, and padded
with straw sewn inside cloth covers, with black buttons for
eyes. They were about thirty-five centimeters in height, and
could in extremity be taken for oxen and asses, though most
drolly unnatural. It was totally impossible to get Sultan, who
at that time could be led by the hand outside, near these
small objects, which had so little real resemblance to any
kind of creature.        One day I entered their room with
                            .   .   .



one of these toys under my arm. Their reaction-times may
be very short; for in a moment a blacker cluster, consisting
of the whole group of chimpanzees, hung suspended to the
farthest corner of the wire roofing; each individual tried to
thrust the others aside and bury his head deep among
them." 17
   His comment on these events is simple and cogent.
   "It is too facile an explanation of these reactions to assume
that everything new and unknown appears terrible to these
creatures.   .   .   .   New things are not necessarily frightful to a
chimpanzee, any more than to a human child; certain inherent
qualities are requisite to produce this special effect. But, as
the examples cited above prove, any marked resemblance to
the living foes of their species does not seem at all essential,
and it almost seems as though the immediate impression of
something exceptionally frightful could be conveyed in an
even higher degree by constructing something frightful, than
by any living animal (with the possible exception of snakes).
For us human beings as well, many ghost-forms and specters,
with which no terrible experience can be individually con-
nected, are much more uncanny than certain very substantial
dangers which we may easily have encountered in daily
life." 18
   Not only fear, but also delight or comfort may be inspired
in these animals by objects that have no biological significance
for them; thus Gua, who was so attached to Mr. Kellogg that
she went into tantrums of terror and grief whenever he left
the house, could be comforted by being given his pair of
coveralls. "This she would drag around with her," the account
reads, "as a fetish of protection until his return.     Occa-.   .   .



sionally, if it was necessary for him to go away, the leave-
taking could be accomplished without emotional display on
the part of Gua if the coveralls were given her before the
time of departure." 19
   Here certainly is a case where the object is significant.
  17 Page 333.                  is Kohler, The Mentality of Apes, p. 334.
  is Kellogg, op. cit., p. 160.
                            LANGUAGE                        103
Superficially it reminds one of a dog's recognition of his
master's clothes. But whereas a dog is prompted to the action
of seeking the possessor of them, Gua let the possessor go out
and contented herself with the proxy. Therein lies the dif-
ference. Gua was using the coveralls even in his presence as
a fifelp to her imagination, which kept him near whether he
went out or not.
   Kohler describes how the chimpanzees will hoard perfectly
useless objects and carry them between the lower abdomen
and the upper thigh, a sort of natural trouser pocket, for
days on end. Thus Tschego, an adult female, treasured a
stone that the sea had rounded and polished. "On no pre-
text," he says, "could you get the stone away, and in the
evening the animal took it with it to its room and its nest." 20
   No one knows what made the stone so valuable to Tschego;
we cannot say that it was significant, as we can in the case of
Gua's keepsake. But certainly an object which is aesthetically
satisfying or horrifying is a good candidate for the office of
fetish or bogie, as the case may be. An ape that can transfer
the sense of her master's presence to a memento of him, and
that reacts with specific emotions to the sheer quality of a
perception, certainly is nervously organized above the level
of purely realistic conditioned response. It is not altogether
surprising, therefore, to find even more definite traces of
                                             —
symbolic behavior in the chimpanzee this time a real prep-
aration for the function of denotation, which is the essence
of language.
   This behavior is the performance of symbolic acts acts—
that really seem to epitomize the creature's apprehension of
a state of affairs, rather than to be just a symptom of emotion*.
The difference between a symbolic and a symptomatic act
may be illustrated by contrasting the intentional genuflexion
of a suppliant with the emotional quaver of his voice. There
is a convention about the former, but not about the latter.
And the conventional expression of a feeling, an attitude,
etc., is the first, the lowest form of denotation. In a conven-
tional attitude, something is summed up, understood, and
consciously conveyed. So it is deeply interesting that both
Kohler and Kellogg have observed in their apes quite un-
mistakable cases of symbolic (not signific) gesture. Kohler
reports that when a young chimpanzee would greet Tschego,
it would put its hand into her lap. "If the movement of the
arm will not go so far," he says, "Tschego, when in a good
mood   .   .  will take the hand of the other animal, press it
               .


to her lap, or else pat it amicably. . . . She will press our

  20 Kohler, The Mentality of Apes, p. 99.
104                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
hand   to just that spot    between her upper thigh and lower
abdomen where she keeps her precious objects. She herself,
as a greeting, will put her huge hand to the other animal's
lap or between their legs and she is inclined to extend this
greeting even to men." 21
   Here we certainly have the dawn of a conventional ex-
pression of good-will. But a still more clearly significant act
is described by the Kelloggs in their account of Gua: that is

the kiss of forgiveness. Kissing is a natural demonstration
on the part of chimpanzees, and has an emotional value for
them. In her human surroundings the little ape soon em-
ployed it in an unequivocally conscious way.
   She would kiss and offer her lips in recompense for small
errors many times a day.      .   .Thereafter she could be put
                                      .



down again and would play, but unless the ritual had been
satisfactorily completed she would not be quiet or turn away
until it had, or until some other climax superseded it." 22
   The upshot of all these considerations is that the tendency
to a symbolic transformation of experience, the primary
requisite for speech, is not entirely wanting in the ape, though
it is as rudimentary as the rest of his higher functions       —
                                                              his
perception of causal relations, for instance. If we take sym-
bolic representation, rather than communication, as the cri-
terion of a creature's capacity for language, we see that the
chimpanzee, at least, is in some measure prepared; he has a
rudimentary capacity for it. 23 Yet he definitely has no speech.
He makes no stumbling attempts at words, as he does at using
tools, decorating his body, dancing and parading, and other
primitive pursuits. He is conceptually not far from the su-
preme human achievement, yet never crosses the line. What
has placed this absolute barrier between his race and ours?
   Chiefly, I think, one difference of natural proclivities. The
ape has no instinctive desire to babble in babyhood. He does
not play with his mouth and his breath as human infants
do; there is no crowing and cooing, no "goo-goo" and "ba-ba"
and "do-de-da" in his otherwise uproarious nursery. Conse-
quently there are no sounds and syllables that please or
frighten him by their sheer aesthetic character, as he is
pleased, frightened, or comforted by purely phenomenal
sights. Oddly enough, it is just because all his utterances
                    —                                  —
have signification all are pragmatic or emotional that none
of them ever acquire significance. He does not even imitate

  21 hoc. cit., infra.               22 Kellogg, op. cit., p. 172.
                        of chimpanzee behavior, see Kohler, The Men-
  23 For a detailed study
tality of Apes, passim; for a general evaluation of the findings, the
appendix, pp. 281-342, "Some Contributions to the Psychology of
Chimpanzees."
                              LANGUAGE                    105
sounds for fun, as he imitates gestures, and gravely mimics
practices that have no utility for him.
   This mutism of the great apes has been little realized by
people who have not actually studied their habits; in fact,
our satirists have made much of the supposedly simian trait
of constant unsolicited chatter. "Heavens, what a genius for
tongues these simians have!" said Clarence Day in one of
his clever books. And assuming that we are descended from
such arboreal geniuses, he comments on our political prob-
lems: "The best government for simians seems to be based
on a parliament: a talk-room, where endless vague thoughts
can be warmly expressed. This is the natural child of those
primeval sessions that gave pleasure to apes." 24 And even
Kipling, who has lived in a land where monkeys and apes are
wild, did not observe that their chatter (when they do chat-
ter) is no more imitative than the "ch-ch-ch-chee" of an
angry squirrel; if he had, we might be the poorer by missing
that delightful parody on human loquacity, the council-scene
in "Cold Lairs."
   A genuine symbol can most readily originate where some
object, sound, or act is provided which has no practical mean-
ing, yet tends to elicit an emotional response, and thus hold
one's undivided attention. Certain objects and gestures ap-
pear to have this phenomenological, dissociated character for
some apes, as well as for man; sounds have it for man alone.
They annoy or please him even when they are not signs of
anything further; they have an inherently interesting charac-
ter. Add to this the fact that man spontaneously produces
random syllables in infancy, whereas the ape does not, and
it is  immediately apparent that verbal symbols are easily
available to tjje one and very remote and unnatural (o the
other. Man, though undoubtedly a simian, must trace his
descent from a vocalizing race      —
                                   a genus of ape, perhaps, in
which the rudiments of symbolic conception, that apparently
are dawning in the chimpanzee, were coupled with an in-
stinctive tendency to produce sounds, to play with the vocal
apparatus.
  Furness succeeded in teaching a young orang-utan two
words, which it certainly appeared to use intelligently. Un-
fortunately for science, as well as for the ape, it died five
months after this achievement, so we do not know how much
further it might have gone on the road to Parnassus. But the
experimenter had little confidence, despite his success. His
chief obstacle was not the subject's lack of understanding,
but of instinctive response, of any tendency to imitate his

  24 This Simian   World (1920), p. 69.
106                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
mouthings and articulations. Its lips had to be moved by
hand instead of by example. Once it learned the trick, it
soon had the words; but the trick was something it would
never in the world have thought of by itself. 25 For this reason,
if for no other, it is unlikely that the descendants of our great
apes, ten thousand years hence, will hold parliaments (the
prognosis is better for World Fairs). The apes will not evolve
verbal symbolism because they do not instinctively supply
themselves with verbal material, interesting little phonetic
items that can acquire conventional meanings because they
carry no natural messages.
   The notion that the essence of language is the formulation
and expression of conceptions rather than the communication
of natural wants (the essence of pantomime) opens a new

  25 Furness' own account of this training is worth repeating here. His
own estimate of his success seems to me too modest, considering the
difference in learning-time of the first word and the second. For he says:
"It seems wellnigh mcredible that in animals otherwise so close to us
physically there should not be a rudimentary speech-center in the brain
which only needed developing. I have made an earnest endeavor and am
still endeavoring, but I cannot say that I am encouraged.
    "In teaching articulate speech I found the first difficulty to be over-
come in both the orang and the chimpanzee is their lack of use of lips
or tongue in making their natural emotional cries.
   ". .  In the case of the orang-utan it took at least six months to teach
          .


her to say 'Papa.' This word was selected not only because it is a very
primitive sound, but also because it combined two elements of vocaliza-
tion to which orang-utans and chimpanzees are         .   .  unaccustomed,
                                                              .


namely: the use of lips and an expired vowel. ..." Presumably, this
latter fact precluded the occurrence of the "word" by accident, and the
danger of interpreting as a "word" some mere natural sound. The teacher
manipulated the ape's lips, and also made the motions and sounds for her
with his own mouth.
   "At the end of six months, one day of her own accord, out of lesson
time, she said 'Papa' quite distinctly and repeated it on command.      .  ..


She never forgot it after that and finally recognized it as my name. When
asked 'Where is Papa?' she would at once point to me or pat me on the
shoulder."
   Once, while being carried into the water, "she was panic-stricken^ she
clung with her arms about my neck; kissed me again and again and kept
saying 'Papa! Papa! Papa!' Of course, I went no further after that
pathetic appeal."
   Her next word was "cup." The greatest art was needed to teach her
the purely physical trick of pronouncing k with an open vowel, ka; but
once this was learned, "after a few lessons when I snowed her the cup
and asked 'What is this?' she would say 'cup' very plainly. Once when ill
at night she leaned out of her hammock and said 'cup, cup, cup,' which
I naturally understood to mean that she was thirsty and which proved to
be the case. I think this showed fairly conclusively that there was a
glimmering idea of the connection of the word with the object of her
desire." (Furness, "Observations on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and
Orang-Utans," pp. 281-284.)
   Once the idea of the spoken word was awakened in the ape, which
awakening took all of six months, the learning of a second word was
chiefly a matter of conquering the unnaturalness of the physical process.
Who knows how far this development might have gone if the subject had
lived?
                              LANGUAGE                               107
vista upon the mysterious problem of origins. For its begin-
nings are not natural adjustments, ways to means; they are
purposeless lalling-instincts, primitive aesthetic reactions, and
dreamlike associations of ideas that fasten on such material.
The preparations for language are much lower in the rational
scale than word-uses; they can be found below the evolution-
ary level of any communication by sounds.
   Moreover, this originally impractical, or better, conceptual,
use of speech is borne out by the fact that all attempts to
teach apes or the speechless "wild children" to talk, by the
method of making them ask for something, have failed;
whereas all cases where the use of language has dawned on
an individual, simian or human, under such difficult cir-
cumstances, have been independent of the practical use of
the word at the moment. Helen Keller's testimony has already
been cited (pp. 62-64); after all her teacher's efforts in formal
daily lessons to make the child use words like "cup" and
"doll" to obtain the denoted objects, the significance of the
word "water" suddenly burst upon her, not when she needed
water, but when the stream gushed over her hand! Likewise,
Yerkes' efforts to make Chim use an articulate syllable to ask
for a piece of banana all failed; he articulated no "word"
resembling the speech of man, nor did he seem to establish
a relation between the sound and any particular object. 26
Furness, on the other hand, carefully kept all practical in-
terests out of his experiment. He tried only to associate an
impression, a visual experience, with a word, so that by
constant association the two should fuse, not as sign and re-
sult, but as name and image; and he has had the greatest
success on record so far as I know. 27
   But the most decisive and, at the same time, pathetic*evi-
dence that the utilitarian view of language is a mistake, may
be found in the story of Victor, the Savage of Aveyron, writ-
ten by the young doctor who undertook to study and educate
him. Since the boy always took notice when anyone exclaimed
"Oh!" and even imitated the sound, Dr. Itard undertook to

   26 See Yerkes and Learned, op. cit., p. 56: "The experimenter suc-
ceeded in training him to speak for food as a dog may readily be taught
to do. This he did, however, not in imitation of the trainer but to secure
the food."
   27 See Furness, op. cit., p. 285: "As to a comprehension of the con-
nection of spoken words with objects and actions both the orang-utan and
the chimpanzee, I think, exceed any of our domestic animals; both of my
anthropoids have been able to understand what I said to them, more
intelligently than any professionally trained animals I have ever seen. In
their education the enticement of food has never been used as an incentive
to action, and praise and petting have been the only rewards. In other
words my object has been to endeavor to make them show signs of
thought rather than a perfunctory performance of tricks."
108               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
make him use the word "eau" as a sign when he wanted
water; but this attempt failed because he used every sign but
the vocal one, and water could not be indefinitely withheld
to force the issue. So a second attempt was made with the
word "lait," of which Itard gives the following account:
    "The fourth day of this, my second experiment, I suc-
ceeded to the utmost of my wishes; I heard Victor pronounce
distinctly, in a manner, it must be confessed, rather harsh,
the word lait, which he repeated almost incessantly; it was
the first time that an articulate sound had escaped his lips,
and of course I did not hear it without the most lively satis-
faction. I nevertheless made afterwards an observation, which
deduced very much from the advantage which it was reason-
able to expect from the first instance of success. It was not
till the moment, when, despairing of a happy result, I actually

poured the milk into the cup which he presented to me, the
word lait escaped him again, with evident demonstrations of
joy; and it was not till after I had poured it out a second
time, by way of reward, that he repeated the expression. It
is evident from hence, that the result of the experiment was

far from accomplishing my intentions; the word pronounced,
instead of being the sign of a want, it appeared, from the time
in which it was articulated, to be merely an exclamation of
joy. If this word had been uttered before the thing that he
desired had been granted, my object would have been nearly
accomplished: then the true sense of speech would have been
soon acquired by Victor; a point of communication would
have been established between him and me, and the most
rapid progress must necessarily have ensued. Instead of this
I had obtained only an expression of the pleasure which he
felt, insignificant as it related to himself, and useless to us
both. ... It was generally only during the enjoyment of the
thing, that the word lait was pronounced. Sometimes he hap-
pened to utter it before, and at other times a little after, but
always without having any view in the use of it. I do not
attach any more importance to his spontaneous repetition
of it, when he happens to wake during the course of the
night." 28
  Another word which Victor acquired quite spontaneously
was "Li," which Itard identifies as the name of a young girl,
Julie,who stayed at the house for several weeks, to Victor's
great delight; but this word he uttered to himself, all the
time, and "even during the night, at those moments when
there is reason to believe that he is in a profound sleep,"
so no importance was attached to it as a sign of reason.

  28 The Savage of Aveyron, pp.   93-96.
                              LANGUAGE                               109
   Unfortunately, the young doctor was such a faithful dis-
ciple of   Locke and Condillac that after his "failure" with the
word    "lait" he gave up the attempt to teach the Wild Boy
spoken    language, and tried to instruct him in the deaf-mutes'
alphabet instead. Victor picked up a few spoken words, sub-
sequently, by himself; but as he merely said them when he
contemplated their objects with joy or sorrow, not when
he lacked anything, no one paid much attention to these
"mere exclamations" or made response to them.
    Young children learn to speak, after the fashion of Victor,
by constantly using words to bring things into their minds,
not into their hands. They learn it fully whether their parents
consciously teach them by wrong methods or right or not at
all. Why did Victor not defy the doctor's utilitarian theories

and learn language by the babbling method?
    Because he was already about twelve years old, and the
lalling-impulse of early childhood was all but completely
outgrown. The tendency to constant vocalization seems to
be a passing phase of our instinctive life. If language is not
developed during this period, the individual is handicapped
—   like the apes—  by a lack of spontaneous phonetic material
to facilitate his speech experiments. The production of sounds
is conscious then, and is used economically instead of prod-
igally. Victor did not articulate to amuse himself; his first
word had to be stimulated. Wild Peter, we are told, never
babbled to himself, though he sang a great deal; Kamala,
the surviving little "wolf-girl" found at Midnapur, had learned
about forty words at the end of six years in human surround-
ings, and formed sentences of two or three words; but even
with this vocabulary, which would serve a three-ye^r-olcL
to carry on incessant conversations, Kamala never talked
unless she was spoken 1o. 29 The impulse to chatter had been
outgrown without being exploited for the acquisition of lan-
guage.
    In a social environment, the vocalizing and articulating
instinct of babyhood is fostered by response, and as the
sounds become symbols their use becomes a dominant habit.
Yet the passing of the instinctive phase is marked by the fact
that a great many phonemes which do not meet with response
are completely lost. 30 Undoubtedly that is why children, who

  29 The most trustworthy, because contemporary, accounts of the Mid-
napur children are probably the brief notes published in the American
Journal of Psychology by Kellogg and Squires. See P. C. Squires, " 'Wolf-
Children' of India," XXXVIII (1927), 31 3-3 15; W. N. Kellogg, "More
About the 'Wolf-Children' of India," XLII (1931), 508-509, and "A
Further Note on the 'Wolf-Children' of India,"    XLV     (1934), 149-150.
  30 Thus Israel Latif, speaking of the "lalling stage" of babyhood, says:
1   10              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
have not entirely lost the impulse to make random sounds
which their mother tongue does not require, can so easily
learn a foreign language and even master several at once,
like many English youngsters born in India, who learn not
only one vernacular, but speak with every native servant in
whatever happens to be his dialect. A British psychologist,
J. W. Tomb, has called attention to this phenomenon and
concluded from it that children have a linguistic intuition
which is lost later in life. 31
   But intuition is a slippery word, which has to cover, in
this case, understanding, reproduction, and use   i.e.     —
                                                       inde-
pendent, analogous application      —
                                   of words. It is hard to imag-
ine any "intuition" that would bestow so many powers. It
is better, perhaps, to say that there is an optimum period

of learning, and this is a stage of mental development in
which several impulses and interests happen to coincide: the
lalling instinct, the imitative impulse, a natural interest in
distinctive sounds, and a great sensitivity to "expressiveness"
of any sort. Where any one of these characteristics is absent
or is not synchronized with the others, the "linguistic intui-
tion" miscarries.
   The last requirement here mentioned is really the "higher
function" of the mind that shines forth so conspicuously in
human intercourse; yet it is the one that linguists and psy-
chologists either overlook entirely, or certainly do not credit
to early childhood. The peculiar impressionability of child-
hood is usually treated under the rubric of attention to exact
colors, sounds, etc.; but what is much more important, I
think, is the child's tendency to read a vague sort of meaning
into pure visual and auditory forms. Childhood is the great
period of synaesthesia; sounds and colors and temperatures,
forms and feelings, may have certain characters in common,
by which a vowel may "be" of a certain color, a tone may
"be" large or small, low or high, bright or dark, etc. There
is a strong tendency to form associations among sensa that
are not practically fixed in the world, even to confuse such
random impressions. Most of all, the over-active feelings
"Many more sounds are produced by the infant during this period than
are later used, at least in its own language.   ." (To this effect he
                       —
                                               .   .


cites many authorities    Stern, Lorimer, K. C. More, Stanley Hall,
Preyer, and Conradi.) "Now, out of this astonishingly rich and varied
                                                                 —
repertoire of sounds, those which are used by the child's elders are re-
inforced, and become habitual; the others cease to be uttered."    "The
Physiological Basis of Linguistic Development and the Ontogeny of
Meaning," Psychological Review, XLI (1934), 55-85, 153-176, 246-264.
See esp. p. 60.
  3i See his article "On the Intuitive Capacity of Children to Understand
Spoken Language," British Journal of Psychology, XVI (1925-26),
53-55.
                         LANGUAGE                          111
fastenupon such flotsam material. Fear lives in pure Ges-
talten,warning or friendliness emanates from objects that
have no faces and no voices, no heads or hands; for they all
                                             —
have "expression" for the child, though not as adults often
          —
suppose anthropomorphic form. One of my earliest recol-
lections is that chairs and tables always kept the same look,
in a way that people did not, and that I was awed by the
sameness of that appearance. They symbolized such-and-such
a mood; even as a little child I would not have judged that
they felt it (if any one had raised such a silly question).
                                     —
There was just such-and-such a look dignity, indifference, or
              —
ominousness about them. They continued to convey that
silent message no matter what you did to them.
   A mind to which the stern character of an armchair is
more immediately apparent than its use or its position in the
room, is over-sensitive to expressive forms. It grasps analo-
gies that a riper experience  would reject as absurd. It fuses
sensa that practical thinking must keep apart. Yet it is just
this crazy play of associations, this uncritical fusion of im-
pressions, that exercises the powers of symbolic transforma-
tion. To project feelings into outer objects is the first way
of symbolizing, and thus of conceiving those feelings. This
activity belongs to about the earliest period of childhood that
memory can recover. The conception of "self," which is
usually thought to mark the beginning of actual memory,
may possibly depend on this process of symbolically epito-
mizing our feelings.
  From this dawn of memory, where we needs must begin
any first-hand record, to adolescence, there is a constant de-
crease in such dreamlike experience, a growing shift^rom
subjective, symbolic, to practical associations." Sense-data now
keep to their categories,^ and signify further events. Percepts
become less weighted with irrelevant feeling and fantasy,
and are more readily ranged in an objective order. But if
in theory we count backward over the span which none of
us recollect, and which covers* the period of learning lan-
         —
guage is it likely that the mind was realistic in its earlier
phase? Is it not probable that association was even more
trivial, more ready, and that the senses fused more completely
in yielding impressions? No experience belongs to any class
as yet, in this primitive phase. Consider, now, that the vocal
play of the infant fills his world with audible actions, the
nearest and most completely absorbing stimuli, because they
are both inner and outer, autonomously produced yet un-
expected, inviting that repetition of accidental motions which
William James deemed the source of all voluntary acts; in-
triguing, endlessly variable noises mysteriously connected with
112              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the child himself! For a while, at least, his idle experiments
in vocalization probably fill his world.
   If, now, his audible acts wake echoes in his surroundings
that is to say, if his elders reply to them — there is a growth
of experience; for the baby appears to recognize, gradually,
that the sound which happens there and comes to him, is
the same as his lalling. This is a rudimentary abstraction;
by that sameness he becomes aware of the tone, the product
of his activity, which absorbs his interest. He repeats that
sound rather than another. His ear has made its first judg-
ment.  A   sound (such as "da-da," or "ma-ma," probably) has
been conceived, and his diffuse awareness of vocalizing gives
way to an apparently delightful awareness of a vocable.
   It is doubtful whether a child who never heard any articu-
late sounds but his own would ever become conscious of
different phonemes. Voice and uttered syllable and the feel-
ing of utterance would probably remain one experience to
him; the babbling period might come and go without his
recognizing any product of his own activity. If this guess
is correct, it is easy to understand why Victor and Wild Peter
did not invent language, and were nearly, if not entirely,
past the hope of acquiring it when they were socialized.
  A    new vocable is an outstanding Gestalt. It is a possession,
too,  because it may be had at will, and this itself makes it
very interesting. Itard tells us that when Victor pronounced
his first word he repeated it "almost incessantly"; as does
every baby who has learned a new syllable. Moreover, an
articulate sound is an entirely unattached item, a purely
phenomenal experience without externally fixed relations; it
lies wide open to imaginative and emotional uses, synaesthetic
identifications, chance associations. It is the readiest thing
in the world to become a symbol when a symbol is wanted.
The next sharp and emotional arrest of consciousness, the
next deeply interesting experience that coincides with hearing
or uttering the vocable, becomes fixed by association with
that one already distinct item; it may be the personality of
the mother, the concrete character of the bottle, or what not,
that becomes thus identified with the recognizable, producible
sound; whatever it is, the baby's mind has hold of it through
the word, and can invoke a conception of it by uttering the
word, which has thus become the name of the thing.
   For a considerable time, playing with conceptions seems
to be the main interest and aim in speaking. To name things
is a thrilling experience, a tremendous satisfaction. Helen
Keller bears witness to the sense of power it bestows. Word
and conception become fused in that early period wherein
both grow up together, so that even in later life they are
                              LANGUAGE                                    113
hard to separate. In a sense, language is conception, and
conception is the frame of perception; or, as Sapir has put
it, "Language is heuristic ... in that its forms predetermine

for us certain modes of observation and interpretation.                   .   .   .


While it may be looked upon as a symbolic system which
reports or refers or otherwise substitutes for direct experi-
ence, it does not as a matter of actual behavior stand apart
from or run parallel to direct experience but completely
interpenetrates with it. This is indicated by the widespread
feeling, particularly among primitive people, of that virtual
identity or close correspondence of word and thing which
leads to the magic of spells.      .Many lovers of nature, for
                                       .   .



instance, do not feel that they are truly in touch with it
until they have mastered the names of a great many flowers
and trees, as though the primary world of reality were a
verbal one and as though one could not get close to nature
unless one first mastered the terminology which somehow
magically expresses it." 32
    The fact is that our primary world of reality is a verbal
 one. Without words our imagination cannot retain distinct
objects and their relations, but out of sight is out of mind.
 Perhaps that is why Kohler's apes could use a stick to reach
 a banana outside the cage so long as the banana and the
 stick could be seen in one glance, but not if they had to
 turn their eyes away from the banana to see the stick. Ap-
 parently they could not look at the one and think of the
         A
 other. 33   child who had as much practical initiative as the
 apes, turning away from the coveted object, yet still murmur-
 ing "banana," would have seen the stick in its instrumental
 capacity at once.                                        ym
    The transformation of experience into concepts, not the
 elaboration of signals and symptoms, is the motive of lan-
 guage. Speech is through and through symbolic; and only
 sometimes signific. Any attempt to trace it back entirely to
 the need of communication, neglecting the formulative, ab-
 stractive experience at the roolt of it, must land us in the
 sort of enigma that the problem of linguistic origins has
 long presented. I have tried, instead, to trace it to the char-
 acteristic human activity, symbolic transformation and ab-
straction,     of which pre-human beginnings                 may perhaps be
                             Yet we have not found the
attributed to the highest apes.
commencement of language anywhere between their state
and ours. Even in man, who has all its prerequisites, it de-

  32 From Sapir, Article "Language,"           p.   157,   by permission of The
Macmillan Company, publishers.
  33 Kohler,   The Mentality of Apes, p. 37.
114                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
pends on education not only for its full development, but
for its very inception. How, then, did it ever arise? And
why do all men possess it?
   It could only have arisen in a race in which the lower
                                      —
forms of symbolistic thinking dream, ritual, superstitious
       —
fancy were already highly developed, i.e. where the process
of symbolization, though primitive, was very active. Com-
munal life in such a group would be characterized by vigor-
ous indulgence in purely expressive acts, in ritual gestures,
dances, etc., and probably by a strong tendency to fantastic
terrors and joys. The liberation from practical interests that
is already marked in the apes would make rapid progress in
a species with a definitely symbolistic turn of mind; conven-
tional meanings would gradually imbue every originally ran-
dom act, so that the group-life as a whole would have an
exciting, vaguely transcendental tinge, without any definable
or communicable body of ideas to cling to.                 A
                                                      wealth of
dance-forms and antics, poses and manoeuvres might flourish
in a society that was somewhat above the apes' in non-prac-
tical interests, and rested on a slightly higher development of
the symbolific brain-functions. There are quite articulated
play-forms, verging on dance-forms, in the natural repertoire
of the chimpanzees; 34 with but a little further elaboration,
these would become most obvious material for symbolic ex-
pression. It is not at all impossible that ritual, solemn and
significant, antedates the evolution of language.
   In a vocalizing animal, such actions would undoubtedly
                                                     —
be accompanied by purely fanciful sounds wavering tones,

  34 Even at the risk of letting Kohler's apes steal the show in this chap-
ter,I must quote his account of these plays. Tschego and Grande de-
veloped a game of spinning round and round like dervishes, which found
favor with all the others. "Any game of two together," says Kohler, "was
apt to turn into this 'spinning-top' play, which appeared to express a
climax of friendly and amicable joie de vivre. The resemblance to a
human dance became truly striking when the rotations were rapid, or
when Tschego, for instance, stretched her arms out horizontally as she
                                  —
spun round. Tschego and Chica whose favorite fashion during 1916
                  —
was this 'spinning' sometimes combined a forward movement with the
rotations, and so they revolved slowly round their own axes and along
the playground.
   "The whole group of chimpanzees sometimes combined in more
elaborate motion-patterns. For instance, two would wrestle and tumble
near a post; soon their movements would become more regular and tend
to describe a circle round the post as a center. One after another, the
rest of the group approach, join the two, and finally march in an orderly
fashion round and round the post. The character of their movements
changes; they no longer walk, they trot, and as a rule with special em-
phasis on one foot, while the other steps lightly; thus a rough approxi-
mate rhythm develops, and they tend to 'keep time' with one another.   ..  .


   "It seems to me extraordinary that there should arise quite spontane-
ously, among chimpanzees, anything that so strongly suggests the dancing
of some primitive tribes." (The Mentality of Apes, pp. 326-327.)
                                           LANGUAGE                                 115
strings of syllables, echoing shouts. Voice-play, which as an
instinct is lost after infancy, wouldbe perpetuated in a group
by the constant stimulation of response, as it is with us when
we learn to speak. It is easy enough to imagine that young
human beings would excite each other to shout, as two apes
excite one another to jump, rotate, and strike poses; and the
shouting would soon be formalized into song. Once the vocal
habits are utilized, as in speech or song, we know that they
do not become lost, but are fixed as a life-long activity. In
a social group, the infantile lalling-instinct would be con-
stantly reinforced, and instead of being outgrown, would
become conventionalized in social play-forms. "Never a no-
madic horde in the wilderness, but must already have had
its songs," says Wilhelm von Humboldt, "for man as a species
is  a singing creature.      ." 35 Song, the formalization of
                                       .   .



voice-play, probably preceded speech.
   Jespersen, who is certainly one of our great authorities on
language, suggests that speech and song may well have sprung
from the same source (as Herder and Rousseau, without
                            imagined long ago). "Word-tones
really scientific foundation,
were originally frequent, but meaningless," he observes; "aft-
erwards they were dropped in some languages, while in others
they were utilized for sense-distinguishing purposes." 36 Fur-
thermore, he points out that in passionate speech the voice
still   tends        to   fluctuate,       that     civilization   only reduces this
effect  by reducing passionate utterance, and that savages
still use a sing-song manner of speaking; and in fine, he de-

clares, "These facts and considerations all point to the con-
clusion that there was once a time when all speech was song,
or rather when these two actions were not yet differenti-
ated.    .    .
                  ." 37   *
  Yet it is hard to believe that song was ever an essential
form of communication. How, then, was language derived
from it? He does not tell us; but the difficulty of tracing an
instrument like language to a free exercise like song is mini-
mized in his sagacious reflection: "Although we now regard
the communication of thought as the main object of speak-
ing, there is no reason for thinking that this has always been
the case." 38
   Strangely enough, Professor Jespersen seems to be un-
acquainted with an essay by J. Donovan, "The Festal Origin
of Human Speech," which appeared in the form of two
articles in Mind as long ago as 189 1-92, 39 and which de-

     35 Die       sprachphilosophischen         Werke Wilhelm von Humboldts          (ed.
Steinthal,         1884), p. 289.
     zs Language, p. 418, n.                   37 Ibid., p. 420.     38 Ibid., p. 437.
     39 Vol.      XVI
                  (O. S.), pp.     498-506, and vol. XVII, pp. 325-339.
116                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
velops, quite fully and logically, the very idea he advances.
Probably the fact that it appeared in a philosophical journal
caused it to escape the notice of philologists. Its thesis, how-
ever, is so well corroborated by Jespersen's more recent and
perhaps more reliable findings, that I present it here as a
very suggestive and arresting hypothesis; the sort of idea that
throws light at least on the problem of human articulate-
ness, once we accept the Leitmotif of symbolic activity, rather
than intelligent signaling, as the key to language.
   Donovan's theory is, in brief, that sound is peculiarly well
adapted to become symbolic because our attention to it re-
quires no utilitarian motive. "The passivity of the ear allowed
auditory impressions to force themselves into consciousness
in season and out of season, when they were interesting to
the dominant desires of the animal and when they were not.
These impressions got further into consciousness, so to speak,
before desire could examine their right of entrance, than was
possible for impressions which could be annihilated by a
wink or a turn of the head." 40 Since noises have this intrinsic
and commanding interest, and the ear cannot be closed, they
were peculiarly well suited to become "free" items where
they had no biological value, and to be utilized by the im-
agination in sheer play. Especially in the "play-excitement"
following successful communal enterprise (one is reminded
of the apes' outburst of pure joie de vivre culminating in a
dervish-like spin), such noises as rhythmic beating and hand-
clapping were used to emphasize the play-mood and keep
it steady—  for this primeval man was probably, like the ape,
incredibly distractible. The voice could be used, like the
drum, to attract attention and accentuate rhythm; and thus
the force of a change of pitch to make some notes stand out
 (one in four, etc.) was naturally discovered. Being more
variable than the drum, voices soon made patterns, and the
long wandering melodies of primitive song became an in-
tegral part of communal celebration.
   First the actions of the "dance" would tend to become
pantomimic, reminiscent of what had caused the great ex-
citement. They would become ritualized, and hold the mind
to the celebrated event. In other words, there would be con-
ventional modes of dancing appropriate to certain occasions,
so intimately associated with that kind of occasion that they
would presently uphold and embody the concept of it in           —
other words, there would emerge symbolic gestures.
  The   voice,  used to accompany such ritual acts, would
elaborate its own conventions; and in a babbling species, cer-

  40 Donovan,   "The Festal Origin of Human Speech," part I, p. 499.
                                  LANGUAGE                                117
tain syllables  would find favor above others and would give
color to festal plays.
   Now, the centering of certain festivities round particular
individuals, human or other            —
                                 death-dances round a corpse,
triumph-dances round a captive female, a bear, a treasure,
            —
or a chief would presently cause the articulate noises pecul-
iar to such situations to become associated with that central
figure, so that the sight of it would stimulate people to utter
those syllables, or more likely rhythmic groups of syllables,
even outside the total festive situation. "And every moment
during which such objects, connected as they are with the
natural appetites of the animal, could be dominated by the
emotional strength of festal play, and kept, however dimly,
in consciousness, without firing the train of passions natural
to them (e.g. to food, females), would mean the melting
away of a link in the chain which held the animals below
the possibility of human development." 41
   "In the early history of articulate sounds they could make
no meaning themselves, but they preserved and got intimately
associated with the peculiar feelings and perceptions that
came most prominently into the minds of the festal players
during their excitement. Articulate sounds           could only
                                                           .   .   .


wait while they entered into the order imposed on them by
the players' wild imitations of actions, and then preserve them
in that order. 42
   "Without the vestige of a conscious intention behind it,
this impulse (the play) induced the players to dwell on some
sort of an image of an individual in relation to the actions
imitated, whilst rhythmic and articulate utterances were ab-
sorbing ear and mind, and, at the same time, getting, jixed-s
upon the penteptions which they were associated with re-
peatedly." Thus a rhythmic group of syllables conventionally

  41 Ibid., part II, p. 330.    The importance here given to the festal as
opposed to the impulsive       spirit in   the origination of speech stands in
striking contrast to the opinion expressed by Markey, who also recognizes
the probability of an emotional, perhaps ritual, source; in The Symbolic
Process Markey writes: "Symbols must have developed only after long
association had conditioned instinctive cries or sounds to specific be-
havior in which two or more individuals were involved. In order that the
mnesic traces become sufficiently vivid and consistent to result in the
necessary integration, a highly emotional state was probably neces-
sary. While the festive group occasion of song and dance may have
served as a background, it is probable that definite sex behaviour fur-
nished the relatively similar, recurrent, and specific activity necessary for
the conditioning process associated with a highly emotional facilitating
state. Specific sounds being associated with this type of behaviour, would
furnish a similar stimulus which could be produced and interchanged by
each person" (p. 159). But specific sex behavior is just the sort of overt
expression that obviates the need of imaginative consciousness and its
symbolic expression.
  42 Donovan, op. cit., part II, p. 332.
 118                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY

                                                     —
 associated with the object or central figure of a certain type
of celebration   —say, with a certain warrior    "would become
 its vocal mark, and be uttered when any objects of nature
 gave impressions which could, however faintly, touch the
 springs of the latent mass of sensations belonging to the festal
imagining of the destroying warrior." 43
    This passage is interesting for two reasons: (1) because it
 assumes that the original use of language lies in naming,
fixating, conceiving objects, so that the communicative use
of words is only a secondary one, a practical application of
something that has already been developed at a deeper psy-
chological level; and (2) because it suggests the very early,
very primitive operation of metaphor in the evolution of
speech. The nature of metaphor is another topic which can-
not be properly understood without a symbolistic rather than
a signalistic view of language; but to this matter we will
presently return.
    "When particular syllables got fixed upon particular ac-
tions," Donovan continues, "they would be brought up with
them, and here two chief interests of the festal excitement
would begin to clash, the interest of significance, and that
belonging to the impulse to make the vocal apparatus pro-
duce the easiest possible enticements to the ear. ... In the
familiar observation of travellers about 'the unmeaning inter-
jections scattered here and there to assist the metre' of savage
songs, as well as in the most polished alliterations, assonances,
rhymes, refrains and burthens, there can be no doubt that
we behold the demands for aural absorption trying to make
their way among syllables which have been fixed by sig-
nificance." 44
    Recent anthropological literature has certainly borne out
the observations of the travellers he cites; we need only turn
to Boas' statement, quoted by Jespersen, 45 that Indian song
may be carried on purely rhythmic nonsense syllables, or
"consist largely of such syllables, with a few interspersed
words suggesting certain ideas and feelings; or it may rise
to the expression of emotions connected with warlike deeds,
with religious feeling, love, or even to the praises of the
beauties of nature." 46
    The first symbolic value of words is probably purely con-
notative, like that of ritual; a certain string of syllables, just

  Mlbid., part   II,   pp. 334-335.
  44 Ibid., part II, p. 337.
  45 Jespersen, Language, p. 437.
  46 The purely phonetic origin of song texts survives in   our "hey-nonny-
nonny" and   "tralala"; Donovan remarks that such nonsense syllables
have been relegated entirely to the choruses of our songs, and are no
longer mixed with genuinely verbal elements; but in purely festal songs,
                             LANGUAGE                              119
like a rite, embodies a concept, as "hallelujah" embodies much
of the concept expressed in the Easter service. But "halle-
lujah" is not the name of any thing, act, or property; it is
neither noun, verb, adjective, nor any other syntactical part
of speech. So long as articulate sound serves only in the ca-
pacity of "hallelujah" or "alack-a-day," it cannot fairly be
called language; for although it has connotation, it has no
denotation. But denotation is the essence of language, be-
cause it frees the symbol from its original instinctive utter-
ance and marks its deliberate use, outside of the total situation
that gave it birth.   A denotative word is related at once to
a conception, which may be ever so vague, and to a thing
(or event, quality, person, etc.) which is realistic and public;
so it weans the conception away from the purely momentary
and personal experience and fastens it on a permanent ele-
ment which may enter into all sorts of situations. Thus the
definiteness of sticks and stones, persons and acts and places,
creeps into the recollection and the anticipation of experi-
ence, as its symbols, with their whole load of imagery and
feeling, gradually become anchored to real objects.
   The utterance of conception-laden sounds, at the sight of
things that exemplify one or another of the conceptions which
those sounds carry, is first a purely expressive reaction; only
long habit can fix an association so securely that the word
and the object are felt to belong together, so that the one is
always a reminder of the other. But when this point is reached,
the humanoid creature will undoubtedly utter the sound in
sport, and thus move the object into nearer and clearer
prominence in his mind, until he may be said to grasp a
conception of it by means of the sound; and now the'gbuncT
               "*
is a word.
   In a sociable speciesthis game would presumably become
a joint affair almost at once. The word uttered by one pre-
Adamite would evoke a fuzzy, individual conception in an-
other; but if the word, besides, stimulating that conception,
were tied up to the same object for the hearer as it was for
the speaker, the word would have a common meaning for

such as drinking and cheering songs, we still find such conglomerations
of words and babble as:

             "With a veevo, with a vivo,
              With a veevo-vivo-vum,
              Vum get a rat-trap bigger than a cat-trap,
              Vum get a cat-trap bigger than a rat-trap,
              Cannibal, cannibal, sizz-boom-bah,
              (College, college), rah rah rah!"

Nothing in the savages' repertoire could answer better to Boas' descrip-
tion, "nonsense syllables with a few interspersed words."
120               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
them both. The hearer, thinking his own thought of the
object,would be moved thereby to say the word, too. The
two creatures would look at one another with a light of
understanding dawning under their great brow-ridges, and
would say some more words, and grin at some more objects.
Perhaps they would join hands and chant words together.
Undoubtedly such a wonderful "fashion" would become im-
mensely popular.
   Thus in a genuinely pre-human manner, and not by social
contract or practical forethought, articulate sounds with a
festal expressive value may have become representative. Of
course this is pure speculation; but all theory is merely specula-
tion in the light of significant facts. Linguists have avowedly
given it up, in this case, for lack of such facts; a general
study of symbolism may supply them, and yield at least a
plausible theory in place of the very unsatisfactory current
conviction that language simply cannot have begun in any
thinkable way.
   But another mystery remains. Given the word, and the
thought of a thing through the word, how did language rise
from a sheer atomic conglomeration of symbols to the state
of a complex relational structure, a logical edifice, such as
it is among all tribes and nations on earth? For language is

much more than a set of symbols. It is essentially an organic,
functioning system, of which the primary elements as well as
the constructed products are symbols. Its forms do not stand
alone, like so many monoliths each marking its one isolated
grave; but instead, they tend to integrate, to make complex
patterns, and thus to point out equally complex relationships
in the world, the realm of their meanings.
   This tendency is comprehensible enough if we consider
the preeminence which a named element holds in the kaleido-
scopic flow of sheer sense and feeling. For as soon as an
object is denoted, it can be held, so that anything else that
is experienced at the same time, instead of crowding it out,
exists with it, in contrast or in unison or in some other
definite way. If the ape who wants a banana beyond his cage
could only keep "banana, banana," in his head while he
looks behind him at the convenient bamboo, he could use
the rod to fetch his lunch. But without language, relations
are either taken for granted in action     —   as by a dog, for
instance, who looks hopefully inside the garbage pail, or
takes shelter from punishment under the sofa      —   or they can-
not be experienced at all. The ape simply     knew  nothing  about
the relation of stick and fruit when       their co-presence   was
not visible.
   This phenomenon of holding on to the object by means
of its symbol is so elementary that language has grown up on
                                       LANGUAGE                            121

it.    A
       word fixes something in experience, and makes it the
nucleus of memory, an available conception. Other impres-
sions group themselves round the denoted thing and are
associatively recalled when it is named.                 A
                                                  whole occasion
may be retained in thought by the name of an object or a
person that was its center. The one word "river" may bring
back the excitement of a dangerous crossing, a flood, a
rescue, or the thought of building a house at the water's edge.
The name of a person, we all know, brings to mind any
number of events in which he figured. That is to say, a
mnemonic word establishes a context in which it occurs to
us; and in a state of innocence we use it in the expectation
that it will be understood with its context. A baby who says
"cookie" means, and trusts his nurse to know, that he sees,
or wants, or has a cookie; if he says "out" he may mean that
he is going out, that someone has gone out, that the dog
wants to go out, etc., and he confidently expects his utter-
ance to be understood with its tacit context.
    Carl Biihler has called this elementary stage the "empractic"
use of language. 47 The context is the situation of the speaker
in a setting visible to the hearer; at the point where their
thinking is to converge, a word is used, to fix the crucial
concept. The word is built into the speaker's action or situa-
tion, in a diacritical capacity, settling a doubt, deciding a
response. 48
    The distinction between the novel predication in a state-
ment and the merely qualifying situation, given by visible
and demonstrable circumstance (Biihler calls it das Zeigfeld),
or verbally by exposition (das Symbolfeld), was recognized
fifty years ago by Philip Wegener; in a little book called
 I)'ntersuchungm     iiber die   Grundfragen des Sprachlebens
Wegener expounded the growth of explicit statement from
such a matrix, such communication by mere key words,
eked out by pointing and by their setting in an obvious state
of affairs. He recognized two general principles of linguistic
development: emendation, which begets syntactical forms of
speech, and metaphor, the source of generality. The first
principle serves to solve the problem of structure, so I will
briefly set        it     forth.
      Since a word, in the elementary social use which babies

      47 See Biihler, Sprachtheorie, chap, iii, passim.
      48 "Where a diacritical verbal sign is built into the action, it frequently
needs no surrounding framework or other verbal indicators. For in place
of such substitute it is surrounded by that for which they are proxy, and
is supported by it. That the patron of a restaurant intends to consume
something ... is thoroughly understood by his partner (the waiter). The
customer uses a verbal sign       only at the moot point in his otherwise
                                   .   .   .


tacit,            behavior, as a diacritical sign. He inserts it, and the
           intelligible
ambiguity is removed; that is the empractic use of language." Ibid., p. 158.
122                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and foreigners make of it, and which probably represents a
primitive stage of its communicative function, is meant to
convey a concept not of a mere object, but also of the part
played by that object in a situation which is supposed to be
"understood," such a single word is really, in meaning, a
one-word sentence. But it requires a certain amount of good
will and like-mindedness to understand the speaker of a one-
word sentence.       Wealways assume that our own attitude
toward things is shared by our fellows, and needs only the
"empractic" use of a vocable to designate our particular
thought in that setting, until we find ourselves misunder-
stood. Then we supplement the lone verb or noun with
                     —
demonstratives little words like "da!" "his!" From such
syllables, added as supplements to the one-word sentence,
arise inflections, which indicate more specifically what the
word-sentence asserts about the expressed concept. Wegener
has traced interesting parallels between inflections and demon-
stratives. More and more vocables are need to modify the
original expression, and to accompany and emphasize gestures
and attitudes; so the grammatical structure evolves by emen-
dation of an ambiguous expression, and naturally follows quite
closely the relational pattern of the situation that evokes it
In this way, the context of the primitive word-sentence is
more and more adequately expressed in verbal terms. At first
modifiers and identifiers follow the crucial word that expressed
the required predication in too great haste. "Appositives and
relative clauses are subsequent corrections of our deficient
presentations." 49 Hence the cognate nature of relative and
interrogative, or relative and demonstrative pronouns. All
these auxiliary utterances Wegener calls the "exposition" of
the original word, which contains the real "novelty" to be
asserted. This exposition finally becomes the verbal context in
which the assertion is made. When the speaker is fully aware
of the context and the need of stating it, his speech is full-
fledged. As Wegener puts it, "Only the development of speech
as an art and a science finally impresses on us the duty of
rendering the exposition before the novel predication." 50
   Since language is grafted on a vocalizing tendency in im-
mature humans and is kept up only by becoming habit,
linguistic forms very easily become fixed, because they are
habitual responses. The trick of accompanying all communica-
tion with words quickly becomes an ingrained custom; so
that words without important meanings creep in simply to
fill gaps in the vocal pattern, and utterances become sentences

of certain standard forms. At the highest development of
  4 » Wegener,   Untersuchungen, p. 34.
  so Ibid., p. 40.
                            LANGUAGE                          123
these language-making functions, the resultant systems are
immensely inflected. Then separate items, or "roots," become
conventionally attached to very bare items of conception,
abstractable from the articulated whole; and the logic of lan-
guage, which appears to us in our awareness of syntax,
emerges as an amazing intellectual structure.
   The significant feature of Wegener's theory is that it
derives grammatical structure from the undifferentiated con-
tent of the one-word sentence, and the literal, fixed denota-
tion of separate words from the total assertion by gradual
crystallization, instead of trying to build the complexities
of discursive speech out of supposed primitive "words" with
distinctly substantive or distinctly relational connotations. No
savage society of unintellectual hunters and squaws could
ever build a language; they could only produce it by some
such unconscious process as endless misunderstanding, modi-
fication, reduplication for emphasis (as we reduplicate baby
       —
words "goody-goody," "naughty-naughty," "bye-bye," etc.)
and "filling in" by force of a formal feeling based on habits.
   The structure of language may, indeed, have grown up by
gradual emendation, but not so its other essential value,
generality. Even a contextual language is still primarily spe-
cific as long as the verbal exposition merely replaces the
situation of an "empractically" used word, and the word is a
name. Here we encounter the second, and I think more vital,
principle of language (and perhaps of all symbolism) Meta-:


phor.
   Here again Wegener's study shows us a natural process,
born of practical exigencies, effecting what ultimately proves
                                                                 *'
to be an incomparable achievement. But to follow his reason-
ing it is necessary to go back to his conception of the nature
of communication.
   All discourse involves two elements, which may be called,
respectively, the context (verbal or practical) and the novelty.
The novelty is what the speaker is trying to point out or to
express. For this purpose he will use any word that serves
him. The word may be apt, or it may be ambiguous, or even
new; the context, seen or stated, modifies it and determines
just   what   it   means.
  Where a precise word is lacking to designate the novelty
which the speaker would point out, he resorts to the powers
of logical analogy, and uses a word denoting something else
that is a presentational symbol for the thing he means; the
context makes it clear that he cannot mean the thing literally
denoted, and must mean something else symbolically. For
instance, he might say of a fire: "It flares up," and be clearly
understood to refer to the action of the fire. But if he says:
124              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
"The king's anger flares up," we know from the context that
"flaring  up" cannot refer to the sudden appearance of a
physical flame; it must connote the idea of "flaring up" as
a symbol for what the king's anger is doing. We conceive
the literal meaning of the term that is usually used in con-
nection with a fire, but this concept serves us here as proxy
for another which is nameless. The expression "to flare up"
has acquired a wider meaning than its original use, to de-
scribe the behavior of a flame; it can be used metaphorically
to describe whatever its meaning can symbolize. Whether it
is to be taken in a literal or a metaphorical sense has to be
determined by the context.
   In a genuine metaphor, an image of the literal meaning is
our symbol for the figurative meaning, the thing that has
no name of its own.    H   we say that a brook is laughing in
the sunlight, an idea of laughter intervenes to symbolize the
spontaneous, vivid activity of the brook. But if a metaphor
is used very often, we learn to accept the word in its meta-

phorical context as though it had a literal meaning there. If
we say: "The brook runs swiftly," the word "runs" does not
connote any leg-action, but a shallow rippling flow. If we say
that a rumor runs through the town, we think neither of leg-
action nor of ripples; or if a fence is said to run round the
barnyard there is not even a connotation of changing place.
Originally these were probably all metaphors but one (though
it is hard to say which was the primitive literal sense). Now

we take the word itself to mean that which all its applications
have in common, namely describing a course. The great
extent and frequency of its metaphorical services have made
us aware of the basic concept by virtue of which it can function
as a symbol in so many contexts; constant figurative use has
generalized its sense.
   Wegener calls such a word a "faded metaphor," and shows,
in an argument too long and elaborate to be reproduced here,
that all general words are probably derived from specific ap-
pellations, by metaphorical use; so that our literal language
is a very repository of "faded metaphors."

   Since the context of an expression tells us what is its sense
—  whether we shall take it literally or figuratively, and how,
                                          —
in the latter case, it is to be interpreted  it follows that the

context itself must always be expressed literally, because it
has not, in turn, a context to supplement and define its
sense. Only the novel predication can be metaphorical.        A
discourse divorced from physical situations, i.e. a discourse
in which the context is entirely expressed and not bound to
"empractic" utterances, is not possible until some words have
acquired fixed, general connotations, so that they may serve
                             LANGUAGE                                125
in a conventional, literal fashion, to render the exposition of
the crucial assertion. "All words, therefore, which may be
logical subjects (of predications)and hence expository," says
Wegener, "have acquired this capacity only by virtue of their
'fading' in predicational use. And before language had any
faded words to denote logical subjects, it could not render a
situation by any other means than a demonstrative indication
of it in present experience. So the process of fading which
we have here adduced represents the bridge from the first
(one-word)    .   .phase of language to the developed phase
                      .



of a discursive exposition." 51
  Metaphor is our most striking evidence of abstractive see-
ing,of the power of human minds to use presentational
symbols. Every new experience, or new idea about things,
evokes first of all some metaphorical expression. As the idea
becomes familiar, this expression "fades" to a new literal use
of the once metaphorical predicate, a more general use than
it had before. It is in this elementary, presentational mode

that our first adventures in conscious abstraction occur. The
spontaneous similes of language are our first record of simi-
larities perceived. The fact that poverty of langauge, need
of emphasis, or need of circumlocution for any reason what-
ever, 52 leads us at once to seize upon a metaphorical word,
shows how natural the perception of common form is, and
how easily one and the same concept is conveyed through
words that represent a wide variety of conceptions. The use
of metaphor can hardly be called a conscious device. It is
the power whereby language, even with a small vocabulary,
manages to embrace a multimillion things; whereby new
words are born and merely analogical meanings becomer-
stereotyped into literal definitions. (Slang is almost entirely
far-fetched metaphor. Although much of it is conscious and
humorous in intent, there is always a certain amount of
peculiarly apt and expressive slang which is ultimately taken
into the literary language as "good usage."
   One might say that, if ritual is the cradle of language,
metaphor is the law of its life. It is the force that makes
it essentially relational, intellectual, forever showing up new,

abstractable forms in reality, forever laying down a deposit of
old, abstracted concepts in an increasing treasure of general
words.
   The intellectual vocabulary grows with the progress of
  5i Wegener, Untersuchungen, p. 54.
  52 For detailed studies of motives governing the use of
                                                  metaphor, see
Heinz Werner, Die Ursprunge der Metapher (1919); Hermann Paul,
Principles of the History of Language (1888; German         1880); Alfred
Biese, Die Philosophic des Metaphor ischen (1893).
126                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
conceptual thinking and civilized living. Technical advances
make demands on our language which are met by the elabora-
tion of mathematical, logical, and scientific terminologies.
Anthropomorphic metaphors are banned, and the philologi-
cal laws of word-change become almost all-important in the
production of further nomenclatures and usages. Meanings
become more and more precise; wherefore, as Jespersen says,
"The evolution of language shows a progressive tendency
from inseparable conglomerations to freely and regularly
combinable short elements." 53 Speech becomes increasingly
discursive, practical, prosaic, until human beings can actually
believe that it was invented as a utility, and was later em-
bellished with metaphors for the sake of a cultural product
called poetry.
    One more problem invites our speculation: Why do all men
possess language? The answer, I think, is that all men possess
it because they all have the same psychological nature, which

has reached, in the entire human race, a stage of development
where symbol-using and symbol-making are dominant activi-
ties. Whether there were many beginnings of language or
few, or even only one, we cannot tell; but wherever the first
stage of speaking, the use of any denotative symbol, was at-
tained, there the development of speech probably occurred
with phenomenal speed. For the notion of giving something
a name is the vastest generative idea that ever was conceived;
its influence might well transform the entire mode of living
and feeling, in the whole species, within a few generations.
We    ourselves have seen how such a notion as the power-
engine can alter the world, how other inventions, discoveries,
and adaptations crowd in its wake.      We
                                         have watched human
industry change from handicraft to mass production in every
phase of life, within the memory of individuals. So with the
advent of language, save that it must have been more revolu-
tionary. Once the spark was struck, the light of reason was
lit; an epoch of phenomenal novelty, mutation, perhaps even

cerebral evolution, was initiated, as Man succeeded to the
futile simian that had been himself. Once there were speak-
ing men on earth it would take utter isolation to keep any
tribe from speaking. And unless there have been many
cradles of mankind, such total isolation of a society, from
pre-human aeons to historic times, is hard to imagine.
    The general theory of symbolism here set forth, which
distinguishes between two symbolic modes rather than re-
stricting intelligence to discursive forms and relegating all
other conception to some irrational realm of feeling and

 53 Op.   cit.,   p. 429.
            life-symbols: the roots of sacrament            127
instinct,  has the great advantage of assimilating all mental
activity    toreason, instead of grafting that strange product
upon a fundamentally unintellectual organism. It accounts
for imagination and dream, myth and ritual, as well as for
practical intelligence. Discursive thought gives rise to science,
and a theory of knowledge restricted to its products culmi-
nates in the critique of science; but the recognition of non-
discursive thought makes it just as possible to construct a
theory of understanding that naturally culminates in a cri-
tique of art. The parent stock of both conceptual types,
of verbal and non-verbal formulation, is the basic human
act of symbolic transformation. The root is the same, only
the flower is different. So now we will leave language and
all its variants, and turn, for other flowers, to other fields.




     6.      Life-Symbols: The Roots of Sacrament


If language is born, indeed, from the profoundly symbolific
character of the human mind, we may not be surprised to find
that this mind tends to operate with symbols far below the
level of speech. Previous studies have shown that even the sub-
jective record of sense experience, the "sense-image," is not a
direct copy of actual experience, but has been "projected," in
the process of copying, into a new dimension, the more or less
stabile form we call a picture. It has not the protean, mercurial
elusiveness of real visual experience, but a unity and lasting"
identity that makes it an object of the mind's possession rather
than a sensation. Furthermore it is not firmly and fixedly deter-
mined by the pattern of natural phenomena, as real sensa-
tions are, but is "free," in the same manner as the little noises
which a baby produces by impulse and at will. We can call
up images and let them fill the virtual space of vision between
us and real objects, or on the screen of the dark, and dismiss
them again, without altering the course of practical events.
They are our own product, yet not part of ourselves as our
physical actions are; rather might we compare them with our
uttered words (save that they remain entirely private), in that
they are objects to us, things that may surprise, even frighten
us, experiences that can be contemplated, not merely lived.
   In short, images have all the characteristics of symbols.
If they were weak sense-experiences, they would confuse the
order of nature for us. Our salvation lies in that we do not
normally take them for bona fide sensations, but attend to
128                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
them only in their capacity of meaning things, being images
of things      —
            symbols whereby those things are conceived, re-
membered, considered, but not encountered.
   The best guarantee of their essentially symbolic function
is their tendency to become metaphorical. They are not only
capable of connoting the things from which our sense-experi-
ence originally derived them, and perhaps, by the law of
association, the context in which they were derived (as the
sight of a bell may cause one to think of "ding-dong" and
also of dinner), but they also have an inalienable tendency
to "mean" things that have only a logical analogy to their
primary meanings. The image of a rose symbolizes feminine
beauty so readily that it is actually harder to associate roses
with vegetables than with girls. Fire is a natural symbol of
life and passion, though it is the one element in which nothing
can actually live. Its mobility and flare, its heat and color,
make it an irresistible symbol of all that is living, feeling, and
active. Images are, therefore, our readiest instruments for
abstracting concepts from the tumbling stream of actual im-
pressions. They make our primitive abstractions for us, they
are our spontaneous embodiments of general ideas.
   Just as verbal symbolism has a natural evolution from the
mere suggestive word or "word-sentence" of babyhood to the
grammatical edifice we call a language, so presentational sym-
bolism has its own characteristic development. It grows from
the momentary, single, static image presenting a simple
concept, to greater and greater units of successive images
having reference to each other; changing scenes, even visions
of things in motion, 1 by which we conceive the passage of
events. That is to say, the first thing we do with images is
to envisage a story; just as the first thing we do with words
is to tell something, to make a statement.
   Image-making is, then, the mode of our untutored think-
ing, and stories are its earliest product. We think of things
happening, remembered or imaginary or prospective; we see
with the mind's eye the shoes we should like to buy, and the
transaction of buying them; we visualize the drowning that
almost happened by the riverbank. Pictures and stories are
the mind's stock-in-trade. Those larger, more complex ele-
ments that symbolize events may contain more than merely
visual ingredients, kinesthetic and aural and perhaps yet other
factors, wherefore it is misleading to call them "story-images";
I will      refer to   them as "fantasies."
  Like        all   symbols, fantasies are derived from specific ex-

  i   Cf.   M. Drummond, "The Nature of Images,"    British Journal of
Psychology,    XVII (1926), 1: 10-19.
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                 129
 perience; even the most elaborately monstrous ones go back
 to witnessed events. But the original perception     —  like any
 item that sticks in the mind — is promptly and spontaneously

 abstracted, and used symbolically to represent a whole kind
of actual happening. Every process we perceive, if it is to
be retained in memory, must record itself as a fantasy, an
envisagement, by virtue of which it can be called up in
imagination or recognized when it occurs again. For no actual
process happens twice; only we may meet the same sort of
occasion again. The second time we "know" already what the
event is, because we assimilate it to the fantasy abstracted
from the previous instance. It will not fit exactly, and it need
not; the fantasy need only convey certain general features,
the new case only exemplify these generalities in its own way,
to make us apprehend a recurrence of a familiar event.
   Suppose a person sees, for the first time in his life, a train
arriving at a station. He probably carries away what we
should call a "general impression" of noise and mass, steam,
human confusion, mighty motion coming to heated, panting
rest. Very possibly he has not noticed the wheels going round,
but only the rods moving like a runner's knees. He does not
instantly distinguish smoke from steam, nor the hissing from
squeaking, nor freight cars from windowed coaches, nor even
boiler, cab, and coal car from each other. Yet the next time
he watches a train pull in the process is familiar. His mind
retains a fantasy which "means" the general concept, "a
train arriving at a station." Everything that happens the second
time is, to him, like or unlike the first time. The fantasy which
we   call his conception of a halting train gradually^Jxiiltk
itself up ou^of many impressions; but its framework was
abstracted from the very first instance, and made the later
ones "familiar."
   The symbolic status of fantasies (in this technical sense
of action-envisagements) is further attested by the regularity
with which they follow certain basic laws of symbols. Like
words and like images, they have not only literal reference to
concepts, but tend to convey metaphorical meanings. Events
and actions, motions and emotions, are inexhaustible in our
short lives; new experience overwhelms us continually; no
mind can conceive in neat literal terms all the challenges
and responses, the facts and acts, that crowd in upon it. Yet
conception is its essential technique, and conception requires
a language of some sort. Among cur fantasies there is usually
something, at least, that will do as a metaphor, and this
something has to serve, just as the nearest word has to serve in
a new verbal expression. An arriving train may have to em-
body nameless and imageless dangers coming with a rush to
130               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
unload their problems before me. Under the pressure of fear
and confusion and shrinking, I envisage the engine, and the
pursuant cars of unknown content, as a first symbol to shape
my unborn concepts. What the arriving train represents is the
first aspect of those dangers that I can grasp. The fantasy that
literallymeans a railroad incident functions here in a new
capacity, where its literal generality, its applicability to trains,
becomes irrelevant, and only those features that can symbolize
the approaching future    —  power, speed, inevitable direction
                                             —
 (symbolized by the track), and so forth remain significant.
The fantasy here is a figure, a metaphor of wordless cognition.
   Metaphor is the law of growth of every semantic. It is not
a development, but a principle. This is strikingly attested by
the fact that the lowest, completely unintentional products of
the human brain are madly metaphorical fantasies, that often
make no literal sense whatever; I mean the riotous symbolism
of dreams.
   The first thing we instinctively strive to conceive is simply
the experience of being alive. Life is a network of needs and
fulfilments and further needs, with temporary frustrations
here and there. If its basic needs are long unsatisfied, it ends.
Our first conciousness is the sense of need, i.e. desire. There-
fore our most elementary conceptions are of objects for desire.
   The shapes and relations and names of such objects are un-
known to the infant's mind. Food it knows, but not the source
of food, beyond the mere touch and vague form of the
mother's breast. Comfort and security, human nearness, light
            —
and motion all these objects have neither substance nor fixed
identity. The first images that sense impression begets in his
mind have to serve for the whole gamut of his desires, for all
things absent. Everything soft is a mother; everything that
meets his reach is food. Being dropped, even into bed, is
            —
terror itself   the first definite form of insecurity, even of
death (all our lives we speak of misfortune as a "fall"; we fall
into the enemy's hands, fall from grace, fall upon hard
times).
   In the brief waking spells when his sense organs are learn-
ing to make report, when noises overcome his initial deaf-
ness and colors or light-spaces arrest his wandering focus,
his infantile symbols multiply. Wish and fantasy grow up to-
gether. Since the proper function of his mind is conception,
he produces ideas without number. He does not necessarily
feel desire for everything he can think and dream; desire is
only the power behind the mind, which goads it into action,
and makes it productive. An overactive mind is uncritical,
as a voracious appetite is unfastidious. Children mix dream
and reality, fact and fiction, and make impossible combina-
         life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                          131
tions of ideas in their haste to capture everything, to conceive
an overwhelming flood of experiences. Of course the stock
of their imagery is always too small for its purpose, so every
symbol has to do metaphorical as well as literal duty. The
result is a dreamlike, shifting picture, a faery "world."
   Something like this may be seen not only in our children,
whose free fancy is somewhat hemmed by the literal logic of
adults around them, but in primitive societies, where the
best thought still bears a childlike stamp. Among certain
peoples whom we call "savage," the very use of language ex-
hibits a rampant confusion of metaphorical meanings cling-
ing to every symbol, sometimes to the complete obscurance
of any reasonable literal meaning. Cailliet, 2 who made a study
of this phenomenon, calls this the "vegetative" stage of
thought, likening the tremendous tangle of non-literal sym-
bolism to a jungle where things choke each other in their
overgrowth. 3 The cause for this sumptuous prodigality of
symbols lies in the intellectual needs of an adolescent race.
When new, unexploited possibilities of thought crowd in upon
the human mind, the poverty of everyday language becomes
acute. Apprehension outruns comprehension so far that every
phrase, however homely and literal it may be in its traditional
meaning, has a vague aura of further significance. Such
a state of mind is peculiarly favorable to the development of
metaphorical speech. 4
   It is characteristic of figurative images that their allegori-
cal status is not recognized. Only a mind which can appre-
hend both a literal and a "poetic" formulation of an idea is in
a position to distinguish the figure from its meaning. In spon-
                                                                   *
taneous envisagement there is no such duality of form* and
content. In our most primitive presentations          —
                                                    the metaphori-
cal imagery of dreams      —
                           it is the symbol, not its meaning, that

seems to command our emotions.             We
                                            do not know it as a
symbol. In dream-experience we very often find some fairly
                        —
commonplace object a tree, a fish, a pointed hat, a staircase
—  fraught with intense value or inspiring the greatest terror.
We cannot tell what makes the thing so important. It simply
seems to be so in the dream. The emotional reaction is, of

  2£mile Cailliet, Symbolisme et dmes primitives (1936), chap. iv.
   s The same figure was used by Jespersen (Language, p. 428) to describe
the form-producing period of primitive language, and by Whitehead
(Symbolism, p. 61) in speaking of undisciplined symbol-mongering.
  4 There are certain backward races which, like backward persons,
seem to have become arrested in the age of their adolescence. They are
no longer vigorously imaginative, yet have never outgrown the effect of
that "vegetative" stage; so they have incorporated figurative speech in the
genteel tradition of their social intercourse. Their metaphors are not new
and revealing, they are conventional, and serve only to interfere with the
progress of literal conception.
132                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
course, evoked by the idea embodied in that object, but so
long as the idea lives only in this body we cannot distinguish
it from its symbolic incarnation which, to literal-minded
common sense, seems trivial.
   Primitive thought is not far removed from the dream level.
It operates with very similar forms. Objects that could func-
tion as dream-symbols have a mysterious significance for the
waking mind, too, and are viewed with emotion, even though
they have never served a practical purpose for good or for
evil. The Australian's churinga, the Egyptian's scarab, the
charms which Greek women carried to the altar, are such
objects of indescribable value, dream-symbols found and
treasured in waking life. With their realistic presence, the
imaginative process is carried over from dream to reality;
fantasy is externalized in the veneration of "sacra."
   The study of dreams gives us a clue to the deeper meaning
of these bizarre holy articles: they are phallic symbols and
death-symbols.       We
                      need not consult the psychoanalysts to
learn this truth; any student of anthropology or archeology
can assure us of it. Life and life-giving, death and the dead,
are the great themes of primitive religion. Gods are at first
merely emblems of the creative power; fetishes, trees, men-
hirs. Certain animals are natural symbols to mankind: the
snake hidden in earth, the bull strong in his passion, the
mysterious long-lived crocodile who metes out unexpected
death. When, with the advance of civilization, their images
are set up in temples or borne in processions, such images
are designed to emphasize their symbolic force rather than
their natural shapes. The snake may be horned or crowned
or bearded, the bull may have wings or a human head.
   Such sacra command a peculiar emotion, which is not the
simple joy of possessing something advantageous, e.g. a strong
weapon or a new slave; the "rejoicing" of a religious cere-
monial is not a spontaneous delight which causes people to
raise the cry of triumph, as we shout when we catch a big
fish or win a game. The supposed power of the god to pro-
tect his worshippers would be no more apt to evoke cries
of "hallelujah" than the tacitly accepted power of a father
to protect his children. Our children live under the guarantee
of our superior strength and have a sense of security in it,
but they do not periodically burst into praises of it. Reli-
gious rejoicing is bound entirely to set occasions, when the
god-symbol     —which probably   always there, tucked away
                                     is
in   its        — brought
           shrine   is               officially contemplated.
                                 forth    and
Even this is not enough; someone leads the shouting and
makes a demonstration of joy; gradually the feeling develops,
and delight seizes the congregation. Their joy is not in an
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                133
event, but in a presented idea. It centers round objects that
are themselves quite passive, and useless for any other pur-
pose than conveying the idea.
                              —                     —
   The power of conception of "having ideas" is man's
peculiar asset, and awareness of this power is an exciting sense
of human strength. Nothing is more thrilling than the dawn
of a new conception. The symbols that embody basic ideas
of life and death, of man and the world, are naturally sacred.
But naive thinking does not distinguish between symbol and
import; it sees only the physical churinga or the clay thesmos,
or, where the symbol is not made by human art, but chosen
among natural objects, it sees the actual snake or ibis, oak
tree or arbor vitae. There is no explicit reason why sacredness
belongs to such an object, only a strong feeling that in it the
luck and hope and power of man is vested. The prac-
tical efficacy attributed to sacra is a dream-metaphor for the
might of human ideation. Their "mightiness" is thought of as
specific efficacy; whatever expresses Life is regarded as a
source of life, whatever expresses Death as an agent of death.
The savage's alleged stupidity about causal relations rests on
this very profound law of mind, which is exemplified not only
in primitive religions, but in our own pious beliefs, e.g. that
the devil can be averted by holding up a little cross against
him, or that a picture of the Virgin Mother protects a house
against evil. Such notions rest on a natural identification of
symbolic values with practical values, of the expressive with
the physical functions of a thing. But this identification is too
deeply grounded to be put aside as a "silly" mistake. It is
symptomatic of our supreme and constant preoccupation with^
ideas, our spontaneous attention to expressive forms'* that
causes us to mix their- importance with the importance of
other activities by which life is carried on.
   The contemplation of sacra invites a certain intellectual
          —
excitement intellectual because it centers in a mental activ-
  —
ity   the excitement of realizing life and strength, manhood,
contest, and death. The whole cycle of human emotions is
touched by such a contemplation. Undoubtedly the first out-
ward show of sacred emotions is purely self-expressive, an
unconscious issue of feelings into shouting and prancing or
rolling on the earth, like a baby's tantrum; but soon the
outburst becomes a habitual reaction and is used to demon-
strate, rather than to relieve, the feelings of individuals.
Lively demonstration makes an emotion contagious. Shout
answers shout, the collective prancing becomes dancing. Even
those who are not compelled by inner tension to let off
steam just at this moment, fall into step and join the common
cry.
134                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   But as soon as an expressive act is performed without inner
momentary compulsion      it is no longer self-expressive; it is
expressive in the logical sense. It is not a sign of the emotion
it conveys, but a symbol of it; instead of completing the
natural history of a feeling, it denotes the feeling, and may
merely bring it to mind, even for the actor. When an action
acquires such a meaning it becomes a gesture. 5
   Genuine acts are completed in every detail unless they are
forcibly interrupted, but gestures may be quite abortive
imitations of acts, showing only their significant features.
They are expressive forms, true symbols. Their aspect be-
comes fixed, they can be deliberately used to communicate
an idea of the feelings that begot their prototypes. Because
they are deliberate gestures, not emotional acts, they are no
longer subject to spontaneous variation, but bound to an
often meticulously exact repetition, which gradually makes
their  forms as familiar as words or tunes.
   With the formalization of overt behavior in the presence of
the sacred objects, we come into the field of ritual. This
is, so to speak, a complement to the life-symbols; for as the

latter present the basic facts of human existence, the forces
of generation and achievement and death, so the rites enacted
at their contemplation formulate and record man's response
to those supreme realities. Ritual "expresses feelings" in the
logical rather than the physiological sense. It may have what
Aristotle called "cathartic" value, but that is not its charac-
teristic; it is primarily an articulation of feelings. The ulti-
mate product of such articulation is not a simple emotion,
but a complex, permanent attitude. This attitude, which is
the worshipers' response to the insight given by the sacred
symbols, is an emotional pattern, which governs all individual
lives. It cannot be recognized through any clearer medium
than that of formalized gesture; yet in this cryptic form it
is recognized, and yields a strong sense of tribal or congrega-

tional unity, of Tightness and security. A rite regularly per-
formed is the constant reiteration of sentiments toward "first
and last things"; it is not a free expression of emotions, but a
disciplined rehearsal of "right attitudes."
   But emotional attitudes are always closely linked with the
exigencies of current life, colored by immediate cares and
desires, by specific memories and hopes. Since the sacra are
consciously regarded not as symbols of Life and Death, but
   s Cf. L. A. Reid, "Beauty and Significance," Proceedings of the Aristo-
                   XXIX
telian Society, N.S.       (1929), 123-154, esp. p. 144: "If an expression,
which at first was automatic, is repeated for the sheer joy of expression,
at that point it becomes aesthetic..   Anger enjoyed in being acted con-
                                       .   .



sciously is not mere instinctive anger, but dramatic (sometimes melo-
dramatic) anger, a very different thing."
           life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                       135
as life-givers and death-dealers, they are not only revered,
but also besought, trusted, feared, placated with service and
sacrifice. Their power is invoked for the salvation of wor-
shipers in times of danger. They can break the drought, end
famine, stay a pestilence, or turn the tide of battle. The
sacred ark going up before the Children of Israel gives them
their victory.    Held by the Philistines,   it   visits   disease   on   its

captors.   Its   efficacy seen in every triumph of the com-
                            is

munity, every attainment and conquest. Specific events as
well as definite feelings become associated with a Holy of
Holies, and seek expression round the altar.
   This is the source of mimetic ritual. The memory of cele-
brated events is strong in the celebration that renders thanks
to the saving Power; it enters, perhaps quite unconsciously
at first, into the gestures and shouts traditionally conveying
such thanks. The story is retold, because it reveals the
character of the Holy One, and as the telling soon becomes
a formula, the gesticulations that accompany it become tradi-
tional gestures, new bodily expressions that can be woven
into ritual patterns. The flourish of swords that accompanies
the recall of a great exploit is presently carried out at definite
points in the narrative, so that the congregation may join
in it, as it joins in shouts like "Hallelujah," "Iacchos," or
"Amen" at recognized periods. The gesture acquires a swing
and rhythm of its own so it can be performed in genuine
unison. At the end of the story it may be elaborated into a
long demonstration, a "sword-dance."
   Another and even more obvious origin of mimetic rites
lies not in sacred story, but in supplication. Here conception--
is even more^ivid, more urgent than in memory; an act is
to be suggested and recommended to the only Being that
can perform it, the Holy One; the suppliants, in their eager-
ness to express their desire, naturally break into pantomime. 6
Representations of the act mingle with gestures of entreaty.
And just as the expressive virtue of sacra is conceived as
physical virtue, so the symbolic power of mimetic rites is
presently regarded as causal efficacy; hence the world-wide
and world-old belief in sympathetic magic. It really sinks to
the inane conception of "magic" only when one assumes a
direct relation between the mimicked event and the expected
real one; in so far as the pantomime is enacted before a fetish,
a spirit, or God, it is intended to move this divine power to
act, and is simply a primitive prayer.       We
                                              are often told that

  6 Cf W. W. Newell, "Ritual Regarded as the Dramatization of Myth,"
      .



International Congress of Anthropology (1894), 237-245; also W. Mat-
thews, "Some Illustrations of the Connection between Myths and Cere-
mony," ibid., pp. 246-251.
136               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
savage religion begins in magic; but the chances are, I think,
that magic begins in religion. Its typical form  —   the confident,
practical use of a formula, a brew, and a rite to achieve a
              —
physical effect   is the empty shell of a religious act. Confused,

inferior minds may retain it, even in a society that no longer
thinks in terms of hidden agency, but sees causally connected
phenomena; and so we come to the absurd practice of a
"magic" that is supposed to defy natural law.
   Religion is a gradual envisagement of the essential pattern
of human life, and to this insight almost any object, act, or
event may contribute. There is no ingredient in ritual that
may not also be found outside it. Sacred objects are not in-
trinsically precious, but derive their value from their reli-
gious use. Formalized expressive gesture occurs in the most
casual social intercourse, in greetings, marks of deference, or
mock defiance (like, the grimaces school-children make be-
hind the back of an unpopular teacher, mainly for each
other's benefit). As for mimetic gestures, they are the current
and often unconscious accompaniment of all dramatic imagi-
nation. It need not be of serious or important acts. Mimicry
is the natural symbolism by which we represent activities to
our minds.   It is so obvious a semantic that even where no
act is carried out, but every idea merely suggested, panto-
mime is universally understood. Victor the Wild Boy of
Aveyron, and even Wild Peter who was less intelligent, could
understand mimetic expression at once, without any training,
though neither ever learned language.
   Before a symbolic form is put to public religious use
before it serves the difficult art of presenting really profound
ideas — it has probably had a long career in a much homelier

capacity. Long before men perform rites which enact the
phases of life, they have learned such acting in play. And the
play of children is very instructive if we would observe the
peculiarly intellectual (non-practical) nature of gesture. If
its purpose were, as is commonly supposed, to learn by imi-

tation, an oft-repeated enactment should come closer and
closer to reality, and a familiar act be represented better than
a novel one; instead of that we are apt to find no attempt
at carrying out the suggested actions of the shared day-dreams
that constitute young children's play.
                     —
    "Now I go away" three steps away from the center of the
game constitute this process. "And you must be crying"
the deserted one puts her hands before her face and makes a
little pathetic sound. "Now I sew your fairy dress"     —  a hand
with all five fingertips pressed together describes little circles.
But the most convincingly symbolic gesture is that of eating.
Children are interested in eating, and this much-desired oc-
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                 137
casion arises often in their games. Yet their imitation of that
process is perhaps their least realistic act. There is no attempt
to simulate the use of a spoon or other implement; the hand
that carries the imaginary food to the mouth moves with the
speed of a short clock-pendulum, the lips whisper "B-b-b-b-b."
This sort of imitation would never serve the purpose of learn-
ing an activity. It is an abbreviated, schematized form of an
action. Whether or no the child could perform the act is
irrelevant; eating is an act learned long ago, sewing is prob-
ably a total mystery. Yet the imitation of sewing, though
clumsy, is not as poor as that of the banquet.
   The better an act is understood and the more habitually
it is associated with a symbolic gesture, the more formal and

cursory may be the movement that represents it. Just as the
white settlers of this country first called an Indian feast a
"Pow! Wow! Wow!" and later referred to it quite off-handedly
as "a pow-wow," so a child's representation of sewing, fight-
ing, or other process will be really imitative at first, but dwin-
dle to almost nothing if the game is played often. It becomes
an act of reference rather than of representation.
   The fact that so much of primitive religious ritual is
mimetic, and that mimicry is the typical form of children's
play, has misled some excellent philosophers, notably John
Dewey, to believe that rites are simply a repetition of practical
                                           —
behavior for the fun of the action itself a repetition which
presently becomes habitual, and has to be dignified by the
imputation of magical usefulness. "Men make a game of
their fishing and hunting, and turn to the periodic and dis-
ciplinary labor of agriculture only when inferiors, women or
slaves, cannq£ be had to do the work. Useful labor isf^vhenP
ever possible, transformed by ceremonial and ritual accom-
paniments,    subordinated to art that yields immediate
enjoyment; otherwise it is attended to under compulsion of
circumstance during abbreviated surrenders of leisure. For
leisure permits of festivity, in revery, ceremonies and con-
versation. The pressure of necessity is, however, never wholly
lost, and the sense of it led men, as if with uneasy conscience
at their respite from work, to impute practical efficacy to
play and rites, endowing them with power to coerce events
and to purchase the favor of the rulers of events. ... It was
not conscience that kept men loyal to cults and rites, and
faithful to tribal myths. So far as it was not routine, it was
enjoyment of the drama of life without the latter's liabilities
that kept piety from decay. Interest in rites as means of in-
fluencing the course of things, and the cognitive or explan-
ation office of myths were hardly more than an embroidery,
repeating in pleasant form the pattern which inexpugnable
138                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
necessities imposed upon practice. When rite and myth are
spontaneous rehearsal of the impact and career of practical
needs and doings, they must also seem to have practical
force." 7
   From this standpoint it is hard to understand why savage
rites   so   often   involve   terrible   tortures   —branding,        flaying,
knocking out teeth, cutting off finger-joints, etc. Puberty-rites,
for instance, in which boys sometimes die under the knife
or the whip, can hardly be described as "enjoyment of the
drama of life without the latter's liabilities." Such actions
are far removed from play. Their instrumental value for
bringing about victories, fertility, or general good luck is
undoubtedly secondary, as Professor Dewey says; but their
primary achievement is not entertainment, but morale. They
are part of man's ceaseless quest for conception and orienta-
tion. They embody his dawning notions of power and will,
of death and victory, they give active and impressive form
to his demoniac fears and ideals. Ritual is the most primitive
reflection of serious thought, a slow deposit, as                it   were, of
people's imaginative insight into          life.   That   is   why it is in-
trinsically solemn, even though some rites of rejoicing or
triumph may degenerate into mere excitement, debauchery,
and license.
   If men's minds were essentially playful, they could have
no "uneasy conscience at their respite from work." Young
dogs and young children, to whom play is a necessity, have
no such conscience. Only people who feel that play displaces
something more vital can disapprove of it; otherwise, if the
bare necessities were taken care of, work in itself could com-
mand no respect, and we would play with all the freedom in
the world, if practical work and sheer enjoyment were our
only alternatives.
   But the driving force in human minds is fear, which begets
an imperious demand for security in the world's confusion:
a demand for a world-picture that fills all experience and
gives each individual a definite orientation amid the terrify-
ing forces of nature and society. Objects that embody such
insights, and acts which express, preserve, and reiterate them,
are indeed more spontaneously interesting, more serious than
work.
   The universality of the concepts which religion tries to
formulate draws all nature into the domain of ritual. The
apparently misguided efforts of savages to induce rain by
dancing and drumming are not practical mistakes at all; they
are rites in which the rain has a part. White observers of

  7 Experience   and Nature (1925), pp. 78-79.
          life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                          139
Indian rain-dances have often commented on the fact that
in  an extraordinary number of instances the downpour really
"results." Others, of a more cynical turn, remark that the
leaders of the dance know the weather so well that they time
their dance to meet its approaching changes and simulate
"rain-making." This may well be the case; yet it is not a
pure imposture.      A"magic" effect is one which completes a
rite. No savage tries to induce a snowstorm in midsummer,
nor prays for the ripening of fruits entirely out of season, as
he certainly would if he considered his dance and prayer the
physical causes of such events. He dances with the rain, he
invites the elements to do their part, as they are thought to
be somewhere about and merely irresponsive. This accounts
for the fact that no evidence of past failures discourages his
practices; for if heaven and earth do not answer him, the
rite is simply unconsummated; it was not therefore a "mis-
take." Its failure can be redeemed by finding some extenu-
ating circumstance, some "counter-charm" that explains the
miscarriage of the usual climax. There is no evil intent in
the devices of medicine men to insure, or even to simulate,
answers to magical invocations; for the most important virtue
of the rite is not so much its practical as its religious success.
Rain-making may well have begun in the celebration of an
imminent shower after long drought; that the first harbinger
clouds would be greeted with entreaty, excitement, and mi-
metic sugestion is obvious. The ritual evolves while a caprici-
ous heaven is making up its mind. Its successive acts mark
the stages that bring the storm nearer. Its real import         its    —
power to articulate a relation between man and nature, vivid^
at the moment     —
                  can be recognized only in the metaphorical
guise of a physical power to induce the rain. 8
   Sympathetic magic, springing from mimetic ritual, belongs
mainly to tribal, primitive religion. There is, however, a
type of ceremonial that runs the whole gamut from the most
savage to the most civilized piety, from blind compulsive
behavior, through magical conjuring, to the heights of con-
scious expression: that is the Sacrament.
  »The expressive function of ritual is properly distinguished from the
practical in an article by Alfred Vierkandt, "Die entwicklungspsycholo-
gische Theorie der Zauberei," Archiv fiir gesammte Psychologie, XCVIII
(1937), 420-489. Vierkandt treats the causal conception as • superim-
posed one. "The [mimetic] activity," he says, "appears as a means to the
desired end. If this end is all that motivates the rite, then the latter has
changed from a purely expressive act to a purposive act. ... In the
course of this change there may be all possible gradations of the relation-
ship between these two structures, from the merest superimposition of a
purposive activity to the complete extinction of the expressive need. At
the one extreme, the practical end is a mere superstructure, an ideology,
while the driving force is the desire for expression.      .   . The other
                                                                   .



extreme is the genuine purposive act, in which the whole is organized
according to the categories of means and ends."
140                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   The overt form of a sacrament is usually a homely, familiar
action, such as washing, eating, drinking; sometimes a more
special performance    —slaughter, or sexual union       —
                                                        but still
an act that is essentially realistic and vital. At first sight it
seems strange that the highest symbolic import should attach
to the lowliest activities, especially as the more commonplace
and frequent of these are the most universal sacraments. But
if we consider the genesis of such profound and ancient
symbols we can understand their origin in commonplace
events.
   Before a behavior-pattern can become imbued with second-
ary meanings, it must be definite, and to the smallest detail
familiar. Such forms are naturally evolved only in activities
that are often repeated. An act that is habitually performed
acquires an almost mechanical form, a sequence of motions
that practice makes quite invariable. Besides the general
repetition of what is done there is a repetition of the way it
is done by a certain person. For instance, two people putting
bread into their mouth are doing the same thing, but they
may do it in widely different manner, according to their re-
spective temperaments and traditions; their behavior, though
purposive and real, contains unconsciously an element of
gesture.
   This formal element offers high possibilities to the symbol-
seeking mind. Just as one person develops personal "ways,"
so a tribe develops tribal "ways," which are handed down
as unconscious mannerisms, until some breach in the usual
pattern makes people aware of them, and they are deliberately
practiced as "correct forms." As soon as they are thus ab-
stracted, these proper gestures acquire tribal importance;
someone sees a secondary meaning in an act which has at-
tained such a formal unity and style. It seems to have a
symbolic as well as a practical function; a new, emotional
importance attaches to it. In a society whose symbolific im-
pulse is in the riotous, "vegetative" stage, a practical act
like dividing food, or eating the first new corn of the season,
may be so exciting as an idea that it actually loses its old
material interest in the new, mystical one. Many savages have
foods that may be eaten only ritually, and there have been
Christians who frowned on all washing and bathing that was
not incidental to a rite.
   These last-named acts of cleansing and purification furnish
a good case in point. Washing away dirt is a simple, practical
act; but its symbolic value is so striking that one might say
the act has a "natural meaning." 9 Eating, likewise, is a daily

  9 Professor Urban reserves the term "true symbol" entirely for ex-
pressions whose meaning is thus "naturally" suggested, and treats all
         life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                          141

practice, but is so easily significant of the kinship among those
who eat together, and the even closer connection identi-         —
fication—  of the eaters with the eaten, that it has a certain
sacramental character for any mind that is capable of general
concepts at all. As soon as the symbolical import of (say)
eating an animal dawns, the feast is conducted in a new
spirit; not food, but animal characteristics, constitute its fare.
The meat becomes a host; though the indwelling virtue may
have no name of its own, and therefore may be thinkable
only in terms of this eating, this gathering, this taste and
smell and place. Because an occasion is the only symbol by
which the new virtue is known, that occasion must have
permanent form, that it may be repeated, the virtue recalled,
reinvoked; and so the abstractable features of the occasion
the manners and mannerisms that were simply learned folk-
ways, habitual patterns      —
                            are exalted into sacred procedure.
The meat must be served in the same order, cut in the same
shape and from the same part, every time it is to be eaten
ritually. Gradually every detail becomes charged with mean-
ing. Every gesture signifies some step in the acquisition of
animal virtue. According to the law of all primitive symbol-
ization, this significance is felt not as such, but as genuine
efficacy; the feast not only dramatizes, but actually negotiates
the desired acquisition. Its performance is magical as well
as expressive. And so we have the characteristic blend of
power and meaning, mediation and presentation, that belongs
to sacraments. 10
   Whether a dim perception of sacramental forces and dan-
gers in the routine actions of life underlies the rigid religious
control that ^almost all primitive societies hold ovef*daily*
food and drink and housekeeping, we cannot stop to investi-
gate here. What matters in the present context is merely that
meaning and magic pervade savage life to such an extent that
any behavior-pattern, any striking visual form or musical
rhythm, any question or announcement made often enough
to become a formula, acquires some symbolic or mystical
function;   this      stage of thinking is the creative period for
religion.   In   it    the great life-symbols are established and

other symbols as signs (cf. Language and Reality, part II, esp. pp. 402-
409). For reasons explained above, I cannot subscribe to this usage, as
the distinction between signs and symbols seems to me to he in a different
dimension.
  io For a modern example, consider the following statement by W. H.
Frere: "The Eucharist is one homogeneous and continuous action and
goes forward, if one may say so, like a drama; it has its prelude, its
working up, its climax, its epilogue..   The Eucharist was to sum up and
                                         .   .


supersede all older rites and sacrifices; and it has been from the first
the central Christian sacrament, not significant only, but efficacious." The
Principles of Religious Ceremonial (1928), pp. 37—39 (italics mine).
142                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
developed. Concepts which are far beyond the actual grasp
of savage or semi-savage minds are apprehended, though not
comprehended, in physical embodiments, sacred fetishes, idols,
animals; human attitudes, vaguely recognized as reasonable
and right, are expressed by actions which are not spontaneous
emotional outlets but prescribed modes of participation and
assent.
   Rites of supplication and offering cannot forever be ad-
dressed to a nameless symbol, a mere bundle of sticks, jaw-
bone, grave-mound, or monolith. The Holy One has a part,
howbeit a silent part, to play in the ceremony; as the cult
develops, the presiding power acquires an epithet expressing
this function: "She who Harkens," "He of Appeasement,"
"He of Sword-play, He of the Sword." The epithet serves
as a name, and soon becomes a name; the name fixes a
character which gradually finds expression in new physical
representations. So the pillar that was once a phallic symbol
becomes a "Herm," and the rock that was itself taboo shelters
a sacred snake to account for its holiness. The snake can
see and hear, respond or retire, strike or spare. The snake can
be a forgiver, the Herm can be a watcher.
   Of course this is a step from sheer superstition toward the-
ology, toward conceiving gods instead of mere magical cult-
objects. But the envisagement of such "gods" is as yet entirely
naive; "He of the Sword" may be represented as a sword,
and "She who Harkens" may not only have, but be, an ear. 11
The first idea of a god is not that of an anthropomorphic
being that dwells in an object, e.g. in a certain tree; it is simply
a notion of the object itself as a personality as an agent par-
                                                    ,



ticipating in the ritual. This participation is what lifts it
above mere magical potency to something like a personal will.
The might of the cult-objects, charms or sacred arks or holy
wells, is simply efficacy; that of gods, whether they be trees,
animals, statutes, or dead men, is ability. A charm is made to
operate by a correct ritual; a deity is invoked by being pleased,
either by service or flattery. The rite may persist for ages, but
when the Holy One becomes a god, the keynote of ritual
becomes prayer. One cannot simply draw "mana" from him
as from the presence of holy things; one has to ask him
to exert his talents. Therefore his worshipers recite the
catalogue of his virtues   —  his valor, wisdom, goodness, the
wonders of his favor, the      terrors of his displeasure. In this
way his traits become very definitely and publicly accepted.
Every     asset his worshipers seek   is   his,   and   in his gift.   His

  11 See Jane Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion
(1908), p. 187.
           life-symbols: the roots of sacrament              143
image tends more and more to express this enhanced charac-
ter; he is the summary of a human ideal, the ideal of his tribe.
   Herein lies the rationale of animal worship, which seems
to have preceded, almost universally, the evolution of higher
religions. A god who symbolizes moral qualities does well to
appear in animal form; for a human incarnation would be
confusing. Human personalities are complex, extremely varied,
hard to define, hard to generalize; but animals run very true
to type.The strength of the bull, the shiftiness of the rabbit,
the sinuous mobility of the snake, the solemnity of the owl,
are exemplified with perfect definiteness and simplicity by
every member of their respective species. Before men can find
these traits clearly in themselves they can see them typified in
animals. The beast that symbolizes a virtue, physical or moral,
is divine to men who see and envy that virtue in it. It is the
possessor, hence the possible dispenser, of its peculiar quality.
Therefore it is honored, wooed, placated, and sometimes
sacramentally eaten by its worshipers.
   The man who sees his ideal in an animal calls himself by
its name, because, exemplifying his highest aspirations as it

does, it is his "true self." We who have higher gods still
describe our enemies as the beasts we despise        —   they are
"perfect asses," "just pigs," or on extreme provocation
"skunks." Men who still look up to animals bestow analo-
gous titles on human beings in a reverent spirit. Those to
whom the swift, intensely vital and prolific hare is a symbol
of life and fertility, think of themselves as hares, and attribute
even more harishness to their venerated, beatified ancestors.
They were the "Great Hares." A civilized man would^mean.
this epithet metaphorically, but the primitive mind is always
losing its way between symbol and meaning, and freely
changes "My earliest ancestor was a 'Hare,' " into "A hare
was my first ancestor."
   Here is probably the genesis of totemism. The fact that
totems feature all kinds of aniirials and even plants does not
preclude such an origin; for once a tribe has adopted an
animal form to express its essence, other tribes will follow
suit by sheer imitation, without the same motive, choosing
different animals to distinguish them from their neighbors.
They may have no original notion of any ideal. A tribal ideal
is then formed in keeping with the symbol, if at all. But the

primary conception of a totem must have sprung from some
insight into the human significance of an animal form; perhaps
a purely sexual significance, perhaps a sublimer notion of
savage virtue.
  Such speculation is borne out by the fact that it is the
animal form rather than any living representative of the
144                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
species that is preeminently holy. Emile Durkheim, who has
made a close study of totemism in Les formes elementaires
de la vie religieuse, warns against the fallacy of seeing a
simple animal worship in its practices; for in the course of
such study, he says, "One comes to the remarkable con-
clusion that images of the totem-creature are more sacred than
the totem-creature itself " 12
   "Here is the real nature of the totem: it is nothing but the
material form by which human minds can picture that im-
material substance, that energy diffused throughout all sorts
of heterogeneous things, that power which alone is the true
object of the cult." 13 Moreover, it is this Power concentrated
in the character of the clan                   —
                                  the social influence and author-
  —
ity   which, in M. Durkheim's opinion, is the real divinity.
    "The totem is the banner of the clan," he says; and fur-
ther, "Since the religious Power is nothing else than the
collective and nameless Power of the clan, and since this is
not capable of representation except through the totem, the
totemic emblem is like the visible body of the god.                     .   .   .



This explains why, in the hierarchy of things sacred, it holds
the highest place     .    .       .



    "Why is it forbidden to kill and eat the totem-animal, and
why has its flesh these positive virtues which give it its part
in ritual? Because this animal resembles the tribal emblem,
namely its own image. And as of course it resembles it more
closely than man, it has a higher rank than he in the hierarchy
of holies." 14
    Durkheim's whole analysis of totemism bears out the con-
tention that it is, like all sacraments, a form of ideation, an
expression of concepts in purely presentational metaphor.
    "Religion is, first and foremost, a system of ideas by means
of which individuals can envisage the society of which they
are members, and the relations, obscure yet intimate, which
they bear to it. That is the primordial task of a faith. And
though it be metaphorical and symbolical, it is not therefore
untrue. On the contrary, it conveys all that is essential in
the relations it claims to portray.        ." 15    .   .



    "The believer is not deceiving himself when he puts his
faith in the existence of a moral potency, on which he is de-
pendent, and to which he owes his better part; this Power
exists, it is Society.        Doubtless, he is mistaken when he
                               .       .   .



believes that the enhancement of his vital strength is the
work of a Being that looks like an animal or a plant. But
 his error lies only in the literal reading of the symbol by


  12 Op. cit., p. 189.                             13 Ibid., p. 270.
  14 Ibid., pp. 315-318.                            1* Ibid., p. 323.
        life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                    145
which this Being is presented to his mind, the external aspect
under which his imagination conveys it, and does not touch
the fact of its existence. Behind these figures and metaphors,
however gross or refined they may be, there lies a concrete
and living reality." 16
  From such primitive sacramentalism to a real theology, a
belief inOlympians who lie on beds of asphodel, or in a
heavenly Jerusalem where a triune God sits enthroned, may
seem so far a call that one may incline to doubt whether
human imagination could have passed continuously from
one to the other. The mentalities of Australian aborigines
and of European worshipers, ancient and modern, appear to
be just worlds apart; the Sacred Emu does not give any
promise of a future Zeus, nor does a lizard in a cave appear
to foreshadow the Christian God of Love. Yet when we trace
the histories of such high divinities back to their antecedents
in earlier ages, there is an astonishing kinship between those
antecedents and the local deities of Australian, African, or
American savages. We have no evidence that genuine totem-
ism ever existed in Europe; but of animal cults we have con-
vincing proof. Luck has it that one of the most civilized
religions of all time, namely the Greek, has inscribed the
whole course of its evolution for us on the places where it
flourished  —on the temples and households, cemeteries and
libraries that tell the story of Hellas   from its dawn to its slow
destruction; and that a classical scholar with patience and
insight has traced that evolution from its earliest recoverable
phases to its last decadent forms. For, as Professor Gilbert
Murray has said, "In this department as in others, ancient.
Greece has th^ triumphant if tragic distinction of beginning
at the very bottom and- struggling, however precariously, to
the very summits. There is hardly any horror of primitive
supersition of which we cannot find some distant traces in
our Greek record. There is hardly any height of spiritual
thought attained in the world that has not its archetype or its
echo in the stretch of Greek literature that lies between
Thales and Plotinus.     ." 17
                             .   .



   The scholar to whom we are most indebted for a truly
coherent picture of religious origins is Jane Harrison, whose
Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion sets forth with
all detail the evolution of Olympian and Christian divinities
from their humble, zoolatrous beginnings in tombs and
snake-holes and chimney-corners. This evolution is a long
story. It has been briefly retold by Professor Murray in the
book from which the above quotation is taken, 18 and here
  is Ibid., p. 322.n Five Stages of Greek Religion (1925), pp. 15-16.
  18 See esp. chaps,   i   and ii.
146                                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
I   can do no more than indicate its beginning, direction, and
moral.
        Its   beginning        —contrary        to   our traditional ideas of the
                     —
Greek mind is not at all in bright fancies, lovely anthro-
pomorphic conceptions of the sun, the moon, and the rain-
bow. Professor Murray remarks this at the outset.
   "The things that have misled us moderns in our efforts
towards understanding the primitive stage in Greek reli-
gion," he says, "have been first the widespread and almost
ineradicable error of treating Homer as primitive, and more
generally our unconscious insistence on starting with the
notion of 'Gods.'      The truth is that this notion of a god
                                        —
                                    .   .   .



far away in the sky   I do not say merely a First Cause who
is 'without body parts or passions,' but almost any being that

                                                      —
we should naturally call a 'god' is an idea not easy for
primitive man to grasp. It is a subtle and rarefied idea, satu-
rated with ages of philosophy and speculation." 19
   The Olympian gods, who seem like free inventions of an
innocent, delighted imagination, "are imposed upon a back-
ground strangely unlike themselves. For a long time their
luminous figures dazzled our eyes; we were not able to see
the half-lit regions behind them, the dark primeval tangle
of desires and fears and dreams from which they drew their
vitality. The surest test to apply in this question is the evi-
dence of actual cult. Miss Harrison has here shown us the
right         method.      .   .
                                    ." 20

        Her findings by this method were, in brief, that in the
great      Greek festivals the Olympian gods played no role at
all; their names were quite externally associated with these
occasions, and were usually modified by an epithet, to make
the connection at least reasonable. Thus the Athenian Diasia
is held in honor of "Zeus Meilichios," or "Zeus of Placation."
   "A god with an epithet," says Murray, "is always suspi-
cious, like a human being with an 'alias.' Miss Harrison's
examination shows that in the rites Zeus has no place at all.
Meilichios from the beginning has a fairly secure one. On
some of the reliefs Meilichios appears not as a god, but as
an enormous, bearded snake, a well-known representation
of underworld powers or dead ancestors.                         .   .   .


    "The Diasia was a ritual of placation, that is, of casting
away various elements of pollution or danger and appeasing
the unknown wraths of the surrounding darkness. The near-
est approach to a god contained in this festival is Meilichios.
.   . His name means 'He of appeasement,' and he is nothing
         .




else."
        "The Thesmophoria formed the great festival of Demeter
        is Ibid., p. 24.                             20 ibid., p. 28.
           life-symbols: the roots of sacrament                           147
and her daughter Kore, though here again Demeter appears
with a clinging epithet, Thesmophoros. We know pretty clearly
the whole course of the ritual.        The Olympian Demeter
                                           .   .   .



and Persephone dwindle away as we look closer, and we are
left with the shadow Thesmophoros, 'She who carries Thes-
moi,' not a substantive personal goddess, but merely a personi-
fication  of the ritual itself; an imaginary charm-bearer
generated by so much charm-bearing, just as Meilichios in
the Diasia was generated from the ritual of appeasement." 21
   The first entirely anthropomorphic conception seems to
have come into Greece with the conquering Achaeans, whose
Olympian Zeus, a mountain god, 22 had attained human form,
at a time when the native Pelasgian gods still retained their
animal shapes or were at best monstrous hybrids; Athena still
identified with an owl, or figured as the Diver-Bird or bird-
headed "Diver-Maid" of Megara. 23 The effect of this per-
sonified Achaean god on the barbarian worship then current
in Aegean lands was probably spectacular; for a single higher
conception can be a marvellous leaven in the heavy, amor-
phous mass of human thought. The local gods took shape
in the new human pattern, so obvious once it had been
conceived; and it is not surprising that this Achaean moun-
tain-god, or rather mountain-dwelling sky-god, became either
father or conqueror of those divinities who grew up in his
image.
   "He had an extraordinary power of ousting or absorbing the
various objects of aboriginal worship which he found in his
path," says Professor Murray. "The story of Meilichios [whose
cult he usurped] is a common one." 24
   But even this^ great Olympian could not attain his pefrect
form, his definite relations to the heavens, the gods, and the
human world, until he became a figure in something more
than ritual; it is in the great realm of myth that human con-
ceptions of divinity really become articulated.              A
                                                      symbol may
give identity to a god, a mimetic dance may express his favors,
but what really fixes his character is the tradition of his origin,
actions, and past adventures. Like the hero of a novel or a
drama, he becomes a personality, not by his sheer appearance,
but by his story. Moloch, however widely worshiped, has
never become an independent being apart from his rites, be-
cause if he had any myth, it never became coherent in any
systematic account. But Zeus and all his family had their
genealogist in Homer, to mention only the greatest myth-
maker we know. Herodotus was probably not far from the
   21 Ibid., pp. 28-31.
   22 ibid., p. 66. "It ['Olympus'] is a   pre-Greek word applied to Moun-
tains."
   23 Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 304.       24 Murray, op. cit. s p. 70.
 148                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
 truth     when he said that Homer gave the Greek gods their
 names and        stations   and even   shapes. 25 Divinities are
                                                their
born of ritual, but theologies spring from myth. Miss Harri-
son, in describing the origin of a Kore or primitive earth-
goddess, says: "The May-pole or harvest-sheaf is half-way to a
harvest Maiden; it is thus         that a goddess is made.
                                        .   .   .                                     A
song is sung, a story told, and the very telling fixes the out-
line of the personality. It is possible to worship long in the
spirit, but as soon as the story-telling and myth-making
instinct awakes you have anthropomorphism and theology." 28
   The "myth-making instinct," however, has a history of its
own, and its own life-symbols; though it is the counterpart
of sacrament in the making of higher religion, it does not be-
long to the lower phases; or, at least, it has little importance
below the level of dawning philosophic thought, which is the
last reach of genuine religion, its consummation and also its
dissolution.




                  Life-Symbols: The Roots of Myth


While religion grows from the blind worship of Life and
magic "aversion" of Death to a definite totem-cult or other
sacramentalism, another sort of "life-symbol" develops in its
own way, starting also in quite unintentional processes, and
culminating in permanent significant forms. This medium is
myth. Although we generally associate mythology with re-
ligion, it really cannot be traced, like ritual, to an origin in
anything like a "religious feeling," either of dread, mystic
veneration, or even festal excitement. Ritual begins in motor
attitudes, which, however personal, are at once externalized
and so made public. Myth begins in fantasy, which may re-
main tacit for a long time; for the primary form of fantasy
is   the entirely subjective and private phenomenon of dream.
     The lowest form of story is not much more than a dream-
narrative. It has no regard whatever for coherence or even
consistency of action, for possibility or common sense; in
fact, the existence of such yarns as for instance the Papuans
tell, in a society which is after all intelligent enough to gauge

the physical properties of clubs and arrows, fire and water,
and the ways of animals and men, shows that primitive story
has some other than literal significance. It is made essentially

     25 Harrison, Prolegomena, p. 64.           26 Harrison, op.   cit.,   p.   80.
                 LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                 149
    of dream-material; the images in it are taken from life, they
    are things and creatures, but their behavior follows some
    entirely unempirical law; by realistic standards it is simply
    inappropriate to them.
       Roland Dixon, in his Oceanic Mythology, 1 cites a story
    from Melanesia, in which two disputants, a buffalo and a
    crocodile, agree to ask "the next to come down the river"
    to arbitrate their quarrel; their request for a judgment is
    refused successively by a leaf-plate, a rice-mortar, and a mat,
    before the Mouse-Deer finally acts as judge. 2 There is an-
    other tale which begins: "One day an egg, a snake, a centi-
    pede, an ant, and a piece of dung set out on a head-hunting
    expedition.  .   .
                        ." 3 In yet  another narrative, "while two
    women were sleeping in a house, a tapa-beater transformed
    itself into a woman resembling one of the pair, and waking
    the other, said to her, 'Come, it is time for us to go fishing.'
    So the woman arose, and they took torches and went out to
    sea in a canoe. After a while she saw an island of driftwood,
    and as the dawn came on, perceived that her companion had
    turned into a tapa-beatei, whereupon she said: 'Oh, the tapa-
    beater has deceived me. While we were talking in the evening
    it stood in the corner and heard us, and in the night it came

    and deceived me.' Landing her on the island, the tapa-beater
:   paddled away and abandoned her.       .   .
                                               ." After a miraculous

    rescue and return, "the woman told her parents how the
    tapa-beater had deceived and kidnapped her; and her father
    was angry, and building a great fire, he threw the tapa-beater
    into it and burned it up." 4
        In these stories we have certainly a very low stage of hupjan
    imagination; one cannot call them "myths," let alone "reli-
    gious myths." For the leaf-plate which refused to arbitrate
    a quarrel (it was peeved, by the way, because it had been
    thrown out when it was still perfectly good), the equally
    unobliging mortar and mat, the piece of dung that went head-
    hunting, and the deceitful tapa-beater, are not "persons" in
    a strange disguise; despite their humanoid activities they are
     just domestic articles. In fact, the tapa-beater is in disguise
    when it resembles a woman, and when the rising sun breaks
     the spell it must return to its real form. But even as a tapa-
     beater it has no trouble in paddling the canoe home, and
     returning alone to the house.
        No sane human being, however simple, could really "sup-
     pose" such events to occur; and clearly, in enjoying this sort

      iVol. ix of The Mythology of All Races (1916).
      2 Dixon, Oceanic Mythology,
                                  p. 198.
      3 Ibid.,p. 202.
      *lbid., pp. 141-142.
150                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of story nobody is trying to "suppose" anything. To imagine
the assorted hunting-party really on its way through the jungle
is perhaps just as impossible for a Papuan as for us. The only

explanation of such stories is, then, that nobody cares whether
their dramatis personae act in character or not. The act is
not really proper to its agent, but to someone its agent repre-
sents; and even the action in the story may merely represent
the deeds of such a symbolized personality. In other words,
the psychological basis of this remarkable form of nonsense
lies in the fact that the story is a fabrication out of subjective
symbols, not out of observed folkways and nature-ways. The
psychoanalysts, who have found such unconscious metaphor
to be the rationale of our otherwise inexplicable dreams, can
give us ample illustration of this sort of fantasy. It is entirely
bound to feelings and wishes of its author, cast in its bizarre
or monstrous mold by his unavowed fears and reticences,
formulated and told and retold as a means of self-expression.
As we meet it in these Melanesian stories, it is really only
a cut above genuine dream. But even so, the story is an
improvement on mere dream, because the very telling of it
requires a little more coherence than our nightmares usually
have. There must be a thread of logic; a tapa-beater who is
also a woman must, in one capacity or the other, be "in
disguise"; the head-hunting dung, egg, and animals must set
out together, and   — though the head-hunt is forgotten before
the end of the story —   they must either do something together
or get separated. Characters have to be generally accounted
for,which is more than we do in dreaming.
  So long as a story is told to a very uncritical audience by
the person who made it up, it may be ever so silly without
giving offense. Anyone who has heard young children telling
yarns to each other can corroborate this. But as soon as the
story goes abroad, it meets with more rigorous demands for
significance. If it survives in a larger sphere, it undergoes
various modifications, in the interests of coherence and pub-
lic appeal. Its purely personal symbols are replaced by more
universal ones; animals, ghosts, and witches take the place of
tapa-beaters and suchlike in the villain's role. Just as sacra
change their form, and become gradually personified with the
growth of ritual action, so the development and integration of
story-action makes the symbols of fantasy take on more and
more reasonable outward form to fit the role in which they
are cast.  A   higher fictional mode emerges     —  the animal fable,
the trickster story, or the orthodox ghost story. 5 Often the
   5 It must be borne in mind here that the primitive animal fable has
no conscious allegorical import, as Aesop's or La Fontaine's fables have,
and that the ghost story has no naturalistic "explanation," because
ghosts are accepted beings in the savage's cosmos.
             LIFE-SYMBOLS THE ROOTS OF MYTH
                              I                                 151

theme    is quite ephemeral  —  merely the homecoming of a
strayed person, the theft of a cocoanut, or somebody's meeting
with a cannibalistic ghoul in the bush   —  but such simple plots
grow, with the advancing arts of life and social organization,
into the well-known genre of fairytale.
   Here we have a literary product belonging to the civilized
races of Europe just as much as to the savage cultures of
darker continents. Aristocratic beings, chiefs or princes, now
play the leading role; dragons and ogres and wicked kings,
or beautiful witches of great power, replace the monkeys,
crocodiles, angry dead men, or local cannibals of the older
tradition. The wishful imagination of man has been disci-
plined, by public exposure and realistic reflection, into a
genuine art-form, as far removed from personal dreaming
as the ritual dance from self-expressive bouncing and shouting.
   Yet this high development of fantasy has brought us no-
where in the direction of mythology. For although fairy-story
is probably an older form than myth, the latter is not simply
a higher development of the former. It, too, goes back to
primitive fantasy, but the point of its origin from that source
lies far back in cultural history, long before the evolution of
                        —
our modern fairytale of Kunstmarchen, as the Germans
say, or even Volksmdrchen. It required not a higher stage of
story-telling, but a thematic shift, to initiate what Miss Harri-
son called "the myth-making instinct."
    The difference between the two fictional modes many    —
scholars to the contrary notwithstanding 6     — is a crucial one.

For the fairytale is irresponsible; it is frankly imaginary, and
its purpose is to gratify wishes, "as a dream doth flatter."

Its heroes and fferoines, though of delightfully^ high station,
wealth, beauty, etc., are simply individuals; "a certain prince,"
"a lovely princess." The end of the story is always satisfy-
ing, though by no means always moral; the hero's heroism
may be slyness or luck quite as readily as integrity or valor.
The theme is generally the triumph of an unfortunate one
an enchanted maiden, a youngest son, a poor Cinderella, an
 alleged fool—   over his or her superiors, whether these be
kings, bad fairies, strong animals (e.g. Red Riding Hood's
wolf), stepmothers, or elder brothers. In short, the fairytale
 is a form of "wishful thinking," and the Freudian analysis
 of it fully explains why it is perennially attractive, yet never
 believed by adults even in the telling.
    Myth, on the other hand, whether literally believed or not,

  6 See esp. P. Ehrenreich, Die allgemeine Mythologie und ihre ethno-
logischen Grundlagen (1910); E. Mudrak, "Die deutsche Heldensage,"
Jahrbuch fur historische Volkskunde, VII (1939): and Otto Rank,
Psychoanalytische Beitrdge zur Mythenforschung (1922).
152               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
istaken with religious seriousness, either as historic fact or as
a "mystic" truth. Its typical theme is tragic, not Utopian;
and its personages tend to fuse into stable personalities of
supernatural character. Two divinities of somewhat similar
type  —perhaps miraculously born, prodigious in strength,
heroically defeated and slain — become identified; they are one
god under two names. Even those names may become mere
epithets linking the god to different cults.
   This sets the hero of myth strikingly apart from the fairy-
tale hero.  No matter how closely the Prince Charming of
Snow White's story resembles the gentleman who wakens
Sleeping Beauty, the two characters do not become identified.
No one thinks that the trickster "Little Claus" is the little
tailor who slew "seven at a stroke," or that the giant whom
Jack killed was in any way related to the ogre defeated by
Puss in Boots, or that he figured elsewhere as Bluebeard.
Fairy stories bear no relation to each other. Myths, on the
other hand, become more and more closely woven into one
fabric, they form cycles, their dramatis personae tend to be
intimately connected if not identified. Their stage is the actual
      —
world the Vale of Tempe, Mount Olympus, the sea, or the
     —
sky and not some ungeographical fairyland.
  Such radical dissimilarities between two kinds of story lead
one to suspect that they have fundamentally different func-
tions. And myth has, indeed, a more difficult and more serious
purpose than fairytale. The elements of both are much alike,
but they are put to quite different uses. Fairytale is a per-
sonal gratification, the expression of desires and of their
imaginary fulfillment, a compensation for the shortcomings of
real life, an escape from actual frustration and conflict. Be-
cause its function is subjective, the hero is strictly individual
and human; for, although he may have magic powers, he is
never regarded as divine; though he may be an oddity like
Tom Thumb, he is not considered supernatural. For the same
reason    —
          namely that his mission is merely to represent the
"self" in a day-dream   — he is not a savior or helper of man-
kind. If he is good, his goodness is a personal asset, for which
he is richly rewarded. But his humanitarian role is not the
point of the story; it is at best the setting for his complete
social triumph. The beneficiary of his clever acts, his prowess,
or his virtue is he himself, not mankind forever after. And
because an individual history is what the fairytale fancies, its
interest is exhausted with the "happy ending" of each finished
story. There is no more mutual reference between the ad-
ventures of Cinderella and those of Rapunzel than between
two separate dreams.
   Myth, on the other hand, at least at its best, is a recogni-
                LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                      153
tion of natural conflicts, of human desire frustrated by non-
human powers, hostile oppression, or contrary desires; it is a
story of the birth, passion, and defeat by death which is
man's common fate. Its ultimate end is not wishful distortion
of the world, but serious envisagement of its fundamental
truths; moral orientation, not escape. That is why it does not
exhaust its whole function in the telling, and why separate
myths cannot be left entirely unrelated to any others. Because
it presents, however metaphorically, a world-picture, an in-

sight into life generally, not a personal imaginary biography,
myth tends to become systematized; figures with the same
poetic meaning are blended into one, and characters of quite
separate origin enter into definite relations with each other.
Moreover, because the mythical hero is not the subject of an
egocentric day-dream, but a subject greater than any indi-
vidual, he is always felt to be superhuman, even if not quite
divine. He is at least a descendant of the gods, something
more than a man. His sphere of activity is the real world,
because what he symbolizes belongs to the real world, no
matter how fantastic its expression may be (this is exactly
contrary to the fairytale technique, which transports a natural
individual to a fairyland outside reality).
   The material of myth is, indeed, just the familiar symbolism
of dream    —
            image and fantasy. No wonder psychologists have
discovered that it is the same material as that of fairytale; that
both have symbols for father and son, maiden and wife and
mother, possession and passion, birth and death. 7 The dif-
ference is in the two respective uses of that material: the one,
primarily for supplying vicarious experience, the other essen-
tially for understanding actual experience. 8 Both interests
may be served in one and the same fiction; their complete
separation belongs only to classic cases. Semi-mythical mo-
tives occur in sheer day-dream and even night-dream, and
an element of compensation-fantasy may persist in the most
universalized, perfected myths. That is inevitable, because

  "
      Cf.Sigmund Freud, Collected Papers, vol. IV (1925), Essay ix (pp.
173-183), "The      Relation of the Poet to Day-Dreaming"; also Otto
Rank, op. cit., esp. essays vi (pp. 119-145), "Das Briidermarchen," and
vii (pp. 146-184), "Mythus und Marchen."
   s This distinction w. s m ..e fairly long ago by E. Bethe, in his mono-
                —
graph, Mythus Sage    —    Marchen (1905), in which he writes: "Myth,
legend, and fairytale differ from one another in origin and purpose.
Myth is primitive philosophy, the simplest presentational (anschauliche)
form of thought, a series of attempts to understand the world, to ex-
plain life and death, fate and nature, gods and cults. Legend is primi-
tive history, naively formulated in terms of love and hate, unconsciously
transformed and simplified. But fairytale has sprung from, and serves,
no motive but entertainment." Cf. also A. Thimme, Das Marchen
(1909).
154                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the latter type has grown at some point out of the former,
as all realistic thinking springs from self-centered fancy. There
is no clean dividing line. Yet the two are as distinct as sum-

mer and winter, night and day, or any other extremes that
have no exact zero-point between them.
  We    do not know just where, in the evolution of human
thought, myth-making begins, but it begins somewhere with
the recognition of realistic significance in a story. In every
fantasy, no matter how Utopian, there are elements that repre-
sent real human relations, real needs and fears, the quandaries
and conflicts which the "happy ending" resolves. Even if the
real situation is symbolized rather than stated (a shocking
condition may well be disguised, or a mysterious one strangely
conceived), a certain importance, an emotional interest, at-
taches to those elements. The ogre, the dragon, the witch, are
intriguing figures in fairy-lore. Unlike the hero, they are
usually ancient beings, that have troubled the land for many
generations. They have their castles or caves or hermitages,
their magic cook-pots and sorcerer's wands; they have evil
deeds laid up against them, and extremely bad habits, usually
of a cannibalistic turn. Their records are merely suggested in
the story, which hastens to get on with the fortunes of the
hero; but the suggestion is enough to activate a mind which is,
after all, committed to some interests besides dream-spinning.
Because they represent the realistic setting from which the
dream starts its fanciful escape, they command a serious sort
of contemplation.
   It is significant that people who refuse to tell their children
fairytales do not fear that the children will believe in princes
 and princesses, but that they will believe in witches and
bogeys. Prince or princess, to whom the wish-fulfilment hap-
pens, we find in ourselves, and need not seek in the outer
 world; their reference is subjective, their history is our dream,
 and we know well enough that it is "make-believe." But the
incidental figures are material for superstition, because their
meanings are in the real world. They represent those same
powers that are conceived, first perhaps through "dreadful"
objects like corpses or skulls or hideous idols, as ghosts, keres,
hoodoos, and similar spooks. The ogres of literature and the
ghouls of popular conception embody the same mysterious
Powers; therefore the fairytale, which even most children will
not credit as a narrative, may carry with it a whole cargo of
ideas, purely secondary to its own purpose, that are most
convincing elements for superstition. The awful ancestor in
the grave goes abroad as the goblin of story: that is the god
of superstition.   The world-picture of spook-religion is a re-
flection of fairytale, a dream whose nightmare elements be-
            LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                 155
come attached to visible cult objects and thus taken seriously.
   There is nothing cosmological about the being such a symbol
can embody. Deities in the classical sense cannot be born of
tales whose significance is personal, because the setting of
such tales is necessarily a genre picture, a local, temporal,
human environment, no matter how distorted and disguised.
The forces that play into an individual's dream are social
forces, not world-powers. So long as the hero is the self, the
metaphorical dragons he slays are his elders, his rivals, or
his personal enemies; their projection into the real world
as sacred beings can yield only ancestors, cave-monsters, mani-
tos, and capricious demigods.
   It is noteworthy that when these secondary characters of
day-dream or story are incorporated into our picture of the
external world as objects of superstition, they represent a
generalized, heightened conception of the social forces in
question: not a man's father, but his fathers, the paternal
power in all generations, may be seen in the fabulous animal-
ancestor he reveres; not his brother, but a "Great Brother,"
in the manito-bear that is his familiar of the forest. The
process of symbolization, while it often obscures the origin
of our ideas, enhances their conceptual form. The demon,
therefore, presents to us not a specific person, but the human
estate of such a person, by virtue of which we are oppressed,
challenged, tempted, or triumphant. Though he is born of a
purely self-centered imagination, he is super-personal; a pro-
duct not only of particular experience, but of social insight.
He is the envisagement of a vital factor in life; that is why
he is projected into reality by the symbolism of religion.
    The great stfip from fairytale to myth is taken whe6*not
                   —
 only social forces persons, customs, laws, traditions    —  but
 also cosmic forces surrounding mankind, are expressed in the
 story; when not only relationships of an individual to society,
 but of mankind to nature, are conceived through the spon-
taneous metaphor of poetic fantasy.
   Perhaps this transition from subjectively oriented stories,
separate and self-contained, to the organized and permanent
envisagement of a world-drama could never be made if crea-
tive thought were not helped by the presence of permanent,
obvious symbols, supplied by nature: the heavenly bodies,
the changes of day and night, the seasons, and the tides. Just
as the social framework of personal life, first conceived in
dream-like, inchoate forms, is gradually given enduring rec-
ognition through religious symbols, so the cosmic setting of
man's existence is imponderable, or at best a mere nightmare,
until the sun and the moon, the procession of stars, the winds
and waters of earth, exhibit a divine rule, and define the
156                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
realm of human activity. When these gods arrive, whose
names connote heavenly powers and natural processes, the
deities of local   caves and groves   become mere    vassals   and
lesser lights.
   It has often been asked, not without justification, how men
of sane observant minds   —   however unschooled or innocent
can be led to identify sun, moon, or stars with the anthropo-
morphic agents of sacred story. Yet the interpretation of gods
and heroes as nature-symbols is very ancient; it has been
variously accepted and rejected, disputed, exploded, and re-
established, by Hellenic philosophers, medieval scholars,
modern philologists, archeologists, and theologians, over a
period of twenty-five hundred years. Mystifying as it is to
psychology, it challenges us as a fact. Demeter was certainly
an earth-goddess, and the identity of Olympian Zeus with the
heavens, Apollo with the sun, Artemis with the moon, etc.,
is so authentic that it has long been considered a truism to
declare these gods "personifications" of the corresponding
natural phenomena. Yet such a process of personification
seems like an unnatural flight of fancy. It is a fairly safe
rule not to impute to the savage mind processes that never
even threaten to arise in our own minds. The difference be-
tween savage and civilized mentality is, after all, one of naive
versus critical thinking; bizarre and monstrous imagery pops
into our heads, too, but is rejected almost instantly by the
disciplined reason. But I do not think that either in dream or
in childhood we are prone to think of the sun as a man. As
for the stars, it takes a sophisticated literary tradition to make
them people, or even Lady Moon's sheep.
   How then did heroic adventures become attached to these
most impersonal actors, as they almost universally did? The
process, I believe, is a natural phase of the evolution of myth-
ology from fairy-story, and indeed represents a potent factor
in that development. The change is a gradual one, and has
necessarily its intermediate steps; one of these is marked by
the introduction of the first cosmic symbols. This transitional
stage between the egocentric interest of folktale, focussed on
a human hero, and the emergence of full-fledged nature-
mythology dealing with divine characters of highly general
import, is the so-called legend, which produces the "culture-
hero."
   This widely represented fictional character is a hybrid of
subjective and objective thinking; he is derived from the
hero of folktale, representing an individual psyche, and con-
sequently retains many of that personage's traits. But the
symbolic character of the other beings in the fairytale has in-
fected him, too, with a certain supernaturalism; he is more
              LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                       157
than an individual wrestling with powers of society. Just what
else he is, must be gathered from his personality as it reveals
itself in the legendary mode.
   He is half god, half giant-killer. Like the latter, he is often
a Youngest Son, the only clever one among his stupid
brothers. He is born of high parentage, but kidnapped, or
exposed and rescued, or magically enslaved, in his infancy.
Unlike the dream-subject of fairytale, however, his deeds only
begin with his escape from thraldom; they go on to benefit
mankind. He gives men fire, territory, game, teaches them
agriculture, ship-building, perhaps even language; he "makes"
the land, finds the sun (in a cave, in an egg, or in a foreign
country), and sets it in the sky, and controls wind and rain.
But despite his greatness he slips back frequently into his role
of folktale hero, and plays the trickster, outwitting human
enemies, local ghosts, or even a venerable ancestor just for
mischief.
  The status of the culture-hero is thus very complex. His
activities lie in the real   world, and their effects are    felt   by
real   men forever after; he therefore has a somewhat vague,
yet unmistakable historical relation to living men, and a tie
to the locality on which he has left his mark. This alone would
suffice to distinguish him from the hero of fairyland, whose
acts are bound up entirely with a story, so that he can be
dispensed with at the end of it, and a new hero introduced
for the next story. The historical and local attachments of the
culture-hero give his being a certain permanence. Stories
gather round him, as they gather round real heroes of history
whose deeds have become legendary, such as Charlemagne,
Arthur, or Kubla Khan. But whereas these princes are creiiited
with enhanced^and exaggerated human acts, the primitive
culture-hero interferes wfth the doings of nature rather than
of men; his opponents are not Saracens or barbarians, but
sun and moon, earth and heaven.
  A  perfect example of such a demigod is the Indian Mana-
bozho or Michabo, also known as Hiawatha. 9 He is at once
a supernatural being, and a very human character. The fact
that he is a manito who can take whole mountain ranges at a
couple of strides, that he chastises his father the West Wind
for the indignities inflicted on his moon-descended mother,
does not put him above feeling the pinch of hunger in winter,
or getting stung in robbing a bee-tree.
   Brinton, one of the earliest systematic collectors of Indian

  9 The first printed source of the Hiawatha legend seems to be J. V.
Clark's History of Onondaga (1849), from which Longfellow drew the
materials for his version. H. R. Schoolcraft's The Myth of Hiawatha
(1856) is fuller and more coherent, but less authentic.
158                        PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
folk-lore, looking for "natural theology" in the Red Man, was
baffled and distressed by the character of Manabozho; for "He
is fullof pranks and wiles, but often at a loss for a meal of
                                magic arts on great beasts and
victuals; ever itching to try his
often meeting ludicrous failure therein; envious of the powers
of others, and constantly striving to outdo them in what they
do best; in short, little more than a malicious buffoon de-
lighting in practical jokes, and abusing his superhuman
powers for selfish and ignoble ends." At the same time, "From
a grain of sand brought from the bottom of the primaeval
ocean he fashioned the habitable land and set it floating on
the waters.   .   One of his footsteps measured eight leagues,
                  .   .




the Great Lakes were the beaver dams he built, and when the
cataracts impeded his progress he tore them away with his
hands." 10 He invented picture writing and made the first
fishing-nets. Obviously he is a deity; yet his name, in every
dialect that varies or translates it, means "Great Hare" or
"Spirit Hare." Brinton was convinced that the popular stories
about him are "a low, modern, and corrupt version," and
that his name rests on a philological mistake which all the
Indians made, confusing wabo, "hare," with wapa, "the dawn";
that his various names originally designated a sun-god, but
led to his representation as a hare, by an accident of lan-
guage. 11
   Manabozho is in all likelihood not a degraded Supreme
God, but an enhanced, exalted fictional hero. He still bears
the marks of his human origin, though he has established rela-
tions to the great forces which encompass human life, the
heavens, the seasons, and the winds. His superhuman deeds
have raised him to a comradeship with these powers; and his
pseudo-historic relation to mankind leads to his identification
with the totem-animal, the mystic ancestor of his people.
Therefore he is at once the son of the West Wind, grandson
of the Moon, etc., and the Great Hare; and at the same time


   10 D. Brinton,         The Myths of the New World (1896), pp. 194-195.
  nlbid., p. 194 ff. On Brinton's theory, one might suppose that the
Sacred Cod of Massachusetts, enshrined in the State House, and some-
times pictured, totem-like, on Massachusetts number-plates, had origi-
nated through a little confusion in the Puritan mind between "Cod"
and "God." The Indian is no more likely than the white man to mis-
take even exact homonyms for each other where their meanings are so
diverse that their interchange is patently absurd. The same objection
holds against every attempt to rest mythology on verbal errors or
garbled versions of fact, as Max Muller and Herbert Spencer proposed
to do. We do not learn religious thinking, on the one hand, nor on the
other turn gospel into bed-time stories, just by mistake       —
                                                            by reading
"son" for "sun," or confusing Simon called Peter with Peter Rabbit;
and presumably right-minded Indians don't, either.
                LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                  159
the clever trickster, the great chief, the canoe-builder, and
the superman.
    We  meet the culture-hero again, in all his glory, as Maui,
the Polynesian demigod. 12 He, too, combines the buffoon,
trickster, or naughty boy with heroic and even divine quali-
ties. Like Manabozho, he is of cosmological descent, though
his normal shape is human. Maui is too widely claimed to
bear the marks of any totem, but can change himself into fish,
bird, or beast at will. He is, indeed, everything from a troll
to a deity, because he belongs to all stages of culture      —
                                                           he is
known as a prankster in Papuan fairytale, the fire-stealer
and dragon-killer ("hero" in a classical sense) in more ad-
vanced legends, the demiurge who shapes earth and sky in
Hawaiian cosmology, and in the mythology of New Zealand
he actually becomes a benevolent patron of humanity, self-
sacrificed inan attempt to bestow immortality on men.
   Yet Maui, like Manabozho, is not worshiped. He has no
cult, his name is not sacred, nor do men feel or fear his
power as a factor in current events. He has died, or gone
west, or otherwise ended his local career; one may see his
footprints in the lava, his handiwork in the arrangements of
heaven and earth, but he no longer presides over these. His
old adversary the Sun still runs the course Maui bade him
follow; his ancestress and murderess, the Moon, still vaunts
her immortality in one resurrection after another. These are
visible powers, deities to be entreated or honored.    Why
                                                        is their
son, grandson, conqueror, or playmate, the culture-hero, not
an eternal god, set as a star in the sky, or imagined as a king
of the sea?
   Because he is not as seriously "believed in" as godsend
spirits are. Like the hero of fairytale, the culture-hero is a
vehicle of human wishes" His adventures are fantasies. But,
whereas the story-hero is an individual overcoming personal
           —
opponents father, master, brothers, or rivals the culture-
hero is Man, overcoming the superior forces that threaten
him. A   tribe, not a single inventor, is unconsciously identified
with him. The setting of his drama is cosmic; storm and night
are his foes, deluge and death his ordeals. These are the
realities that inspire his dream of deliverance. His task is the
control of nature  —  of earth and sky, vegetation, rivers, season
—  and the conquest of death.
   Just as the fairytale served to clarify a personal environ-
ment and human relations in its secondary characters, its

   12 See Roland Dixon, Oceanic Mythology; E. Shortland, Maori Re-
ligion and Mythology (1882); J. C. Andersen, Maori Life in Ao-tea (no
date; c. 1907); W. D. Westervelt, Legends of Maui, a Demigod of Poly-
nesia, and of his Mother Hina (1910).
160                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
kings, witches, ghosts, and fairies (which were often identified
with real beings and so abstracted from the mere tale), so the
culture-hero's story furnishes symbols of a less personal en-
circling reality. The hero's exploits are largely make-believe
even to their inventors; but the forces that challenge him are
apt to be taken seriously. They belong to the real world, and
their symbols mean something beyond the pipe dream in
which they were formulated. Maui is a superman, a wishful
version of human power, skill, and importance; but his place
among the forces of nature is Man's own place. Where did he
come from? From nature, from heaven and earth and sea. In
cosmic terms, he came "out of the Night." In human terms
he came out of Woman. In his myth, therefore, he is de-
scended from Hine-nui-te-po, Great Woman of Night. 13
  The Polynesian word "Hine" (variants "Hina," "Ina") has
an interesting etymology. By itself, it seems to be always either
a proper noun or an adjective connoting either light (e.g.
white, pale, glimmering) or falling, declining; in composite
words it usually refers to woman. 14 As a name, it denotes the
woman or maiden of such-and-such character, somewhat like
the Greek Kore. The mixture of common and proper mean-
ing gives the word a generalizing function; therefore it ap-
plies with special aptness to supernatural beings which, as we
have seen, are generalized personalities. 15 But when several
personages bear the same name because they have essentially
the same symbolic value, they naturally tend to merge. Since
every "Great Woman," "Mountain Maid," "Mother," or "She"
is Woman, we find a great confusion of Hinas.
   In Polynesian mythologies the various Hina characters are
developed mainly as secondary figures in the story of Maui.
They appear as his mother, sister, grandmother, or very first
ancestress. As few English readers are familiar with the legend,
I will sketch briefly the most important tales of this powerful,
mischievous, and brilliant hero.

                            1.      THE QUEST OF FIRE
  Maui was the youngest of four or five brothers, all named
Maui with various epithets. The Mauis were all stupid except
  13 See      Dixon, op.
                     cit., p. 52; Shortland, op. cit., p. 23; Westervelt,
op.   cit.,133; for complete genealogy see Andersen, op. cit., p. 182.
              p.
  14 The general word for "woman" is "wahine." See H. R. Hitchcock,
English-Hawaiian Dictionary (1887); E. Tregear, The Maori-Polynesian
Comparative Dictionary (1891); L. Andrews, Dictionary of the Hawaiian
Language (1865).
  is Shortland {op.        cit.,   chap, ii) gives the following translations:
          Hine-ahu-one  — the Earth-formed Maid       created woman).
                                                             (first
          Hine-a-tauira — the Pattern Maid      begotten woman).
                                                    (first
          Hine-tu-a-maunga —the Mountain Maid.
          Hine-nui-te-po— Great Woman of Night.
                   LIFE-SYMBOLS THE ROOTS OF MYTH
                                      :                               1   6

this youngest son, who was miraculous from his infancy. He
had been prematurely born, and his mother Hina, not in-
terested in such a weakling, threw him into the sea. But a
jellyfish nursed him, and the elements returned him to his
home, where consequently he was received as a foundling. He
was full of power and mischief, always in trouble with his
brothers and his elders.
   Maui's mother slept in a hut with her children, like any
Polynesian mother. But when the first dawn light appeared
she would depart, and keep herself in some mysterious retreat
all day. Young Maui, determined to find her out, blocked all
the chinks and window-holes of the hut, so that no ray of
light wakened her until it was full day; then, when she woke
and hastily fled, he followed her, and discovered the path she
took to the Underworld, where she was wont to spend the
day with her dead ancestors. Maui, in the form of a bird,
joined this company of chthonic gods, who gave him his first
taste of cooked food. Here he found the ancestress in whose
custody was the precious secret of fire.
   There are many versions of his Promethean exploit. In
one of these, the ancestress gives him one of her fingers, in
which the principle of fire dwells; sometimes he wrests it
from her, and sometimes he learns the secret of fire-making
from the Alae, "the bird of Hina," a mud-hen sacred to that
ancestral fire-woman. But in every case, an ancient Hina,
living in a volcano, in a cave, or simply in the earth, possesses
the treasure, and Maui obtains it by trickery, cajoling, or
violence.
                       2.   THE MAGIC FISH-HOOK                       ,m

     This story, current in      New Zealand, tells how Maui was
sent to take food to one of his aged progenitors; "but when
he came to his ancestress he found her very ill, one half of
her body being already dead, whereupon he wrenched off
her lower jaw, made from it a fish-hook, which he concealed
about him, and then returned to his home." 16 With this hook
he went fishing, and drew up a huge fish, which proved to be
the dry land. Had his foolish brothers who were in the canoe
with him not cut up the fish, there would have been a con-
tinent; as it was, the land fell apart into several islands.

3.        THE HINA OF HILO, AND MAUl'S DEED OF SNARING THE
                              SUN 17
  "The Wailuku river, which flows through the town of Hilo,
has its own peculiar and weird beauty. For miles it is a series
     16 Dixon,   Oceanic Mythology,       p.   43   ff.
     17   An excerpt from Westervelt, Legends of Maui, pp. 140-145.
162                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
of waterfalls and rapids. ... By the side of this river Hina's
son Maui had his lands. In the very bed of the river, in a cave
under one of the largest falls, Hina made her home. ... By
the side of this river, the legends say, she pounded her tapa
and prepared her food.          The days were very short and
                                    .   .   .



there was no time for rest while making tapa-cloth.            .          .   .



Although Hina was a goddess and had a family possessing
miraculous power, it never entered the mind of the Hawaiian
legend tellers to endow her with ease in producing wonderful
results.      .   .   .



   "The Hina of Hilo was grieved as she toiled because after
she had pounded the sheets out so thin that they were ready
to be dried, she found it almost impossible to secure the
necessary aid of the sun in the drying process.         The sun
                                                              .   .   .



always hurried so fast that the sheets could not dry.                     .   .   .


Hina found her incantations had no influence with the sun.
She could not prevail upon him to go slower and give her
more time for the completion of her task. Then she called on
her powerful son, Maui-ki-i-ki-i, for aid.
   ". .  He took ropes made from the fibre of trees and vines
          .



[in another version, his sister Ina-Ika's hair] 18 and lassoed
the sun while it climbed the side of the mountain and entered
the great crater which hollows out the summit. The sun came
through a large gap in the eastern side of the crater, rushing
along as rapidly as possible. Then Maui threw his lassoes one
after the other over the sun's legs (the rays of light), holding
him fast and breaking off some of them. With a magic club
Maui struck the face of the sun again and again. At last,
wounded and weary, and also limping on its broken legs, the
sun promised Maui to go slower forevermore."

                          4.   THE DEATH OF MAUI

   This story belongs to New Zealand, and has a tragic, ethical
ring that really suggests a more epic phase of mythology than
the Oceanic. For here the mischievous, wily hero appears in
a serious mood, contemplating the unhappy fate of mankind,
whereby every man must sooner or later go through the gate
of death, and never return. Maui, in the pride of his magic
power, tries to undo this fate, to find life beyond death and
bring it to men on earth.
   Maui, after his many successful exploits, came home to his
parents in high spirits. His father, though duly admiring the
hero's feats, warned him that there was one who might yet
overcome him.

  i&lbid., p. 54. Ina-Ika      is   another "Hina," for "Ina" = "Hina."
             LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                       163
   When Maui   asked incredulously by whom he could be
overcome, "His father answered him, 'By your great ances-
tress,by Hine-nui-te-po, who, if you look, you may see flash-
ing, and as it were, opening and shutting there, where the
horizon meets the sky.     .  What you see yonder shining so
                               .   .



brightly are her eyes, and her teeth are as sharp and hard
as volcanic glass; her body is like that of man, and as for the
pupils of her eyes, they are jasper; and her hair is like the
tangles of long seaweed, and her mouth is like that of a
              ;
               19
barracouta.'
   Maui, despite all warnings, set forth to find the dreadful
ancestress Hina, and to creep through her gaping mouth into
her belly, where Eternal Life was hidden in her womb. He
                                                  —
took his friends the little birds with him presumably for
moral support, since they certainly offered no other aid on      —
his way down the shining path to the horizon; and he adjured
them to make no noise that might wake the monster before
he was safely out of her mouth again. Then he crept into her,
past her obsidian teeth that were the gates of death. He found
the treasure of Eternal Life, and started to make his escape.
But just as he was between the sharp gates once more, one of
the silly small birds could no longer contain itself at the sight
of his undignified exit, and burst into loud, chirping laughter.
Hine-nui-te-po awoke, and Maui was bitten in two. So his great
ancestress conquered him, as she conquers all men             for—
through her jaws they must all go in the end.

   Maui is the same person in various poses throughout these
stories; but it is certainly bewildering to find so many strange
females bearing the name of Hina, and claiming to be Maui's
mother, grandmother, first begotten ancestress, first divine an-
cestress, sister, or other relative. Between his mother who
lived in a hut, and threw him away for a useless weakling
a very true Polynesian lady, we may assume         —
                                                  and the terrible
giantess Hine-nui-te-po, there seCms to be little likeness. Why
do all these mythical women merge their weird personalities
in one name?
  The mystery lightens when we consider that Hina also
means the moon. 20 In the various Hinas of Polynesian myth
we have just so many stages of "personification" of the moon,
from the luminous, hollow woman on the horizon at the end
of the shining path, to the mother who spends the nights with

  19 From Sir George Grey, Polynesian Mythology and Ancient Tradi-
tional History of theNew     Zealand Race, as Furnished by their Priests
and Chiefs, quoted by Dixon, op. cit., p. 52.
   20 Cf. Westervelt, op. cit., p. 165; also Martha Beckwith, Hawaiian
Mythology (1940), p. 220 fi.
164                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
her children but goes down beneath the earth by day. The an-
cestress    who is alive on one side and dead on the other, who
appears to be the same Hina that owned the fire-secret, is
clearly a lunar deity; 21 the Hina of Hilo, emerging from a
cave to spread her tapa-c\oth, seems to be a transitional figure.
   If the gods of mythology really arose by a process of "per-
sonification," then Maui's mother who threw him away and
later re-adopted him must be regarded as the end-result of a
process beginning with a mere animistic conception of the
moon. But in view of the fairytale character of all primitive
story, the complete lack of cosmic interest in the truly savage
mind, and the clear nature-symbolism in the higher mytholo-
gies, I believe the process of development to be exactly the
contrary: Hina is not a symbol of the moon, but the moon
is a symbol of Hina, Woman.
   The moon, by reason of its spectacular changes, is a very
expressive, adaptable, and striking symbol    far more so than—
the sun, with its simple career and unvarying form. A little
contemplation shows quite clearly why the moon is so apt a
feminine symbol, and why its meanings are so diverse that
it may present many women at once                      —
                                          Hina in many, often
incompatible forms, mother and maid and crone, young and
old. The human mind has an uncanny power of recognizing
symbolic forms; and most readily, of course, will it seize
upon those which are presented again and again without
aberration. The eternal regularities of nature, the heavenly
motions, the alternation of night and day on earth, the tides
of the ocean, are the most insistent repetitious forms outside
our own behavior-patterns (the symbolic value of which was
discussed in the previous chapter). They are the most obvious
metaphors to convey the dawning concepts of life-functions
—  birth, growth, decadence, and death.
   Woman is, to primitive reflection, one of the basic mysteries
of nature. In her, life originates; only the more enlightened
societies know that sexual union initiates it. To naive ob-
servation, her body simply waxes and wanes with it for a
certain length of years. She is the Great Mother, the symbol
as well as the instrument of life.
   But the actual process of human conception and gestation
is too slow to exhibit a pattern for easy apprehension. One

needs a symbol, to think coherently about it. Long before
discursive thought could frame propositions to this purpose,
men's minds probably recognized that natural symbol of
womanhood, the waxing and waning moon.
    It is   a characteristic of presentational symbolism that many

  21 Cf.    Dixon, op.   cit.,   p.   43;   Westervelt, op.   cit.,   p. 23.
              LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH               165

concepts may be telescoped into one total expression, without
being severally presented by its constituent parts. The psy-
choanalysts, who discovered this trait in dream-symbolism,
call it "condensation." The moon is a typical "condensed"
symbol. It expresses the whole mystery of womankind, not
only in its phases, but in its inferiority to the sun, its appar-
ent nearness to the clouds that veil it like garments; perhaps
the element of mystery that moonlight invariably creates,
and the complicated time-cycle of its complete withdrawal
(women, in tribal society, have elaborate schedules of taboo
and ritual, of which a man cannot keep track), are not to be
underestimated as symbolical factors.
   But just as life grows to completeness with every waxing
phase, so in the waning period one can see the old moon take
possession, gradually, of the brilliant parts; life is swallowed
by death in a graphic process, and the swallowing monster
was ancestor to the life that dies. The significance of the
moon is irresistible. Ages of repetition hold the picture of life
and death before our eyes. No wonder if men learn to con-
template it, to form their notions of an individual life on the
model of that cycle, and conceive death as a work of ghostly
forbears, the same who gave life                  —
                                         Hina the ancestress is
image of them all; nor that notions of resurrection or rein-
carnation should arise from such contemplation.
   All this may explain why the name Hina should be be-
stowed on the moon, and why that luminary should be deified.
But since savage ideation does not require human form to.
embody a power, why should this Hina be personified?^*
   It is a generally accepted doctrine, almost a truism, that
a savage thinks everything that acts on him must be a person
like himself, and attributes human forms, needs, and motives
to inanimate objects because he cannot explain their activi-
ties in any other way. Again and again we read how primi-
tive men, the makers of mythology, believed the sun, moon,
and stars to be people like themselves, with houses and fami-
lies, because the untutored mind could not distinguish be-
tween heavenly bodies and human bodies, or between their
respective habits. Almost any book on primitive myth that one
picks up repeats this credo, expounded long ago in the classic
work of Tylor:
   "To the lower tribes of man, sun and stars, trees and rivers,
winds and clouds, become personal animate creatures, leading
lives conformed to human or animal analogies, and perform-
ing their special functions with the aid of limbs like beasts or
of artificial instruments like men." 22 Or, in the words of
Andrew Lang:
  22 Tylor, Primitive Culture,   I,   p.   285.
166                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   "The savage draws no hard and fast line between himself
and the things in the world.      .   He assigns human speech
                                      .   .



and feelings to sun and moon and stars and wind, no less than
to beasts, birds and fishes." 23
   Now, there is no doubt that Maui was said to have cut off
the sun's legs, 24 and that the god Tane saw daylight under the
armpit of his father Rangi, the sky; 25 these natural elements
were certainly anthropomorphized in their full-fledged myths.
What I do not believe, however, is that savages originally and
spontaneously see the sun as a man, the moon as a woman,
etc., else cosmological fantasy would be found much lower in
the scale of human mentality than it is; nor do I think that
nature-myths are originally attempts to explain astronomical
or meteorological events. Nature-myths are originally stories
of a superman hero, Maui, Hiawatha, Balder, or Prometheus,
who is a superman because he is felt to be more than a man
—   he is Mankind in a single human figure. He battles with
the forces of nature, the very same forces that made him and
still sustain him. His relation to them is both filial and social;

and it is his incarnation that leads his elemental ancestors,
brethren, and opponents to be personified. In his story, he has
a mother who is human enough; but, as he is Man, so she is
Woman. Now the symbol of womanhood is the moon; and as
a myth-making mentality does not keep symbol and meaning
apart, the  moon not only represents, but presents, Woman,
the mother of Maui. Not personification of the moon, but a
lunarization of Hina, gives rise to Polynesian cosmology.
   Here we have the genesis of myth from legend. The savage
does not, in his innocence, "think" the moon is a woman be-
cause he cannot tell the difference; he "thinks" it is a round
fire, a shining disk; but he sees Woman in it, and names it
Woman, and all its acts and relationships that interest him are
those which carry out that significance. The connection of the
culture-hero with the moon helps to humanize and define the
functions of that deity, because the culture-hero is unequiv-
ocally human; so the lunar changes of light and form and
place, nameless and difficult as mere empirical facts, acquire
importance and obviousness from their analogy to human
relations  and functions: conceiving, bearing, loving, and
hating, devouring and being devoured. The moon lends itself
particularly to such interpretations, because it can present so
many phases of womanhood. A host of different Hinas are
lunar deities. Yet the unity of the underlying symbol reacts
on the theological conception to make the various distinct
  23 Lang, Myth, Ritual and Religion, I, p. 47.
  24 Cf. Westervelt, Legends of Maui, p. 46.
  25 Cf. Shortland, Maori Religion and Mythology, p. 20.
                 LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                   167
Hinas all of one blood, the "mother" with her "daughters."
This calls for mythological elaboration, and gives rise to
genuine nature-myths.
   The apparently irrational genealogies of gods and demigods
spring from the fact that family relationships in myth may
represent many different physical or logical relationships in
nature and in human society. Night "gives birth" to Hanging
Night, Drifting Night, Moaning Night; Morn, by a different
logic, to Abiding Day, Bright Day, and Space. 26 And Man, in
yet a different sense, is descended from the family of all these
Powers. 27 The moon's "daughters" owe their filial status to a
very different source than Maui his sonship, yet they are, by
reason of both relations, unquestionably his sisters. Thus it is
that one may find a personage who is clearly a moon-goddess
taking part in one of Maui's fishing adventures. 28
   I have dwelled so long on the personification of the moon
because it is, in the first place, the most convincing example
of myth-making, and in the second place it may well have
been the original inspiration to that age-long and world-wide
process. There is a school of mythologists who maintain that
not only the first, but all, mythology is moon-mythology. 29 I
doubt whether this sweeping assumption is justified, since
analogous treatment would most naturally be accorded the
sun, stars, earth, sea, etc., as soon as human mentality ad-
vanced to the conception of an anthropomorphic lunar deity.
Such an epoch-making stride of creative imagination could
hardly have been limited to one subject or one symbol. Once
we envisage h^n's status in nature as that of a hero among
cosmic gods, we cannot fail to see a host of gods all round us;
one would naturally expect, at this point, a "vegetative period"
of religious fantasy.
   The term "religious fantasy" is deliberately used here, al-
though many mythologists quite explicitly reject it. Lessmann,
of the afore-mentioned school, points out as a peculiar fact
that "Greek mythology creates an impression as though reli-
gion and mythology were two closely related phenomena," 30
and explains the origin of that deceptive appearance through
a confusion of Greek mythological gods with the Babylonian
cultus-gods. The gods of ritual are related to ancestral spooks,
devils, and local deities; but "at bottom," he says, "demon-
ology is nothing but a low state of religion, and has no more
than the latter to do with mythology." 31 I have tried to show
  26 Ibid., p. 12.          27 Cf. Dixon, Oceanic Mythology, pp. 26-27.
  28 Cf. Westervelt, op. cit., p. 156.
  29 Gesellschaft fur vergleichende Mythenforschung.
  so H. Lessmann, Aufgaben und Ziele der vergleichenden Mythenfor-
schung (1907-1908), p. 7.
  3i hoc. cit.
168                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
how this "confusion" is the normal meeting point of ritual
gods and story gods, how the harvest sheaf who becomes a
harvest maid takes over the story of some maiden of myth-
ology,   whereby the story becomes theology, and enters             into
genuine religious thought.
  In a book called La genese des mythes, A. H. Krappe de-
clares categorically that myths are made up out of whole
cloth by poets, are purely aesthetic productions, and are not
believed unless they happen to be incorporated in some sacred
book. 32 But this is to confuse the myth-making stage of
thought with the literal stage. Belief and doubt belong essen-
tially to the latter; the myth-making consciousness knows only
the appeal of ideas, and uses or forgets them. Only the de-
velopment of literal-mindedness throws doubt upon them and
raises the question of religious belief. Those great conceptions
which can only dawn on us in a vast poetic symbolism are
not propositions to which one says yea or nay; but neither are
they literary toys of a mind that "knows better." The Homeric
Greeks probably did not "believe in" Apollo as an American
fundamentalist "believes in" Jonah and the whale, yet Apollo
was not a literary fancy, a pure figment, to Homer, as he was
to Milton. He was one of the prime realities             —
                                                    the Sun, the
God, the Spirit from which men received inspirations. Whether
anyone "believed" in all his deeds and amours does not matter;
they were expressions of his character and seemed perfectly
rational. Surely the Greeks believed in their gods just as we
believe in ours; but they had no dogma concerning those gods,
because in the average mind no matter-of-fact doubts of
divine story had yet arisen, to cloud the significance of those
remote or invisible beings. Common sense had never asserted
itself against such stories, to make them look like fairytales or
suggest that they were figures of speech. They were figures of
thought, and the only figures that really bold and creative
thought knew.
  Yet there is something to be said for the contention that
mythology is made by the epic poets. The great dreams of
mankind, like the dreams of every individual man, are protean,
vague, inconsistent, and so embarrassed with the riches of
symbolic conception that every fantasy is apt to have a hun-
dred versions.           We see this   in   the   numberless variants   in
which legends are handed down by peoples who have no
literature.   One identical hero has quite incompatible adven-
tures, or one and the same adventure is ascribed to several
heroes, gods, or ogres. Sometimes one cannot tell a maiden
from a bird, or from her own mother, whose "attributive

  32 See p.   23   ff.
               LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                              169
animal" may be that same bird; and this bird-mother-daughter
may be the Earth-Goddess and the Moon and the First
Woman. Mythological figures in their pristine stages have no
fixity, either of form or meaning; they are very much like
dream images, elusive, over-determined, their stories con-
densations of numberless ideas, their names often the only
evidence of any self-identity. 33 As soon as their imaginative
growth is accomplished, traditions become meaningless and
corrupt. Disconnected fragments of great primitive world-
concepts survive in superstitions or in magic formulae, which
the skilled mythologist may recognize as echoes of a more
ancient system of thought, but which the average intelligent
mortal can only view as bizarre and surprising forms of
foolishness.
   The great mythologies which have survived both the over-
growth of mystic fable and the corruption of popular tradi-
tion are those that have become fixed in national poems, such
as the Iliad, the Eddas, the Ramayana, the Kalevala. For an
epic may be fantastic, but it cannot be entirely inconsistent;
it is a narrative, its incidents have temporal order, its world

is geographical and its characters personal. Just as the intro-

duction of nature-symbols gave fantasy a certain dominant
pattern by seeing its monsters and personages exemplified in
the behavior of sun and moon and stars, so the great vehicle
of mythological tradition,           the     epic,   places   its   peculiar re-
strictions on the rampant imagination and disciplines it fur-
ther into consistency and coherence. For it demands nefPonly"
personification, not only some sort of rise and fall in heroic
action, but poetic form", a unity above the separate incidents,
a beginning, climax, and solution of the entire mythical drama.
Such formulation requires a radical handling of the story-
material which tradition is apt tp supply in prodigal quantities
and utter confusion; therefore the principle of poetic form is
a powerful agent in the refashioning of human ideas. This
has given rise to the belief, stated in somewhat doctrinaire
and exaggerated terms by Krappe, that mythology is essentially
the work of epic poets. "Without the epic, no mythology.

   33 Miss Harrison has given recognition to this fact, and it was this very
insight which led her to find the primitive sources of religion behind the
civilized forms of Greek antiquity which she knew as a scholar.
   "Our minds are imbued with classical mythology," she says, "our
imagination peopled with the vivid personalities, the clear-cut outlines of
Olympian gods; it is only by a severe mental effort that we realize          .   .   .



that there were no gods at all,  .   .but only conceptions of the human
                                         .



mind, shifting and changing colour with every human mind that con-
ceived them. Art which makes the image, literature which crystallizes
attributes and functions, arrest and fix this shifting kaleidoscope; but,
until the coming of art and literature and to some extent after, the
formulary of theology is 'all things are in flux.' " Prolegomena, p. 164.
170                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
Homer is the author of the Hellenic mythology, the Nor-
wegian and Icelandic Skalds have created the mythology of
Scandinavia. The same phenomenon may be seen in India, in
Ireland,  and in Japan." 34
   Indeed, the mythologies of Hellas and of the Eddas seem
very remote from the crazy dreamlike yarns of savages. For
the great epics may move against a background of divine
powers and cosmic events, but their heroes are human, not
mystical, and the most wonderful deeds are logically moti-
vated and accomplished. Ulysses or Siegfried or Beowulf sets
out on a definite quest, and the story ends with its success or
frustration; the whole structure presents the career of a super-
human personage, a representative of the race in its strength
and pride, definitely oriented in a world of grand forces and
conflicts, challenges, and destinies. When we look from these
perfected cosmic and social conceptions in the great epics to
the fantasies of Iroquois and South Sea Islanders, we may
well be tempted to say that savages have no mythology worthy
of the name, and that the poets are the creators of that vast
symbolic form.
   Yet this is not true. The "making" of mythology by crea-
tive bards is only a metamorphosis of world-old and universal
ideas. In the finished works of Homer and Hesiod we may see
only what looks like free invention for the sake of the story,
but in the poetry of ruder tribes the popular, religious origin
of myth is still clearly apparent despite the formative influ-
ence of a poetic structure.
   The Finnish Kalevala is a classic example of the transition
from mystical nature-theology and immemorial legend, to a
national treasure of philosophical beliefs and historical tra-
ditions embodied in permanent poetic form. It is probably
the most primitive     —                               —
                        though by no means the oldest of all
epics; and it is quite obviously a transcript of savage mythol-
ogy, more concerned with cosmic origins, conflicts of nature-
deities, incantations, feats and contests of magic, than with
the exploits of brave men and the good or evil ways of
women. It knows no Trojan wars, no planned campaigns of
vengeance; neither lifelong quests, nor founding of cities and
temples. In its first "rune," or canto, the Water-Mother swims
in the sea for seven hundred years; at last she lets the blue
teal nest on her lifted knee, until from the fragments of its
broken eggs the land, the shallows, the deeps and the sky are
fashioned; after this creation she carries the hero in her womb
for thirty years, whereupon he is born an old man full of
magic. The Queen of Night supplies him with Rainbow

  34 Krappe,   La genese des mythes, p. 57.
            LIFE-SYMBOLS! THE ROOTS OF MYTH                 171
Maidens and Air Princesses for unwilling ladyloves whom he
never actually manages to marry. Wainamoinen, this strangely
old and unsuccessful hero, plants forests and fells them, super-
vises the creation of grain, invents the steam bath, builds
boats by sheer magic, and makes the first harp. He is no
fairytale prince beloved of women, but is purely a culture-
hero. When he conquers an adversary he does so by magic
songs, and his rash young enemies and rivals challenge him
not to armed combat, but to singing-contests.
   The whole story really reads more like Polynesian mythol-
ogy than like European epic poetry. Animals are men's mes-
sengers or servants, heroes are custodians of sun, moon, fire
and water, maidens go to live with fishes, their mothers are
Night Queens and their brothers Frost Giants. Kalevala is
essentially a string of magic fishings and plantingsand strange
encounters, like a told dream, patched together with such
human episodes as sledge-building, broom-binding, and the
Finns' inevitable baths, to hold heroes and spirits somehow
to the local scene. How far a call to Helen and Menelaus
and Paris, the Achaean armies encamped, the death of Hector,
the sorrow of Andromache!
   Yet there are culture-heroes in Greek legend, too, who
steal fire from the gods, and youths who would contend with
the sun; and in the Kalevala there are sudden passages of
human import set in its strange mystical frame. When ancient
Wainamoinen seeks the Rainbow Maid, the daughter of the^
Night Woman, that very real and lovely little girl {Brows
herself into a lake rather than give herself to the weird magi-
cian who was old when'he was born. The maiden Aino is too
childlike, too human for him. She sits on a rock above the
water, bewailing her youth and freedom and the cruel decree
of her parents. Her plight is realistic and touching, and her
suicide quite naturally taboos the lake for the family, the
tribe, and the unhappy lover.
   There is nothing in Polynesian or Indian mythology that
comes as near to real life as the lament and desperate act of
the Rainbow Maiden Aino. Every nature mythology treats
the rainbow as an elusive maiden, but it requires the thought-
ful formulation of poetry to see the rainbow's ephemeral
beauty in a girl too wayward and beautiful for her aged lover,
to put the human story first and incorporate the heavenly
phenomenon merely in her symbolic name. Here is the be-
ginning of that higher mythology wherein the world is essen-
tially the stage for human life, the setting of the true epic,
which is human and social. This development in fantasy de-
pends on the clarifying and unifying medium of conscious
composition, the discipline of the compact metrical verse,
172              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
which inevitably sets up standards of coherence and continuity
such as the fragmentary dream-mode does not know or
require.
   The effect of this poetic influence is incomplete in the
Kalevala, but it is there, and lets us see the process by which
mythology is "made" in the epic. The embodiment of myth-
ology in poetry is simply its perfected and final form; because
it has no subsequent higher phases, we regard this formula-

tion as the "true" mythical imagination. And because the sym-
bolic forms stand forth so clearly as pure articulations of
fantasy, we see them only as fictions, not as the supreme con-
cepts of life which they really represent, and by which men
orient themselves religiously in the cosmos.
   It is a peculiar fact that every major advance in thinking,
every epoch-making new insight, springs from a new type of
symbolic transformation. A higher level of thought is prima-
rily a new activity; its course is opened up by a new departure
in semantic. The step from mere sign-using to symbol-using
marked the crossing of the line between animal and man;
this initiated the natural growth of language. The birth of
symbolic gesture from emotional and practical movement
probably begot the whole order of ritual, as well as the dis-
cursive mode of pantomime. The recognition of vague, vital
                             —
meanings in physical forms perhaps the first dawn of sym-
       —
bolism gave us our idols, emblems, and totems; the primitive
function of dream permits our first envisagement of events.
The momentous discovery of nature-symbolism, of the pattern
of life reflected in natural phenomena, produced the first
universal insights. Every mode of thought is bestowed on us,
like a gift, with some new principle of symbolic expression.
It has a logical development, which is simply the exploitation
 of all the uses to which that symbolism lends itself; and when
these uses are exhausted, the mental activity in question has
found its limit. Either it serves its purpose and becomes
truistic, like our orientation in "Euclidean space" or our ap-
preciation of objects and their accidents (on the pattern of
language-structure, significantly called "logic"); or it is super-
seded by some more powerful symbolic mode which opens
new avenues of thought.
   The origin of myth is dynamic, but its purpose is philo-
sophical. It is the primitive phase of metaphysical thought,
the first embodiment of general ideas. It can do no more than
initiate and present them; for it is a non-discursive symbolism,
it does not lend itself to analytic and genuinely abstractive

techniques. The highest development of which myth is capable
is the exhibition of human life and cosmic order that epic
poetry reveals. We cannot abstract and manipulate its con-
               LIFE-SYMBOLS: THE ROOTS OF MYTH                       173

cepts any further within the mythical mode. When this mode
is exhausted, natural religion is superseded by a discursive and

more literal form of thought, namely philosophy.
   Language, in its literal capacity, is a stiff and conventional
medium, unadapted to the expression of genuinely new ideas,
which usually have to break in upon the mind through some
great and bewildering metaphor. But bare denotative lan-
guage is a most excellent instrument of exact reason; it is, in
fact, the only general precision instrument the human brain
has ever evolved. 35 Ideas first adumbrated in fantastic form
become real intellectual property only when discursive lan-
guage rises to their expression. That is why myth is the in-
dispensable forerunner of metaphysics; and metaphysics is
the literal formulation of basic abstractions, on which our
comprehension of sober facts is based. All detail of knowl-
edge, all exact distinction, measure, and practical manipula-
tion, are possible only on a basis of truly abstract concepts,
and a framework of such concepts constitutes a philosophy of
nature, literal, denotative, and systematic. Only language has
the power to effect such an analysis of experience, such a
rationalization of knowledge. But it is only where experience
is already presented     —
                         through some other formative medium,
                                                     —
some vehicle of apprehension and memory that the canons
of literal thought have any application. We must have ideas
before we can make literal analyses of them; and really new
ideas have their own modes of appearance in the unpredict^
able creative mind.
                                                        'm
   The first inquiry as to the literal truth of a myth marks
the change from poetic to discursive thinking. As soon as
the interest in factual values awakes, the mythical mode of
world-envisagement is on the wane. But emotional attitudes
that have long centered on a myth are not easily broken; the
vital ideas embodied in it cannot be repudiated because some-
one discovers that the myth does not constitute a fact. Poetic
significance and factual reference, which are two entirely
different relations in the general symbol-and-meaning pattern,
become identified under the one name of "truth." People who
discover the obvious discrepancy between fantasy and fact
deny that myths are true; those who recognize the truth of
myths claim that they register facts. There is the silly conflict
of religion and science, in which science must triumph, not
because what it says about religion is just, but because religion
rests on a young and provisional form of thought, to which
philosophy of nature
         —                 —
                          proudly called "science," or "knowl-
edge" must succeed if thinking is to go on. There must be a

  35 I   regard mathematical symbolism as a linguistic form of expression.
174                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
rationalistic period  from this point onward. Some day when
the vision is totally rationalized, the ideas exploited and ex-
hausted, there will be another vision, a new mythology.
   The gods have their twilight, the heroes are forgotten; but
though mythology has been a passing phase in man's mental
history, the epic lives on, side by side with philosophy and
science and all the higher forms of thought. Why? What is
the epic, the apotheosis of myth, to those who have repudiated
that metaphorical view of life?
                                  —
   The epic is the first flower or one of the first, let us say
of a new symbolic mode, the mode of art. It is not merely a
receptacle of old symbols, namely those of myth, but is itself
a new symbolic form, great with possibilities, ready to take
meanings and express ideas that have had no vehicle before.
What these new ideas are to which art gives us our first, and
perhaps our only, access, may be gathered from an analysis
of that perfectly familiar yet cryptic notion, "musical signifi-
cance," to which we proceed in the next chapter.




               8.        On Significance in Music

What distinguishes a work of art from a "mere" artifact?
What distinguishes the Greek vase, as an artistic achievement,
from the hand-made bean pot of New England, or the wooden
bucket, which cannot be classed as a work of art? The Greek
vase is an artifact, too; it was fashioned according to a tradi-
tional pattern; it was made to hold grain or oil or other
domestic asset, not to stand in a museum. Yet it has an artis-
tic    value for all generations. What gives it that preeminence?
      To reply, "Its beauty," is simply to beg the question, since
      value is beauty in the broadest sense. Bean pots and
artistic
wooden buckets often have what artists call "a good shape,"
i.e., they are in no wise offensive to the eye. Yet, without

being at all ugly, they are insignificant, commonplace, non-
artistic rather than /^artistic. What do they lack, that a work
of art   —                                         —
          even a humble, domestic Greek vase possesses?
   In the words of a well-known critic, Mr. Clive Bell, " 'Sig-
nificant Form' is the one quality common to all works of
visual art." 1 Professor L. A. Reid, a philosopher well versed
in the problems of aesthetics, extends the scope of this char-
acteristic to all art whatsoever. For him, "Beauty is just ex-
pressiveness," and "the true aesthetic form ... is expressive

  lArt (1914),      p.    8.
                    ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        175
form." 2 Another art critic, Mr. Roger Fry, accepts the term
"Significant Form," though he frankly cannot define its mean-
ing. From the contemplation of (say) a beautiful pot, and as
an effect of its harmony of line and texture and color, "there
comes to us," he says, "a feeling of purpose; we feel that all
these sensually logical conformities are the outcome of a par-
ticular feeling, or of what, for want of a better word, we call
an idea; and we may even say that the pot is the expression of
an idea in the artist's mind." 3 After many efforts to define the
notion of artistic expressiveness, he concludes: "I seem to be
unable at present to get beyond this vague adumbration of
significant form. Flaubert's 'expression of the idea' seems to
me to correspond exactly to. what I mean, but alas! he never
explained, and probably could not, what he meant by the
'idea.' " 4
      There is a strong tendency today to treat art as a significant
phenomenon rather than as a pleasurable experience, a grati-
fication of the senses. This  is probably due to the free use of

dissonance and so-called "ugliness" by our leading artists in
all fields  —
            in literature, music, and the plastic arts. It may
also be due in some measure to the striking indifference of
the uneducated masses to artistic values. In past ages, these
masses had no access to great works of art; music and paint-
ing and even books were the pleasures of the wealthy; it
could be assumed that the poor and vulgar would enjoy art
if they could have it. But now, since everybody can read, visit
museums, and hear great music at least over the radio* the'
judgment of the masses on these things has become a reality,
and has made it quite obvious that great art is not a direct
                                                       —
sensuous pleasure. If it were, it would appeal like cake or
cocktails   —
            to the untutored as well as to the cultured taste.
This fact, together with the intrinsic "unpleasantness" of much
contemporary art, would naturally weaken any theory that
treated art as pure pleasure. Add to this the current logical
and psychological interest in symbolism, in expressive media
and the articulation of ideas, and we need not look far afield
for a new philosophy of art, based upon the concept of
"significant form." 5
  2   A Study in Aesthetics (1931). See esp. pp. 43 and 197. See also
Knowledge and Truth (1923), esp. the final chapter, and "Beauty and
Significance," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, N.S. XXIX (1928-
29), pp. 123-154.
   3 Vision and Design (1925), p. 50.   * Ibid., p. 302.
   s This tendency was recognized long ago by the author of an article on
symbolism, which opens with the words: "An exhaustive treatise on the
symbol is an aesthetic in miniature; for in recent years symbolism has
acquired such a central position in aesthetics that one can hardly take a
step in that wide domain without stumbling upon some sort of symbolic
relation." R. M. Wernaer, "Das aesthetische Symbol," Zeitschrift fur
Philosophic und philosophische Kritik,  CXXX       (1907), 1: 47-75.
176                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
  But if forms in and of themselves be significant, and
indeed must be so to be classed as artistic, then certainly the
kind of significance that belongs to them constitutes a very
special problem in semantics. What is artistic significance?
What sort of meaning do "expressive forms" express?
   Clearly they do not convey propositions, as literal symbols
do.   We all know that a seascape (say) represents water and
rocks, boats and fish-piers; that a still-life represents oranges
and apples, a vase of flowers, dead- game or fish, etc. But
such a content is not what makes the paint-patterns on the
canvas   "expressive forms." The mere notion of rabbits,
grapes, or even boats at sunset is not the "idea" that inspires
a painting. The artistic idea is always a "deeper" conception.
   Several psychologists have ventured to unmask this
"deeper" significance by interpreting pictures, poems, and
even musical compositions as symbols of loved objects,
mainly, of course, of a forbidden nature. Artistic activity,
according to the psychoanalysts who have given it their
attention, is an expression of primitive        dynamisms, of
unconscious wishes, and uses the objects or scenes represented
to embody the secret fantasies of the artist. 6
  This explanation has      much to recommend it. It accounts
for the fact that     we are inclined to credit works of art with
significance, although (by reason of the moral censorship
which            the appearance of basic desires) we can
           distorts
never say what they signify. It does justice to the emotional
interest, the seriousness with which we receive artistic ex-
perience. Above all, it brings this baffling department of
human activity into the compass of a general psychological
         —
system the so-called "dynamic psychology," based on the
recognition  of certain fundamental human needs, of the
conflicts resulting from their mutual interference, and of
the mechanism whereby they assert, disguise, and finally
realize themselves. The starting-point of this psychology is
the discovery of a previously unrecognized symbolic mode,
   e See Ch. Badouin, Psychanalyse de Yart (1929); A. M. Bodkin, "The
Relevance of Psychoanalysis to Art Criticism," British Journal of Psy-
chology, XV (1924-25), part II, 174-183; J. W. Brown, "Psychoanalysis
in the Plastic Arts," International Journal of Psychoanalysis, X, part I
(January 1929); J. Landquist, "Das kiinstlerische Symbol," Imago, VI
(1920), 4: 297-322; Hanns Sachs, "Kunst als Personlichkeit," Imago,
XV (1929), 1: 1-14; the same author's bibliographical essay, "Aesthetics
and Psychology of the Artist," International Journal of Psychoanalysis,
II (1921), part I, 94-100; George Whitehead, Psychoanalysis and Art
(1930). With special reference to music, see A. Elster, Musik und Erotik
(1925); Max Graf, Die innere Werkstatt des Musikers (1910); K. Eggar,
"The Subconscious Mind and the Musical Faculty," Proceedings of the
Musical Association, XLVII (1920-21), 23-38; D. Mosonyi, "Die ir-
rationalen Grundlagen der Musik," Imago, XXI (1935), 2: 207-226;
A. van der Chijs, "Ueber das Unisono in der Komposition," Imago,
XII (1926), 1: 23-31. This list is not exhaustive, but representative.
                   ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           177
typified in dream, and perfectly traceable in all works of
fantasy. To assimilate art to the imaginative life in general is
surely not a forced procedure. It seems, moreover, to bring
the problem of aesthetic experience into the symbol-centered
philosophy that constitutes the theme of this book.
   These are strong recommendations for the psychoanalytic
theory of aesthetics. But despite them all, I do not think
this theory (though probably valid) throws any real light
on those issues which confront artists and critics and con-
stitute the philosophical problem of art. For the Freudian
interpretation, no matter how far it be carried, never offers
even the rudest criterion of artistic excellence. It may explain
why a poem was written, why it is popular, what human
features it hides under its fanciful imagery; what secret ideas
a picture combines, and why Leonardo's women smile mys-
teriously. But it makes no distinction between good and bad
art.   The features to which it attributes the importance and
significance of a great masterpiece may all be found just as
well in an obscure work of some quite incompetent painter
or poet. Wilhelm Stekel, one of the leading Freudian psychol-
ogists interested in artistic productions as a field for analysis,
has stated this fact explicitly: "I want to point out at once,"
he says, "that it is irrelevant to our purpose whether the poet in
question is a great, universally acknowledged poet, or whether
we are dealing with a little poetaster. For, after all, we are in-
vestigating only the impulse which drives people to create." 7
   An analysis to which the artistic merit of a work is iiTele-
vant can hardty be regarded as a promising technique of art-
criticism, 8 for it can look only to a hidden content of the

  7 Die Traume der Dichter (1912), p. 32.
  8 Oddly enough, this fact is overlooked by so excellent a literary critic
as J. M. Thorburn, who says: "The poet must, I think, be regarded as
striving after the simplicity of a childish utterance. His goal is to think
as a child, to understand as a child. .   .       .


   "When he has written, and the work is good, the measure of his genius
is the depth to which he has gone back, the originality of his idiom and
the degree of its antiquity." {Art and the Unconscious, pp. 70-71.)
  "If art be symbolic, it is the artist who discovers the symbol. But he
need not —                           —
            though of course he may recognize it as a symbol. We, the
appreciative recipients of his work, must so recognize it." {Ibid., p. 79.)
  This makes artistic judgment a special development of psychoanalytic
technique. "We try to reconstruct his [the artist's] personality from what-
ever sources we may." {Ibid., p. 21.) The more dreamlike and subjective
the work, the more primitive is its language; the greatest poets should
then be the most graphic dreamers. Stekel has pointed out, however, that
at the level of symbol production the poet does not differ from the most
prosaic soul. After analyzing three dreams                —
                                                one reported by a woman
under his care, one by Goethe, and one by that poet's friend and hench-
                 —
man, Eckermann he observes: "Is it not remarkable that the great poet
Goethe and the unknown little woman          should have constructed such
                                              .   .   .


similiar dreams? And were one to award a prize for poetic excellence,
Eckermann and the deserted woman would both win over Goethe." {Die
Traume der Dichter, p. 14.)
178                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
work, and not to what every artist knows as the real problem
—  the perfection of form, which makes this form "significant"
in the artistic sense. We cannot evaluate this perfection by
finding more and more obscure objects represented or sug-
gested by the form.
   Interest in represented objects and interest in the visual
or verbal structures that depict them are always getting
hopelessly entangled. Yet I believe "artistic meaning" belongs
to the sensuous construct as such; this alone is beautiful,
and contains all that contributes to its beauty.
   The most obvious approach to the formal aspect of art
would be, of course, through the study of pure design. But
in poetry pure design is non-existent, and in the plastic arts
it has played but a minor role until very recent times. It is

carried to considerable heights in textiles, and occurs as
decoration in conjunction with architecture and ceramics.
But the world's greatest artists have rarely worked in these
media; sculptures and paintings are their high achievements.
If we would really restrict ourselves to pure perceptible
forms, the plastic arts offer but a sparse field for research,
and not a central one.
   Music, on the other hand, is preeminently non-representa-
tive even in its classical production, its highest attainments.
It exhibits pure form not as an embellishment, but as its
very essence; we can take it in its flower           —
                                                  for instance,
German music from Bach            to   Beethoven   —and have      practi-
cally   nothing    but       structures before us: no scene,
                         tonal
no   object, no fact. That is a great aid to our chosen preoc-
cupation with form. There is no obvious, literal content in
our way. If the meaning of art belongs to the sensuous
percept itself, apart from what it ostensibly represents, then
such purely artistic meaning should be most accessible
through musical works.
  This is not to say that music is the highest, the most ex-
pressive, or the    most universal art. Sound is the easiest me-
dium    to use in a purely artistic way; but to work in the
safest medium is not at all the same thing as to achieve the
highest aim. Furthermore, we should take warning against
the fallacy of hasty generalization     —   of assuming that through
music we are studying all the arts, so that every insight into
the nature of music is immediately applicable to painting,
architecture, poetry, dance, and drama; and above all, that
propositions which do not have obvious analogues in all
these departments are not very valuable in their restricted
musical context. 9 A basic unity of purpose and even of
  » An artistic principle may be obvious in just one special field, and
prove to be generally applicable only after development in that field; for
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           179
general   method for all the arts is a very inviting hypothesis,
and may well be demonstrable in the end; but as a foregone
conclusion, a dogmatic premise, it is dangerous because it
discourages special theories and single-minded, technical
study. General theories should be constructed by generaliza-
tion from the principles of a special field, known and un-
derstood in full detail. Where no such systematic order exists
to serve as a pattern, a general theory is more likely to consist
of vague generalities than of valid generalizations.
   Therefore let us concern ourselves, at present, with the
significance of music alone.        A
                                    great deal of philosophical
thought has been bestowed on this subject, if not since Winkel-
mann and Herder, at least since Schopenhauer; and not only
from the general standpoint of the aesthetician, which those
early writers took, but from the more specialized one of the
musician and the musical critic. The history of musical aes-
thetics is an eventful one, as intellectual histories go, so it is
unavoidable that a good many theories have to be weighed
in considering it. In the course of all this reflection and
controversy, the problem of the nature and function of music
has shifted its center several times; in Kant's day it hinged
on the conception of the arts as cultural agencies, and con-
cerned the place of music among these contributions to in-
tellectual progress. On this basis the great worshiper of
reason naturally ranked it lowest of all art-forms. 10 The
Darwinians of later days sought the key to its importance-
in its origins; if it could be proved     —
                                        or at least, imagined
to have survival value, ^or even to be the residue of some
formerly useful instinct or device, its dignity was saved, even
if our interest in it now were only what William James took
it to be
          — "a mere incidental peculiarity of the nervous sys-
tem, with no teleological significance." al Helmholtz, Wundt,
Stumpf, and other psychologists to whom the existence and
persistence of music presented a problem, based their inquiries
on the assumption that music was a form of pleasurable sen-
sation, and tried to compound the value of musical composi-


instance, Edward Bullough's excellent notion of "psychical distance"
(of which more will be said later) would probably not have been recog-
nized as an important principle in music or ceramic art, but the peculiar
problems of drama required such a concept. Even if it had not proved
to be universally applicable, it would be valid in its original domain.
(See " 'Psychical Distance' as a Factor in Art and as an Aesthetic Princi-
ple," British Journal of Psychology,  V  (1912), part II, 87-118.)

   io See the excerpt from Kant's Kritik der Urteilskraft in F. M. Gatz's
source-book, Musik-Aesthetik (1929), p. 53.
   ii Principles of Psychology, 2 vols. (1890). See vol. II, p. 419. His
words refer directly to fear-reactions in high places, which, he says, in
this respect resemble "liability to sea-sickness, or love of music."
180                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
tions out of the "pleasure-elements" of their tonal constituents.
This gave rise to an aesthetic based on liking and disliking, a
hunt for a sensationist definition of beauty, and a conception
of art as the satisfaction of taste; this type of art theory,
which of course applies without distinction to all the arts, is
"aesthetic" in the most literal sense, and its exponents today
are rather proud of not overstepping the limits of the field so
defined. 12 But beyond a description of tested pleasure-displeas-
ure reactions to simple sounds or elementary sound-complexes,
and certain observations on people's tastes in musical selec-
tions,   this   approach has not taken         us;   it   seems   to   be an
essentially barren adventure.
   Another kind of reaction to music, however, is more strik-
ing,  and seems more significant: that is the emotional re-
sponse it is commonly supposed to evoke. The belief that
music arouses emotions goes back even to the Greek philoso-
phers. It led Plato to demand, for his ideal state, a strict
censorship of modes and tunes, lest his citizens be tempted
by weak or voluptuous airs to indulge in demoralizing emo-
tions. 13 The same principle is often invoked to explain the
use of music in tribal society, the lure of the African drum,
the clarion call and the "Pibroch" calling armies or clans
to battle, the world-old custom of lulling the baby to sleep
with slumber songs. The legend of the sirens is based on a
belief in the narcotic and toxic effect of music, as also the
story of Terpander's preventing civil war in Sparta, or of
the Danish King Eric, who committed murder as a result of
a harpist's deliberate experiment in mood-production. 14 De-
spite the fact that there  is, to my knowledge, not a single

authentic record of any specific change of disposition or in-
tention, or even the inhibition of a practical impulse in any
person by the agency of music, this belief in the physical
power of the art has come down to modern times. Music is
known, indeed, to affect pulse-rate and respiration, to facili-
tate or disturb concentration, to excite or relax the organism,
while the stimulus lasts; but beyond evoking impulses to sing,
tap, adjust one's step to musical rhythm, perhaps to stare,
hold one's breath or take a tense attitude, music does not
   12 Thus Clive Bell, having proposed the concept of "significant form"
as the keynote of art criticism, says: "At this point a query arises    .  :.   .



'Why are we so profoundly moved by forms related in a particular way?'
The question is extremely interesting, but irrelevant to aesthetics. In pure
aesthetics we have only to consider our emotion and its object."
   If questions about the relation between emotion and object are ir-
relevant, what is there to "consider" about these factors?
   13 Republic, bk. iii.
   I* These and other stories are cited by Irmgard Otto in an essay, "Von
sonderbahrer Wiirckung und Krafft der Musik," Die Musik,               XXIX
(1937), part II, 625-630.
                   ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                            181

ordinarily influence behavior. 15 Its somatic influences seem
to affect unmusical as well as musical persons (the selections
usually employed in experimentation would be more likely to
irritate than to soothe or inspire a musical person), and to
be, therefore, functions of sound rather than of music. 16 Ex-
periments made with vocal music are entirely unreliable,
since words and the pathos of the human voice are added to
the musical stimulus. On the whole, the behavior of concert
audiences after even the most thrilling performances makes
the traditional magical influence of music on human actions
very dubious. Its somatic effects are transient, and its moral
hangovers or uplifts seem to be negligible.
   Granting, however, that the effects do not long outlive their
causes, the proposition that music arouses emotions in the
listener does not seem, offhand, like a fantastic or mythical
assertion. In fact, the belief in the affective power of music
is respectable enough to have led some very factual-minded
modern psychologists to conduct tests for the emotional
effects of different compositions and collect the reported data.
They have compiled lists of possible "effects," such as:
           Sad                                   Rested
           Serious                               Amused
           Like dancing                          Sentimental
           Stirred, excited                      Longing
           Devotional                            Patriotic
            Gay, happy                            Irritated
The auditors of certain musical selections, which were usually
of the so-callecK'semi-popular" sort (e.g. MacDowelPs To a
Wild Rose, Sousa's Volunteer March), were given prepared
data-sheets and asked to check their musically stimulated
feelings with the rubrics there suggested. 17
   The results of such experiments 18 add very little to the
well-known fact that most people connect feelings with music,
  is For an exhaustive treatment of the physical and mental effects of
music, see the dissertation by Charles M. Disserens, The Influence of
Music on Behavior (1926). Dr. Disserens accepts much evidence that I
would question, yet offers no report of practical acts inspired by music,
or even permanent effects on temperament or disposition, such as were
claimed for it in the eighteenth century. (Cf., e.g., Reflections on Ancient
and Modern Musick, with Application to the Cure of Diseases (Anon.,
1749); or Albrecht's De Effectu Musices in Corpus Animatum.)
  is An often neglected distinction pointed out in Ernst Kurth's Musik-
psychologie, p. 152. Kurth observes that Stumph, working deliberately
with unmusical rather than musical persons, gave us a Tonpsychologie
but not a Musikpsychologie.
  1 7 See Esther Gatewood, "The Nature of Musical Enjoyment," in The
Effects of Music, edited by Max Schoen (1927).
  is These results were, of course, not spontaneous, since the question-
naire directed the subjects' expectations to a special kind of experience
which is popularly supposed to result from hearing music, and moreover
dictated a choice, which made it necessary to attribute some particular
182                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and (unless they have thought about the precise nature of
that connection) believe they have the feelings while they are
under the influence of the music, especially if you ask them
which of several feelings the music is giving them. That quick,
lilting tunes are said to make one feel happy or "like dancing,"
hymns to make one solemn, and funeral marches sad, is
hardly surprising; nor that Love's Old Sweet Song was gen-
erally said to stir "tender memories." The whole inquiry
really took for granted what Charles Avison, a British mu-
sicologist and organist, said without experimental evidence in
1775: that "the force of sound in alarming the passions is
prodigious," and that music "does naturally raise a variety of
passions in the human breast, similar to the sounds which
are expressed; and thus, by the musician's art, ... we are
by turns elated with joy, or sunk in pleasing sorrow, rouzed
to courage, or quelled by grateful terrors, melted into pity,
tenderness, and love, or transported to the regions of bliss, in
an extacy of divine praise." 19
   The terms "pleasing sorrow" and "grateful terrors" present
something of a puzzle. If music really grieves or frightens
us, why do we listen to it? The modern experimenters are
not disturbed by this question, but Avison felt called upon to
meet it. The sorrows and terrors of music, he explained, are
not our own, but are sympathetically felt by us; "There are
certain sounds natural to joy, others to grief or despondency,
others to tenderness and love; and by hearing these, we nat-
urally sympathize with thosewho either enjoy or suffer." 20
  But if we are moved by sympathy, with whom are we
sympathizing? Whose feelings do we thus appreciate? The
obvious answer is: the musician's. He who produces the
music is pouring out the real feelings of his heart. Music is
his avenue of self-expression, he confesses his emotions to
                   —                 —
an audience, or in solitude just works them off to relieve
himself. In an age when most performers offered their own
compositions or even improvisations, this explanation of
music was quite natural. Rousseau, Marpurg, Mattheson, C.
Ph. E. Bach, were all convinced that (as Bach put it) "since
a musician cannot otherwise move people, but he be moved
himself, so he must necessarily be able to induce in himself

feeling wholly, or preeminently, to any given piece. Fleeting affects,
superseded by others, could not be checked off without creating a wrong
impression; only general states of feeling were supposed to result, and
were therefore dutifully reported.
  Essentially the same technique is employed by Kate Hevner; see her
"Expression in Music: Discussion of Experimental Studies and Theories,"
Psychological Review, XLII (1935), 2: 186-204, and "Experimental
Studies of the Elements of Expression in Music," American Journal of
Psychology, XLVIII (1936), 2: 246-268.
  19 An Essay on Musical Expression (1775), pp. 3-4.
   20 Loc cit. See also p. 5, n.
                                                                          ,
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                            183
all    those affects which he would arouse in his auditors; he
conveys     his feelings to them, and thus most readily moves
them to sympathetic emotions." 21 The problem was some-
what complicated by the growing distinction between com-
posers and performers toward the end of the century; but
here the reciprocity of expression and impression came to the
rescue. The composer is, indeed, the original subject of the
emotions depicted, but the performer becomes at once his
confidant and his mouthpiece. He transmits the feelings of
the master to a sympathetic audience.
  In this form the doctrine has come           down to our day, and
is    widely accepted by musicians and philosophers alike. From
Rousseau to Kierkegaard and Croce among philosophers, from
Marpurg    to Hausegger and Riemann among music critics,
but above all among musicians themselves            —
                                               composers, con-
ductors, and performers      —
                           we find the belief very widely dis-
seminated that music is an emotional catharsis, that its essence
is self-expression. Beethoven, Schumann, Liszt, to mention
only the great, have left us testimonials to that effect. More-
over, it is the opinion of the average sentimental music-lover
that all moving and poignant music must translate some
personal experience, the longing or ecstasy or despair of the
artist's own vie amoureuse; and most musical amateurs will
accept without hesitation the statement of Henri Prunieres,
who says categorically that whatever feelings a composer may
convey, "we may rest assured that he will not express these
sentiments with authority unless he has experienced them* at
some given moiRent of his existence." 22 Most likely they will
even go so far as to agree that, in the case of a theme which
Beethoven used ten years after he had first jotted it down, "It
is probable that such a theme, translating an impression of
keenest sorrow, came to him during a day of suffering." 23
The self-expression theory, which classes music with "such ex-
pressions as 'oh-oh,' or at a higher level, lyrical verses," as
Carnap says, is the most popular doctrine of the significance
and function of music. 24 It explains in a very plausible way
  21 Versuch ueber die wahre Art, das Klavier zu spielen (1925, reprint
from 2nd ed.; 1st ed., part I, 1753, part II, 1762). See part I, p. 85. For
a detailed study of this early theory, see Wilhelm Caspari's dissertation,
Gegenstand und Wirkung der Tonkunst nach der Ansicht der Deutschen
im 18. Jahrhundert (1903). For extensive source-material, see Gatz,
  22 "Musical Symbolism," Musical Quarterly,      XIX (1933), 1: 18-28.
See p. 20.
  23 ibid., p. 21.
   24 Even our leading psychologists subscribe to this conviction: "To be
successful, the musician must carry his audience on a wave of emotion
often bordering on the point of ecstasy." This from Carl Seashore, who
prides himself on his strict investigation of facts, not "the rehashing of
semi-scientific knowledge under the name of philosophy in aesthetics"!
(See Pyschology of Music, 1938, pp. 174 and 377.)
184                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the undeniable connection of music with feeling, and the
mystery of a work of art without ostensible subject-matter;
above all, it brings musical activity within the compass of
                          —
modern psychology behavioristic, dynamic, genetic, or what
not.
   Yet the belief that music is essentially a form of self-ex-
pression meets with paradox in very short order; philosophi-
cally it comes to a stop almost at its very beginning. For
the history of music has been a history of more and more
integrated, disciplined, and articulated forms, much like the
history of language, which waxes important only as it is
weaned from its ancient source in expressive cries, and be-
comes denotative and connotative rather than emotional.        We
have more need of, and respect for, so-called "pure music"
than ancient cultures seem to have had; 25 yet our counter-
points and harmonic involutions have nothing like the ex-
pressive abandon of the Indian "Ki-yi" and "How-how," the
wailing primitive dirge, the wild syncopated shouts of African
tribesmen. Sheer self-expression requires no artistic form.      A
lynching-party howling round the gallows-tree, a woman
wringing her hands over a sick child, a lover who has just
rescued his sweetheart in an accident and stands trembling,
sweating, and perhaps laughing or crying with emotion, is
giving vent to intense feelings; but such scenes are not occa-
sions for music, least of all for composing. Not even a theme,
"translating an impression of keenest sorrow," is apt to come
to a man, a woman, or a mob in a moment when passionate
self-expression is needed. The laws of emotional catharsis are
natural laws, not artistic. Verbal responses like "Ah!" "Oh-oh!"
are not creations, but speech-habits; even the expressive-
ness of oaths rests not on the fact that such words were in-
vented for psycho-cathartic purposes, but that they are taboo,
and the breaking of a taboo gives emotional release. Break-
ing a vase would do better still.
   Yet it may well be argued that in playing music we seek,
and often find, self-expression. Even Hanslick, to whom emo-
tive meanings in a composition were anathema, granted the
possibility of relieving one's feelings at the keyboard; 26 and
anyone who has a voice or an instrument can verify the
relief of musical outpourings, from his own experience. Surely,
at some time, he has been moved to vent his excitement in
song or rhapsody or furious tarantelle, and felt better for the
manic outburst; and, being "keyed up," he probably sang or
  25 Cf.Eduard Hanslick, Vom Musikalisch-Schonen (5th ed. 1876; 1st
                                     Entwurf einer neuen Aesthetik
ed. 1854), p. 103; also Ferruccio Busoni,
der Tonkunst (1907), p. 5.
  26 Op.   cit.,   pp. 78-79.
                ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                    185

played unusually well. He chose the piece because it seemed
to "express" his condition. It seemed to him, at least at the
time, that the piece was designed to speak his feelings, and
not impossibly he may believe forever after that these must
be the very feelings the composer intended to record in the
score.
  The great variety of interpretations which different players
or auditors will give to one and the same piece   —differences
even of such general feeling-contents as sad, angry, elated,
impatient — make such confidence in the author's intentions
appear somewhat naive. He could not possibly have been
feeling  all the different emotions his composition seems to
be able to express. The fact is, that we can use music to
work off our subjective experiences and restore our personal
balance, but this is not its primary function. Were it so, it
would be utterly impossible for an artist to announce a pro-
gram in advance, and expect to play it well; or even, having
announced it on the spot, to express himself successively in
allegro, adagio, presto, and allegretto, as the changing moods
of a single sonata are apt to dictate. Such mercurial passions
would be abnormal even in the notoriously capricious race
of musicians!
   If music has any significance, it is semantic, not sympto-
matic. Its "meaning" is evidently not that of a stimulus to
evoke emotions, nor that of a signal to announce them; if
it has an emotional content, it "has" it in the same sense^

that language "has" its conceptual content      symbolically. It
is not usually derived from affects nor intended for them;

but we may say, with certain reservations, that it is about
them. Music is not the cause or the cure of feelings, but their
logical expression; though even in this capacity it has its
special ways of functioning, that make it incommensurable
with language, and even with presentational symbols like
images, gestures, and rites.
   Many attempts have been made to treat music as a lan-
guage of emotions. None has been really satisfactory, though
some of them are both searching and well-directed. An ex-
traordinary amount of able thinking has been expended on
the philosophy of music, and the only stumbling-block which
has held up the progress of this central problem of "significant
form" has been, I think, a lack of understanding of the ways
in which logical structures may enter into various types of
"significance." Practically all the work has been done; the
anomalies and puzzles that remain, though very baffling, are
mainly due to logical misconceptions, or slightly naive as-
sumptions which only a logician could be expected to recog-
nize as such. Here we run into a difficulty inherent in the
186              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
scholarship of our time     — the obstacle of too much knowl-
edge, which forces us to accept the so-called "findings" of
specialists in other fields, "findings" that were not made with
reference to our searchings, and often leave the things that
would be most important for us, unfound. Riemann, for
instance, declared with perfect confidence that musical aes-
thetics may and must accept the laws of logic and the
doctrines of logicians as given. 27
   But it happens that just in musical aesthetics the vital
problem with which we are faced is one that involves the
entire logic of symbolism. It is a logical problem of art, and
no logician would be likely to search, in his own interest,
for the "findings" that are relevant to it. It concerns the
logical structure of a type of symbol that logicians do not
use, and would therefore not even stumble upon as an inter-
esting freak. In short, we are dealing with a philosophical
problem, requiring logical study, and involving music: for
to be able to define "musical meaning" adequately, pre-
cisely, but for an artistic, not a positivistic context and pur-
pose, is the touchstone of a really powerful philosophy of
symbolism.
   For the sake of orientation, let us now explicitly abandon
the problems of music as stimulus and music as emotive
symptom, since neither of these functions (though both un-
doubtedly exist) would suffice to account for the importance
we attach to it; and let us assume that its "significance" is in
some sense that of a symbol. The challenge to our theory,
then, is to determine in what sense this can be said; for it
is certainly not true in every sense. The question takes us
back to Chapter 3, to the logic of symbols and the various
possibilities of meaning that symbolic structures may con-
tain. Here we should find the conditions for a "language
of music" if such there be, or of "significant form" of any
Other sort than language.
   The assumption that music is a kind of language, not of
the here-and-now, but of genuine conceptual content, is
widely entertained, though perhaps not as universally as the
emotive-symptom theory. The best-known pioneer in this
field is Schopenhauer; and it has become something of an
accepted verdict that his attempt to interpret music as a
symbol of the irrational aspect of mental life, the Will, was
a good venture, though of course his conclusion, being "meta-
physical," was quite bad. However that may be, his novel
contribution to the present issue was certainly his treatment

  27 Hugo Riemann,   Die Elemente der musikalischen Aesthetik (1903),
p. 3.
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        187
of music as an impersonal, negotiable, real semantic, a sym-
bolism with a content of ideas, instead of an overt sign of
somebody's emotional condition. This principle was quickly
adopted by other thinkers, though there was considerable
debate as to what ideational content was embodied in the
language of tones. Indeed, one author lists no less than
sixteen interpretations, including "the expression of the Free-
dom of the Will" and "the expression of Conscience." 28
   The most obvious and naive reading of this "language" is
the onomatopoetic one, the recognition of natural sounds in
musical effects. This, as everybody knows, is the basis of
"program music," which deliberately imitates the clatter and
cries of the market place, hoof-beats, clanging hammers,
running brooks, nightingales and bells and the inevitable
cuckoo. Such "sound-painting" is by no means modern; it
goes back as far as the thirteenth century, when the cuckoo's
note was introduced as a theme in the musical setting of
"Sumer is acumen in." 29 An eighteenth-century critic says
disapprovingly, "Our intermezzi        .   are full of fantastic
                                           .   .



imitations and silly tricks. There one can hear clocks striking,
ducks jabbering, frogs quacking, and pretty soon one will be
able to hear fleas sneezing and grass growing." 30 But its
early uses were frankly tricks, like Bach's fugue on the letters
of his name, B-A-C-H (to a German, Bb-A-C-Bt|). Only with
the development of opera and oratorio, the orchestra was
called upon to furnish sounds appropriate to certain scenes.
In Haydn's Creation the prancing horses and sinuous worms
merely furnish musical figures with technical possibilities,"'
like the traditional cuckoos and cocks, but the waters over
the earth are certainly used with the serious intent of build-
ing up a thought with the sound-effect. In Bach's Passion Ac-
cording to St. Matthew the orchestra registers the rending
of the temple curtain in midst, of an unmistakable musical
storm. From this time onward, sound-painting increases until
the romantic symphony may require a whole outfit of wooden
rattles, cowbells, whistles, even sound-recordings and a wind-
machine. 31   A veritable code of "effects" grew up, helped by
the more and more detailed and indispensable program notes.
Finally, as   an eminent New York Times critic says, "Strauss,
   28 Colin McAlpin, Hermaia: A Study in Comparative Esthetics (1915).
See his table of contents.
  29 Cf. Richard Aldrich, Musical Discourse (1928), p. 25.
   30 J. A. Hiiller, "Abhandlung von der Nachahmung der Natur in der
Musik," in Marpurg's Historisch-kritische Beytrage zur Aufnahme der
Musik, 5 vols. (1754-1760). See vol. I, p. 532.
   si Respighi's The Pines of Rome features a phonograph record of a
nightingale's song; Strauss' Alpine Symphony calls for the "wind-ma-
chine."
188               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
in the  heyday of his programmatic frenzy, went so far as to
declare that a day would come when a composer could com-
pose the silverware on the table so that the listener could
distinguish the knives from the forks." 32
   But not all conceptions of musical semantic were thus
naive and literal. Side by side with the evolution of sound-
painting runs the development of "dramatic" music in a
                        —
more subjective sense music that is intended, and taken, to
be a language of feeling. Not silverware, nor even parades and
thunderstorms, are the objects of musical representation here,
but love and longing, hope and fear, the essence of tragedy
and comedy. This is not "self-expression"; it is exposition of
feelings which may be attributed to persons on the stage or
fictitious characters in a ballad. In pure instrumental music
without dramatic action, there may be a high emotional
import which is not referred to any subject, and the glib
assurance of some program writers that this is the composer's
protest against life, cry of despair, vision of his beloved, or
what not, is a perfectly unjustified fancy; for if music is really
a language of emotion, it expresses primarily the composer's
knowledge of human feeling, not how or when that knowledge
was acquired; as his conversation presumably expresses his
knowledge of more tangible things, and usually not his first
experience of them.
   This is the most persistent, plausible, and interesting doc-
trine of meaning in music, and has lent itself to considerable
development; on the theoretical side by Kretschmar, E. v.
Hartmann, more recently Schweitzer and Pirro, and on the
practical side by Schumann, Wagner, Liszt, Berlioz (who have
all left us theoretical statements as well), and many others.
From Wagner I take what may be the most explicit render-
ing of the principle:
   "What music expresses, is eternal, infinite and ideal; it
does not express the passion, love, or longing of such-and-
such an individual on such-and-such an occasion, but pas-
sion, love or longing in itself, and this it presents in that
unlimited variety of motivations, which is the exclusive and
particular characteristic of music, foreign and inexpressible
to any other language." 33
   Despite the romantic phraseology, this passage states quite
clearly that music is not self-expression, but formulation and
representation of emotions, moods, mental tensions and res-
olutions —  a "logical picture" of sentient, responsive life, a
source of insight, not a plea for sympathy. Feelings revealed
  32 Aldrich, op. cit., p. 15.
  33 Richard Wagner, "Ein glucklicher  Abend," reprinted by Gatz, in
Musik-Aesthetik, from the Gazette Musicale, nos. 56-58 (1841).
                  ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                      189
in music are essentially not "the passion, love or longing of
such-and-such an individual," inviting us to put ourselves in
that individual's place, but are presented directly to our under-
standing, that   we may grasp, realize, comprehend these feel-
ings, without pretending to have them or imputing them to
anyone else. Just as words can describe events we have not wit-
nessed, places and things we have not seen, so music can pre-
sent emotions and moods we have not felt, passions we did not
know before. Its subject-matter is the same as that of "self-
expression," and its symbols may even be borrowed, upon
occasion, from the realm of expressive symptoms; yet the
borrowed suggestive elements are formalized, and the subject-
matter "distanced" in an artistic perspective.
   The notion of "psychical distance" as the hall-mark of
every artistic "projection" of experience, which Edward
Bullough has developed, does not make the emotive con-
tents typical, general, impersonal, or "static"; but it makes
them conceivable, so that we can envisage and understand
them without verbal helps, and without the scaffolding of an
occasion wherein they figure (as all self-expression implies an
occasion, a cause  — true or imaginary   —
                                         for the subject's tem-
porary feelings). A composer not only indicates, but articulates
subtle complexes of feeling that language cannot even name,
let alone set forth; he knows the forms of emotion and can
handle them, "compose" them.        We do not "compose" our
exclamations and jitters.
   The actual opposition between the two emotive theories
of musical meaning    —  that of self-expression and that of>fc>gi-
cal expression-*^ best summed up by contrasting the passage
from C. Ph. E. Bach, already quoted on page 182, to the
effect that "a musician cannot otherwise move people, but
he be moved himself," and always "conveys his feelings to
them, and thus most readily moves them to sympathetic
emotion," with Busoni's statement:
   "Just as an artist, if he is to move his audience, must never
                   —
he moved himself lest he lose, at that moment, his mastery
                   —
over the material so the auditor who wants to get the full
operatic effect must never regard it as real, if his artistic
appreciation is not to be degraded to mere human sympa-
thy." 34
  This degradation is what Bullough would call a loss of
"psychical distance." It is, in fact, a confusion between a
symbol, which lets us conceive its object, and a sign, which
causes us to deal with what it means.
  "Distance ... is obtained by separating the object and

  34 Busoni, Entwurf einer neuen Aesthetik der Tonkunst, here quoted
from Gatz, op. cit., p. 498.
190                      PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
its  appeal from one's own self, by putting it out of gear
with practical needs and ends. But          . distance does not
                                                .   .




imply an impersonal, purely intellectually interested rela-
tion.    .  On the contrary, it describes a personal relation,
             .   .



often highly emotionally colored, but of a peculiar character.
Its peculiarity lies in that the personal character of the rela-
tion has been, so to speak, filtered. It has been cleared of
the practical, concrete nature of its appeal.    ." 35  .   .



   The content has been symbolized for us, and what it in-
vites is not emotional response, but insight. "Psychical Dis-
tance" is simply the experience of apprehending through a
symbol what was not articulated before. The content of art
is always real; the mode of its presentation, whereby it is at
once revealed and "distanced," may be a fiction. It may
also be music, or, as in the dance, motion. But if the content
be the life of feeling, impulse, passion, then the symbols
which reveal it will not be the sounds or actions that nor-
mally would express this life; not associated signs, but
symbolic forms must convey it to our understanding.
   Very few writers who assign significance of any sort to
music have kept uiese several kinds of meaning strictly apart.
Literal meanings         —
                      the renderings of birds and bells and
thunder and the Twentieth Century Limited by orchestral
instruments          —
               are usually mixed up in a vague way with
emotive meanings, which they are supposed to support, or
even to inspire by suggestion. And emotions, in turn, are
treated now as effects, now as causes, now as contents of
so-called "emotive music." Even in Wagner, who stated ex-
plicitly the abstractive, generalizing function of music in
depicting feelings, there is plenty of confusion. In describing
his own furor poeticus he presents himself as expressing his
personal sentiments and upheavals. In Oper und Drama he
says that operatic music must express the sentiments of the
speaker and actor ("des Redenden und Darstellenden," not
"des redend Dargestellten"). 36 Yet it is perfectly clear that
the "poetic intention" ("die dichterische Absicht") which is
the raison d'etre of the work is not to give the actors self-
expression, nor the audience an emotional orgy, but is to put
over, to make conceivable, a great insight into human passional
nature. And again, in the same work, he refers to the tragic
fate of      Beethoven as an inability to communicate his private
feelings, his sufferings, to the curious        but      unmoved listener
who could not understand him. 37
      So it was that, when Hanslick wrote his famous little book
Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, which attempted to blast the grow-
  35 Bullough, "Psychical Distance," p. 91.
  36 Here quoted from Gatz, op. cit., p. 166.           37 Ibid., p.   172.
                      ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        191
ing romantic conception of a "language of music," he found
himself called upon to combat not only the use of onomato-
poeia, the hoofbeats of Wagner's riding Valkyries and the
thunder-peals that announce the wreck of the Flying Dutch-
man, but also the production, exhibition, or symbolic
representation of emotions     —
                             the moan and tremolo of the or-
chestra, the surging outbursts of Tristan and Isolde. Against
all these alleged "expressive functions" of music the great
purist mustered his arguments. Vehemently he declared that
music conveys no meanings whatever, that the content of
music is nothing but dynamic sound-patterns ("tonend bewegte
Formen"), 38 and that "the theme of a musical composition
is its proper content." 39 But especially the true Wagnerian
    —
aim the semantic use of music, the representation of emo-
tive life   —aroused    his opposition.
   "It    no mere fencing with words," he declares at the
         is

very outset, "to protest most emphatically against the notion
of 'representation,' because this notion has given rise to the
greatest errors of musical aesthetics. To 'represent' something
always involves the conception ( Vorstellung) of two separate,
distinct things, one of which must first be given, by a specific
                                                         40
act, an explicit relation of reference to the other."       Music,
in his estimation, can never be used in this degrading fashion.
   His statement of the conditions for representation can, of
course, be challenged in the light of a better knowledge
of symbolism. What he says applies generally to literal, espe-
cially to scientific, expression; but it is not true of some other
modes, which serve rather to formulate knowledge than to*
communicatees finished products. Yet there is justice in
his protest, too; for thexlaim of his adversaries to a language
of music is indeed a misleading one, which may well do
mischief among musicians and audiences alike.
   Those claims, just like Hanslick's counter-claims, invite
logical criticism. So, instead of wrangling over this or that
alleged "meaning," let us look at music from the purely
logical standpoint as a possible symbolic form of some sort.
As such it would have to have, first of all, formal character-
isticswhich were analogous to whatever it purported to sym-
                     if it represented anything, e.g. an event,
bolize; that is to say,
a passion, a dramatic action, it would have to exhibit a
logical form which that object could also take. Everything
we conceive is conceived in some form, though there are
alternative forms for every content; but the musical figure
which we recognize as such must be a figuration under which
we could apprehend the thing referred to.
  38 Hanslick,  Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, p. 45.
  39 Ibid., p. 136.                   40 ibid., introd., p.   viii.
192                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
  That musical structures logically resemble certain dynamic
patterns of human experience is a well-established fact. Even
Hanslick admitted as much, perhaps with less scientific back-
ing than our modern theorists can claim; for what in his day
was a psychological assumption for the sake of musical under-
standing, has become, in ours, a psychological doctrine aptly
illustrated by musical examples. Wolfgang Kohler, the great
pioneer of Gestalt psychology, remarks the usefulness of so-
called musical "dynamics" to describe the forms of mental
life. "Quite generally," he says, "the inner processes, whether
emotional or intellectual, show types of development which
may be given names, usually applied to musical events, such
as: crescendo and diminuendo, accelerando and ritardano."
He carries these convenient terms over into the description
of overt behavior, the reflection of inner life in physical
attitudes and gestures. "As these qualities occur in the world
of acoustical experiences, they are found in the visual world
too, and so they can express similar dynamical traits of inner
life in directly observable activity. ... To the increasing
inner tempo and dynamical level there corresponds a cre-
scendo and accelerando in visible movement. Of course, the
same inner development may express itself acoustically, as
in the accelerando and reforzando of speech.            Hesitation
                                                              .   .   .



and lack of inner determination become visible                  as        ...
ritardando of visible or audible behavior.        ." 41
                                                      .   .



   This is just the inverse of Jean D'Udine's description of
music, which treats it as a kind of gesture, a tonal projection
of the forms of feeling, more directly reflected in the mimic
"dance" of the orchestral conductor. "All the expressive
gesticulations of the conductor," says that provocative and
readable book, L'art et le geste, "is really a dance ... all
music is dancing.    .  All melody is a series of attitudes." 42
                         .   .



And again "Every feeling contributes, in effect, certain special
           :



gestures which reveal to us, bit by bit, the essential character-
istic of Life: movement.         All living creatures are con-
                                   .   .   .


stantly   consummating          own internal rhythm." This
                                 their
rhythm, the essence of life, is the steady background against
which we experience the special articulations produced by
feeling; "and even the most uneventful life exhibits some
such breaks in its rhythm, sources of joys and sorrows without
which we would be as inert as the pebbles of the highway." 43
And these rhythms are the prototypes of musical structures,
for all art is but a projection of them from one domain of
sense to another, a symbolic transformation. "Every artist is

 4i Kohler, Gestalt Psychology, pp. 248-249.
 42 Jean D'Udine, L'art et le geste (1910), p. xiv.
 43 ibid., p. 6.
                        ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                     193
a transformer; all         creation is but a transmutation." 44
                          artistic
   Just as Kohler uses the language of musical dynamics to
express psychological phenomena, on the basis of their for-
mal analogy, so D'Udine makes movement the prototype of
vital forms and thus reduces all the arts to "a kind of dance"
(this analogy with life-functions, both lower and higher, was
made long ago by Havelock Ellis in The Dance of Life); and
so the musicologist von Hoeslin likens dance, plastic art,
thought, and feeling to music by reason of that same analogy.
The fundamental relationships in music, he says, are tensions
and resolutions; and the patterns generated by these functions
are the patterns exemplified in all art, and also in all emotive
responses. Wherever sheer contrasts of ideas produce a re-
action, wherever experiences of pure form produce mental
tension, we have the essence of melody; and so he speaks of
Sprachmelodien in poetry and Gedankenmelodien in life. 45
More naturalistically inclined critics often mediate the com-
parison between the forms of music and those of feeling, by
assuming that music exhibits patterns of excitation occurring
in the nervous tissues, which are the physical sources of
emotion; 46 but it really all comes to the same thing. The
upshot of all these speculations and researches is, that there
are certain aspects of the so-called "inner life"
          —
mental which have formal properties similar to those of
                                                         —physical or
          —
music patterns of motion and rest, of tension and release,
of agreement and disagreement, preparation, fulfilment, ex-
citation, sudden change, etc.
   So the first requirement for a connotative relationship
between music ^nd subjective experience, a certain similarity
of logical form, is certainly satisfied. Furthermore, there is
no doubt that musical forms have certain properties to recom-
mend them for symbolic use: they are composed of many
separable items, easily produced, and easily combined in a
great variety of ways; in themselves they play no important
practical role which would overshadow their semantic func-
tion; they are readily distinguished, remembered, and re-
peated; and finally, they have a remarkable tendency to
modify each other's characters in combination, as words do,

  44 ibid., p.   xii.

  45 J.   K. v. Hoeslin, Die Melodie als gestaltender Ausdruck seelischen
Lebens (1920).
  46 Both    Kohler and Koffka subscribe to this notion of the "physio-
logical picture," of which we see, according to them, not some external
duplicate, but the actual outward aspects of a tot^l bodily state or
activity. The same standpoint was already defined by C. Beauquier in his
Philosophie de la musique in 1865, and by subsequent authors too numer-
ous to cite.
194                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
by all serving each as a context. 47 The purely structural re-
quirements for a symbolism are satisfied by the peculiar tonal
phenomenon we call "music."
   Yet it is not, logically speaking, a language, for it has no
vocabulary. To call the tones of a scale its "words," harmony
its "grammar," and thematic development its "syntax," is a
useless allegory, for tones lack the very thing that distin-
guishes a word from a mere vocable: fixed connotation, or
"dictionary meaning." Moreover, a tone has many aspects
that enter into the notion of musical significance, but not of
harmony. These aspects have been minutely and seriously
studied from a psychological standpoint, in ways that fairly
well exclude non-musical factors such as personal associa-
tions with tunes, instruments, styles (e.g. church music,
military music), or programmatic suggestions. In a remark-
ably able and careful work, 48 Dr. Kurt Huber has traced the
successive emergence of expressive factors in the apprehension
of the simplest possible tonal patterns         —
                                            bare pitch-patterns
of two to three tones, stripped of all contextual elements of
timbre, rhythm, volume, etc., by their uniform production
on an electrical instrument, in timed succession and equal
strength. The subjects were instructed to describe their ex-
periences in any terms they chose: by their qualities, relations,
meanings, emotional characters, somatic effects, associations,
suggestions, or what-not. They were asked to report any
images or memories evoked, or, failing such experiences,
simply to convey their impressions as best they could. This
form of experiment is certainly much more controlled and
decisive than the Schoen and Gatewood questionnaires on
the influence of musical selections; and the results of Huber's
experiments, which might be expected to be poorer, by reason
of the simplicity of the material and lack of specific instruc-
tions, are actually much more significant and more capable


   47 A. Gehring carried this principle of contextual function even beyond
the compass of the individual composition. "Unreined compositions," he
said, "will affect one another as inevitably as those which are related.
The whole realm of music may be regarded as a single huge composition,
in which every note that is written exerts its influence throughout the
whole domain of tones. To speak with Guyau, ... it changes the very
conditions of beauty.
   "This explains the different effects produced by the same composition
at different times. The harmonies which sound novel today will be
familiar in a few decades; the volume and richness of sound which
pleased our ancestors are inadequate today." (The Basis of Musical
Pleasure [1910], p. 34.)
   Gehring's observation bears out the similarity with language, where
every word that is used even in a narrow context contributes its mean-
ing, as there established, to the living and growing language.
   48 Oer Ausdruck musikalischer Elemental motive. Eine experimental"
psychologische Untersuchung (1923).
                      ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                        195
of systematic arrangement than the emotive-value                statistics.
They may be briefly summarized as   follows:

        ( 1 ) The lowest stage of tone-apprehension yields merely
     an impression of tone-color of the whole tonal complex, or
     of a difference between tone-colors of the separate tones.
        (2) Meanings conveyed by such a mere impression of
   tonal brightness always involve states or qualities or their
   changes, i.e. passive changes. Imagination of an event does
   not occur without an impression of tonal movement.
      (3) The most primitive factor in the perception of tonal
   movement is a sense of its direction. This, according to the
   author, "constitutes the point of departure of that psy-
 •
   chological symbolism of figures (psychische Gestaltsym-
   bolik) which we encounter in the tendency to relate musical
  motives to sentiments."
      (4) The apprehension of a width of tonal intervals is
  independent of this sense of direction; and "all spatial sym-
   bolism in the interpretation of motives has its roots in this
  impression of inter-tonal distance."
      (5) The idea of a musical step requires a joint percep-
  tion of tonal distance and direction. "We are not saying
   too much if we make all the higher psychical interpretation
   directly dependent on the grasping of interval-forms, or
   at least view them as mediately related to these."
      (6) Impressions of consonance, dissonance and related-
  ness (Zusammengehorigkeit) require the notion of a musi-
   cal step, or progression (simultaneous tones were not given;
  the inquiry rested on melodic elements).
      (7) Tones taken as, related may then be referred to a
   tonic, either chosen among them or "understood," i.e.
imaginatively supplied by the auditor         (this orientation
   is most    forcibly suggested by the perfect fourth, e.g.


                          which connotes almost irresistibly the setting:
Pw             fat    ,




       fe±==J=).
        (8) Reference to a tonic determines the feeling of modal-



     ity;   for instance,               J     connotes a different mod-
196                   PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY



                        fa3—
                        wm
   ality if taken as \rfi     \    J    J   -   from what it would as




                     2E-

      (9)       A subjective accent may simply fall upon the tone
   which    harmonically more important as the hearer has
                is

   organized the interval; it may, but need not, suggest a
   rhythmic structure.

   (10) Subjective rhythmatization,         when it occurs, is built
upon mental accentuation.
   Since such mental accentuation           may occur without any
actual emphasis (as in these experiments it necessarily did),
the problem of rhythm in music as we know it is immensely
complicated, and cannot be solved by mere reference to the
drum and footfall of dancing hordes. In fact, Huber distin-
guishes between such purely temporal measure, and "musical
rhythm," which latter results from the internal, tonal organ-
ization of the motif. 49
   The entire study shows effectively how many factors of
possible expressive virtue are involved in even the simplest
musical structure, how many things beside the acknowledged
materials of composition have crucial functions in conveying
a musical message. One may argue that voice-inflections enter
into the "expressiveness" of speech, too; but the fact is that
the verbal message may be understood apart from these.
They do not alter the content of a statement, which is
uniquely determined by vocabulary and syntax, but at most
they may affect one's reaction to the statement. Musical
semantic factors, however, have never been isolated; even
the efforts of Schweitzer 50 and Pirro 51 to trace the "emotional

  49 "So   it appears," he says, "upon this view (which is shared, inci-
dentally by   Ohmann) that musical rhythm, in contrast with the mere
temporal rhythm of measures, grows out of the inner Gestalt-Telations
of the motif itself." (Ibid., p. 179.) This conclusion corroborates by
scientific evidence the doctrines of Heinrich Schenker concerning meter
and rhythm, namely that rhythm is a function of tonal motion, not of
time-division; such motion depends as much on melodic and harmonic
tension and direction as on tempo. (See Schenker's Neue musikalische
Theorien und Phantasien, 3 vols. [1935], esp. vol III, Der freie Satz, ch.
xii, pp. 191-206.)
   so Albert Schweitzer, /. S. Bach, le musicien-poete (2nd ed. 1905).
   si Andre Pirro, L'esthetique de Jean-Sebastien Bach (1907).
                          ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                     197
vocabulary" of Bach by correlating musical figures with the
words he usually sets to them, interesting though they are,
show us certain associations in Bach's mind, perhaps also
accepted conventions of his day or his school, rather than
musical laws of expression. Such precise interpretations of
separate figures are inconclusive because, as Huber remarked
in his direct psychological study, "It is impossible to deter-
mine the absolute expressive value                of   separate   intervals
 (third,    fifth,   etc.)     because their absolute pitch affects the
brightness of their constituents and therewith their qualities
of contrast, apprehensibility, etc." 52 That there are tonal
figures derived from natural rhythms, that upward and down-
ward direction, pendular motion, etc., may be musically
"imitated," that melodic lines may suggest sobs, whimpers, or
yodelers, need not be reiterated here; such general classifi-
cations 53 do not give us a vocabulary of music; and even if
we accept the more ambitious dictionary of Schweitzer or
Pirro, what is usually called the "grammar" of music, i.e.
harmony, does not recognize such "words" as elements at
all.  The analogy between music and language breaks down
if   we carry it beyond the mere semantic function in general,
which they are supposed to share. 54 Logically, music has not
the characteristic properties of language              —
                                            separable terms
with fixed connotations, and syntactical rules for deriving
complex connotations without any loss to the constituent
elements. Apart from a few onomatopoetic themes that have
                               —
become conventional the cuckoo, the bugle-calls, and pos-
sibly the church-bell          —
                         music has no literal meaning.
   Yet it may b£ a presentational symbol, and present eirfotive
experience through global forms that are indivisible as the
elements of chiaroscuro. This view has indeed been sug-
gested. 55 But it seems peculiarly hard for our literal minds to
grasp the idea that anything can be known which cannot be
named. Therefore philosophers ^and critics have repeatedly
denied the musical symbolization of emotion on the ground
that, as Paul Moos puts it, "Pure instrumental music is unable
to render even the most ordinary feelings, such as love,
loyalty, or anger, unambiguously and distinctly, by its own
unaided powers." 56 Or Heinrich, in the same vein: "There
are many musical works of high artistic value, that completely


     52 Huber, Der Ausdruck musikalischer Elementarmotive, p. 182.
     53A  perfect example may be found in E. Sorantin's The Problem of
Musical Expression (1932).
     54 Cf. Siegfried F. Nadel, Der duale Sinn der Musik (1931), p. 78.
     55 Cf. Julius Bittner, "Die Grenzen des Komponierbaren," Der Merker,
II   (1910), part    I,   pp. 11-14.
     56 Paul Moos, Die Philosophie der Musik (1922), p. 297.
198                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
baffle us when we try to denote by one word the mood they
are  supposed to convey. This alone suffices to make the
conception of music as a sentimental art, or an art of ex-
pressing sentiments, quite untenable." 57 And A. Gehring,
pointing out that one cannot prove every musical phrase or
figure to mean some nameable feeling, memory, or idea,
declares, "Until this is done, we must deny that symboliza-
tion accounts for the essential charm of the art." 58
   But this is a fallacy, based on the assumptions that the
rubrics established by language are absolute, so that any
other semantic must make the same distinctions as discursive
thought, and individualize the same "things," "aspects,"
"events," and "emotions." What is here criticized as a weak-
ness, is really the strength of musical expressiveness: that
music articulates forms which language cannot            set   forth.
The classifications which language makes automatically pre-
clude many relations, and many of those resting-points of
thought which we call "terms.", It is just because music
has not the same terminology and pattern, that it lends
itself to the revelation of non-scientific concepts. To render
"the most ordinary feelings, such as love, loyalty or anger,
unambiguously and distinctly," would be merely to duplicate
what verbal appellations do well enough.
   I cannot agree, therefore, with Professor Urban's state-
ment: "It is true that there are other symbols than those of
language, namely, the symbols of art and mathematics, by
means of which meanings may be communicated. But these
symbols themselves require interpretation, and interpreta-
tion is only possible in terms of language." 59 His very com-
bination of art and mathematics seems to me to bespeak
a misunderstanding; for mathematics is discursive and literal,
a specialized and abbreviated language. It appeals essentially
to the eye, and is therefore most easily "done on paper," but




all   its   symbols have names; a complex     like   —  -r—
                                                      Cm n
                                                         '
                                                                may

always be verbally expressed as "the square root of a-p\us-b,
over c to the m-p\us-nth power." This is not a non-linguistic
symbolism; it is merely a highly technical jargon, and the
teaching of mathematics is its interpretation to the uninitiate.
  57 F. Heinrich, "Die Tonkunst in ihrem Verhaltnis zum Ausdruck und
zum Symbol," Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft, VIII (1925-26), 66-
92. See p. 75.
  58 The Basis of Musical Pleasure, p. 90.
  59 W. M. Urban, Language and Reality, p. 55.
                                 ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                      199
But in art such interpretation is vicious, because art  certainly          —
music, and probably all art               —
                                 is formally and essentially un-

translatable; and   cannot agree that 'interpretation of poetry
                                  1


is the determination of what poetry says.             One of the
                                                               .   .   .



essential functions of the teaching of literature is its interpreta-
tion.    .   Now a character of such interpretation is that it
             .   .




is  always carried out in non-poetic terms or in less poetic
terms than the thing interpreted." '"' Evidently Professor Urban
would extend this sort of explanation even to music, for he
says elsewhere: "Even in such non-linguistic arts as music
or pure design, where the element of assertion is apparently
absent, it is, I should hold, only apparently so." 61
   In that case, of course, Moos and Heinrich and Gehring
are justified in denying "emotive" meanings to music on the
ground that no propositions about feelings can be assigned,
with any confidence, as the contents of its forms. But it
seems to me that truth rests rather with another statement of
Urban's, which is hard to reconcile with his prevailing, ex-
plicit views about the primacy and supremacy of language:
"The poet          does well to speak in figure, to keep to his
                     .   .   .



own symbolic form. For precisely in that symbolic form an
aspect of reality is given which cannot be adequately ex-
pressed otherwise. It is not true that whatever can be expressed
symbolically can be better expressed literally. For there is no
literal expression, but only another kind of symbol." 62
   For the musician, this other kind of symbol is not con-
stantly obscured by something that is said; wherefore musi-
cians have grasped its character and importance more clea/ly
than literary critics. If music is a symbolism, it is essentially
of this untranslatable form. That is the gist of Wagner's
description of the "orchestral language." Since this "language"
has no conventional words, it can never appeal to discursive
reason. But it expresses "just what is unspeakable in verbal
language, and what, viewed from our rationalistic (Verstan-
desmenschlichen) standpoint, may therefore be called simply
the Unspeakable." 63
   Because the forms of human feeling are much more con-
gruent with musical forms than with the forms of language,
music can reveal the nature of feelings with a detail and
truth that language cannot approach. This peculiar articu-

     60 Ibid., pp. 487^88.                    «i Ibid.,   pp. 478.
     62 Ibid., p. 500. Oddly
                          enough, this same passage concludes with the
Words: "But when all is said and done, it renmins true that poetry is
covert metaphysics, and it is only when its implications, critically inter-
preted and adequately expressed, become part of philosophy that an ade-
quate view of the world can be achieved." What is this critical and
adequate expression, if not literal interpretation?
  63 Oper und Drama. See Gat/, Musik-Aesthetik, p. 192.
200               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
lateness of music as a semantic of vital and emotional facts
was discovered nearly two centuries ago by one of the con-
tributors to Marpurg's famous Beytrdge zur Musik. This
writer (the same Huller who objected to ducks and sneezing
fleas in"modern music") says:
   "There are feelings  .  which are so constantly suppressed
                            .   .



by the tumult of our passions, that they can reveal themselves
but timidly, and are practically unknown to us.         .Note,
                                                            .   .



however, what response a certain kind of music evokes in
our hearts: we are attentive, it is charming; it does not aim
to arouse either sorrow or joy, pity or anger, and yet we
are moved by it. We are so imperceptibly, so gently moved,
that we do not know we are affected, or rather, that we can
can give no name to the affect.     .   .   .


   "Indeed, it is quite impossible to name every thing fascinat-
ing in music, and bring it under definite headings. Therefore
music has fulfilled its mission whenever our hearts are satis-
fied." 64
   Since the day when this was written, many musicologists
notably Vischer, Riemann, and Kurth             —
                                            have emphasized the
impossibility of interpreting the "language of feeling," al-
though they admit its function to be, somehow, a revelation
of emotions, moods, or subtle nameless affects. Liszt warned
specifically against the practice of expounding the emotive
content of a symphonic poem, "because in such case the words
tend to destroy the magic, to desecrate the feelings, and to
break the most delicate fabrics of the soul, which had taken
this form just because they were incapable of formulation in
words, images or ideas." 65
   But there are musicians for whom it is not enough to
recognize the ineffable character of musical significance; they
must remove their art from the realm of meaning altogether.
They cannot entertain the idea that music expresses anything
in any way. The oddest thing about this perfectly legitimate
problem of musical meaning is that it seems impossible for
people to discuss it with anything like detachment or candor.
It is almost like a religious issue; only that in matters of faith
the proponents of a doctrine are usually the vehement be-
lievers, the passionate defenders, whereas in this musicological
argument it is apt to be the non-believers, the scoffers and
critics, who are most emotional about it. Those who deny
that music is a language of feelings do not simply reject the
symbolistic theory as unconvincing or indemonstrable; they


  64 Huller, "Abhandlung von der Nachahmung der Natur in der Musik,"
pp. 515 and 523. Italics mine.
  65 Franz Liszt, "Berlioz und seine Harold-Symphonie," reprinted by
Gatz from Liszt's Gesammelte Schriften. See Gatz, op. cit., p. 127.
                    ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           201
 are not content to say that they cannot find the alleged mean-
 ing in music, and therefore consider the hypothesis far-
fetched; no, they reject with horror the very attempt to
construe music as a semantic, they regard the imputation of
                —                         —
any meaning emotional or other as an insult to the Muse,
a degradation of the pure dynamic forms, an invidious heresy.
They seem to feel that if musical structures should really be
found to have significance, to relate to anything beyond
themselves, those structures would forthwith cease to be
musical. The dignity of music demands that it should be
autonomous; its existence should have no explanation. To
add "meaning" to its sensuous virtues is worse than to deny
it any virtue   —
                it is, somehow, to destroy its life.
                                                     66

   Yet the most vehement critics of the emotive-content theory
seem to have caught a germ from the doctrine they attacked:
in denying the very possibility of any content of music, they
have fallen into the way of thinking about it in terms of form
and content. Thery are suddenly faced with the dichotomy:
significant or meaningless.       And while they fiercely repudiate
the proposition that music is a semantic, they cannot assert
that it is meaningless. It is the problem, not the doctrine,
that has infected them. Consequently they try to eat their
cake and have it too, by a logical trick that is usually accepted
only among mathematicians          —
                                by a statement which has the
form of an answer to the question in hand, and really com-
mits them to nothing. Musical form, they reply, is its own
content; its means itself. This evasion was suggested by
Hanslick when he said, "The theme of a musical composition
is itsessential content." He knew that this was an evasion^ 67
but his successors have found it harder and harder to resist
the question of content, and the silly fiction of self-significance
has been raised to the dignity of a doctrine. 68 It is really
just a talisman against any and every assignment of specific
content to music; and as such it, will presently appear justi-
fied.
  66 The importance of this conflict was recognized by Dr. Wierling, who
says:  "The great reaction which Hanslick evoked with his book shows
by its harshness that here was no contest of opinions, but a conflict of
forces like that of dogma against heresy.  . The reaction against Hans-
                                               .   .



lick was that of persons attacked in their holiest convictions." (Das
Tonkunstwerk als autonome Gestalt und als Ausdruck der Personlich-
keit, pp. 24—25.) Exactly the same spirit was certainly evinced by
Hanslick himself, who repulsed what he considered not a mere error,
but a pernicious doctrine.
   67 See Hanslick, op. cit., p. 133: "In the art of music there is no
content opposed to form, because music has no form over and above
its content." This is an effectual repudiation of the form-and-content
dichotomy, a rejection of the problem, not of its answers.
   68 See, e.g., E. J. Dent, Terpander: or, the Music of the Future (1927),
p. 12; Carroll C. Pratt, The Meaning of Music (1931), p. 237; and F.
Heinrich, "Die Tonkunst in ihrem Verhaltnis zum Ausdruck und zum
Symbol," p. 67.
202               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
   Whenever people vehemently reject a proposition, they do
so not because it simply does not recommend itself, but
because it does, and yet its acceptance threatens to hamper
their thinking in some important way. If they are unable to
define the exact mischief it would do, they just call it "de-
grading," "materialistic," "pernicious," or any other bad
name. Their judgment may be fuzzy, but the intuition they
are trying to rationalize is right; to accept the opponent's
proposition as it stands, would lead to unhappy consequences.
   So it is with "significant form" in music: to tie any tonal
structure to a specific and speakable meaning would limit
musical imagination, and probably substitute a preoccupation
with feelings for a whole-hearted attention to music. "An
inward singing," says Hanslick, "and not an inward feeling,
prompts a gifted person to compose a musical piece." 69
Therefore it does not matter what feelings are afterward
attributed to it, or to him; his responsibility is only to articu-
late the "dynamic tonal form."
   It is a peculiar fact that some musical forms seem to bear
a  sad  and a happy interpretation equally well. At first sight
that looks paradoxical; but it really has perfectly good reasons,
which do not invalidate the notion of emotive significance,
but do bear out the right-mindedness of thinkers who recoil
from the admission of specific meanings. For what music
can actually reflect is only the morphology of feeling; and it
is quite plausible that some sad and some happy conditions
may have a very similar morphology. This insight has led some
philosophical musicologists to suppose that music, conveys
general forms of feeling, related to specific ones as algebraic
expressions are related to arithmetic; a doctrine put forward
by Moritz Hauptmann 70 and also by Moritz Carriere. 71
These two excellent thinkers saw in music what most aesthe-
ticians failed to see —its intellectual value, its close relation
to concepts, not by reason of its difficult academic "laws,"
but in virtue of its revelations. If it reveals the rationale of
feelings, the rhythm and pattern of their rise and decline
and intertwining, to our minds, then it is a force in our mental
life,   our awareness and understanding, and not only our
affective experience.
  Even Hanslick granted this logical analogy between music
and emotions; 72 but he did not realize how much he had
granted. Because he considered nothing but conventional
denotation as "meaning," he insisted that music could not
mean anything. Every mathematician knows how hard it is
  69 Op. cit., p. 75.  to Die Natur der Harmonik und Metrik (1853).
  7i Aesthetik, 2 vols. (1859).       72 Op. cit., p. 26.
                   ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                  203
to convince the naive beginner in algebra that its letters have
any meaning, if they are not given specific denotations: "Let
a = 5, let b= 10," etc. Presently the novice learns that it makes
no difference to the validity of the equation how the meanings
of terms have been assigned; then he understands the general-
ity  of the symbolism. It is only when he sees the balance of
the equation as a form in itself, apart from all its possible
arithmetical instances, that he grasps the abstraction, the real
concept expressed through the formula.
   Algebraic letters are pure symbols; we see numerical rela-
tionships not in them, but through them; they have the
highest "transparency" that language can attain. In liken-
ing music to such a symbolism, Hauptmann and Carriere
claimed for it that peculiar "significance" that belongs to
abstractions  —a general reference to the realm of reality from
which the form is abstracted, a reflection of the laws of that
realm, a "logical picture" into which all instances must fit,
yet not a "picture" of any actual instance.
   But this explanation of music as a high abstraction, and
musical experience as a purely logical revelation, does not
do justice to the unmistakably sensuous value of tone, the
vital nature of its effect, the sense of personal import which
we meet in a great composition every time it is repeated to us.
Its message is not an immutable abstraction, a bare, unam-
biguous, fixed concept, as a lesson in the higher mathematics
of feeling should be. It is always new, no matter how well
or how long we have known it, or it loses its meaning; it is
not transparent but irridescent. Its values crowd each other,
its   symbols are inexhaustible.                           ym
      The fact is, Uthink, that Hanslick, who admitted only the
formal similarity of music and emotive experience but de-
nied the legitimacy of any further interpretation, and those
authors who realized that formality, but took it for the nature
of musical meaning rather than of musical symbols, were
very close to a correct analysis. For music has all the earmarks
of a true symbolism, except one: the existence of an assigned
connotation. It is a form that is capable of connotation, and
the meanings to which it is amenable are articulations of
emotive, vital, sentient experiences. But its import is never
fixed. In music we work essentially with free forms, following
inherent psychological laws of "rightness," and take interest
in possible articulations suggested entirely by the musical
material. We are elaborating a symbolism of such vitality that
it harbors a principle of development in its own elementary

forms, as a really good symbolism is apt to do   —   as language
has "linguistic laws" whereby words naturally give rise to
cognates, sentence-structures to subordinate forms, indirect
204              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
discourse to subjunctive constructions "by attraction," noun-
inflections to inflectionsof their modifiers "by agreement."
No conscious intellectual intent determines vowel changes,
                                              —
inflections, or idioms; the force of what has been called
"linguistic feeling" or a "sense of words"       "the Spirit of
                             —
Language," as Vossler says develops the forms of speech.
To make up a language upon a preconception of what it is
to express never leads to a real language, because language
grows in meaning by a process of articulation, not in articulate
forms by a process of preconceived expression.
   What is true of language, is essential in music: music that
is invented while the composer's mind is fixed on what is
to be expressed is apt not to be music. It is a limited idiom,
like an artificial language, only even less successful; for
music at its highest, though clearly a symbolic form, is an
unconsummated symbol. Articulation is its life, but not asser-
tion; expressiveness, not expression. The actual function of
meaning, which calls for permanent contents, is not fulfilled;
for the assignment of one rather than another possible mean-
ing to each form is never explicitly made. Therefore music is
"Significant Form," in the peculiar sense of "significant"
which Mr. Bell and Mr. Fry maintain they can grasp, or feel,
but not define; such significance is implicit, but not con-
ventionally fixed.
   The fact that in music we have an unconsummated symbol,
a significant form without conventional significance, casts
some light on all the obscure conflicting judgments that the
rise of program music has evoked. The expression of an
idea in a symbolic mode may be successful or unsuccessful;
easy and adequate, or halting, askew, inexact. Ordinarily
we have no precise "logical picture" of affects at all; but
we refer to them, chiefly by the indirect method of describing
their causes or their effects. We say we feel "stunned," "left
out," "moved," or "like swearing," "like running away."       A
mood can be described only by the situation that might
give rise to it: there is the mood of "sunset and evening star,"
the mood of a village festival, or of a Vienna soiree. If, now,
a composer's musical idiom is not so rich and definite that
its tonal forms alone are perfectly coherent, significant, and
satisfying, it is the most natural thing in the world that he
should supplement them by the usual, non-musical ways of
expressing ideas of feeling to ourselves and others; by en-
visaging situations, objects, or events that hold a mood or
specify an emotion. He may use a mental picture merely
as a scaffolding to organize his otherwise musical conception.
Schumann tells of occasions when he or another composer
had envisaged a scene or a being so that the vision directly
                       ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                               205
inspired a coherent, well-wrought musical work.       Sometimes
                                                          7   '




the mere suggestion of what Huber calls a "sphere," e.g. "a
medieval realm," "a fairy world," "a heroic setting," effected
by one title-word such as "Scheherazade" or "Oberon," serves
to crystallize a shifting and drifting musical theme into artistic
form. Sometimes a composer sets himself an elaborate pro-
gram and follows it as he might a libretto or a choreographer's
book. It is true, and natural enough, that this latter practice
produces a less perfect musical expression than purely the-
matic thinking, for it is not single-minded; not everything
relevant is contained in the music; and there is nothing in
the work to force the composer's helpful fancies on the
listener. Nothing can constrain us to think of Till Eulen-
spiegel's escapades while listening to music.
   But similarly, nothing can prevent our falling back on
mental pictures, fantasies, memories, or having a Spharener-
lebnis of some sort, when we cannot directly make subjective
sense out of music in playing or hearing it. A program is
simply a crutch. It is a resort to the crude but familiar method
of holding feelings in the imagination by envisaging their
attendant circumstances. It does not mean that the listener
is unmusical, but merely that he is not musical enough to
think in entirely musical terms. He is like a person who
understands a foreign language, but thinks in his mother
tongue the minute an intellectual difficulty confronts him.
   To a person of limited musical sense, such ideation seems
the most valuable response to music, the "subjective content"
which the listener must supply. People of this persuasion
often grant that there may also be an appreciation of .pure
beautiful sounds, which "gives us pleasure"; but we can
understand the music better when it conveys a poetic con-
tent. 74 Goethe, for instance, who was not musical (despite his

  73 Robert Schumann on Berlioz' Symphonie Fantastique, reprinted by
Gatz from Gesammelte Schriften iiber* Musik und Musiker. See Gatz,
op.   cit.,   pp. 299-303.
         Prunieres (the same "interpreter" who tells us so categorically
  74 Henri
how Beethoven felt when he invented his themes) writes of Strauss's
programmatic works: "These works are endowed with a form sufficiently
beautiful in itself to afford the auditor lively pleasure, even should he
not perceive all the author's intentions. It must be remembered, however,
that his pleasure is doubled when he is capable of grasping, of gradually
discovering, the hidden symbols." ("Musical Symbolism," p. 20.)
   D. M. Ferguson, in an essay entitled "How can Music Express
Emotion?" claims that music, "being unable, as words and pictures can
do, to present to our attention the causes or external circumstances of
feeling (from which we largely infer the nature of the feeling itself),
begins in medias res, with the nervous disturbance itself and     .instead
                                                                      .   .

of representing the conditions which arouse emotion and demanding
that the observer observe therefrom the emotional meaning, music repre-
sents the emotional disturbance itself and demands that for its fullest
comprehension its hearers shall infer the cause." (Proceedings of the
206                       PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
interest in the art as a cultural product), tells how, in listening
to a new piano quartet, he could make no sense out of any
part save an allegro, which he could interpret as the Witches'
Sabbath on the Blockberg, "so that after all I found a con-
ception which could underlie this peculiar music." 75
   Where such interpretation is spontaneous, it is a perfectly
legitimate practice, common among musically limited per-
sons, and helpful; but it becomes pernicious when teachers
or critics or even composers initiate it, for then they make a
virtue out of walking with a crutch. It is really a denial of
the true nature of music, which is unconventionalized, un-
verbalized freedom of thought. That is why the opponents
of program-music and of hermeneutic are so vehement in
their protests;  they feel the complete misconception of the
artistic significance of tonal structures, and although they give
doubtful reasons for their objection, their reaction is perfectly
sound.
   The real power of music lies in the fact that it can be
"true" to the life of feeling in a way that language cannot;
for its significant forms have that ambivalence of content
which words cannot have. This is, I think, what Hans Mers-
mann meant, when he wrote: "The possibility of expressing
opposites simultaneously gives the most intricate reaches of
expressiveness to music as such, and carries it, in this respect,
far beyond the limits of the other arts." 76 Music is revealing,
where words are obscuring, because it can have not only a
content, but a transient play of contents. It can articulate
feelings without becoming wedded to them. The physical
character of a tone, which we describe as "sweet," or "rich,"
or "strident," and so forth, may suggest a momentary inter-
pretation, by a physical response. A key-change may convey
a new Weltgefiihl. The assignment of meanings is a shifting,
kaleidoscopic play, probably below the threshold of conscious-
ness, certainly outside the pale of discursive thinking. The
imagination that responds to music is personal and associa-
Music Teachers' National Association, 1925, pp. 20-32. See pp. 26-27.
Italics mine.)
  Another purveyor of interpretations, F. Nicholls, says (after classifying
"chords of fear" and "arpeggios of joy"): "It is now desired to illumi-
                                                                  —
nate a piece of pure music by reading into it in accordance with our
acquired knowledge of musical symbolism some more definite and   —
particular meaning.    The music is the higher or cosmic interpretation
                              .       .   .


of definite things.   .   .       .       An interpretation, nevertheless, is often very help-
ful;  and a 'parable,' so to speak, in words often, and quite justifiably,
adds to the enjoyment of the music." (The Language of Music, or, Musi-
cal Expression and Characterization, 1924, pp. 77-78.) Hereupon he
writes doggerel words to a Beethoven piano sonata.
   75 J. P. Eckermann, Gesprdche mil Goethe (ed. of 1912), p. 158.
   76 "Versuch einer musikalischen Wertaesthetik," Zeitschrift fur Musik-
wissenschaft, XVII (1935), 1: 33-^7.
                          ON SIGNIFICANCE IN MUSIC                           207
tive and logical, tinged   with afTect, tinged with bodily rhythm,
tinged with dream, but concerned with a wealth of formula-
tions for its wealth of wordless knowledge, its whole knowl-
edge of emotional and organic experience, of vital impulse,
balance, conflict, the ways of living and dying and feeling.
Because no assignment of meaning is conventional, none is
permanent beyond the sound that p               vet the brief asso-
ciation was a flash of understanding. The lasting effect is,
like the first effect of speech on the development of the mind,
to make things conceivable rather than to store up proposi-
tions. Not communication but insight is the gift of music;
in very naive phrase, a knowledge of "how feelings go."
This    has          nothing   to      do with "Affektenlehre";   it   is   much
more     subtle,complex, protean, and much more important;
for its entire record is emotional satisfaction, intellectual
confidence, and musical understanding. "Thus music has ful-
filled its mission whenever our hearts are satisfied."
   It also gives substance to a theory that sounds very odd

outside some such context as this, a theory advanced by
Riemann, and more recently developed by Professor Carroll
Pratt, who (apparently quite independently) came to the
conclusion that music neither causes nor "works off" real
feelings, but produces some peculiar effects we mistake for
them. Music has its special, purely auditory characters, that
"intrinsically contain certain properties which, because of
their close resemblance to certain characteristics in the subjec-
tive realm, are frequently confused with emotions proper." 77
But "these auditory characters are not emotions at all. They
merely sound the way moods feel .... More often tharvaot
these formal characters of music go unnamed: they are simply
what the music is.       ." *  .   .
                                        7



   The notion that certain effects of music are so much like
feelings that we mistake them for the latter, though they are
really entirely different, may seem queer, unless one looks at
music as an "implicit" symbolism; then, however, the con-
fusion appears as something to be expected. For until sym-
bolic forms are consciously abstracted, they are regularly
confused with the things they symbolize. This is the same
principle that causes myths to be believed, and names de-

   77 Pratt,     The Meaning of Music, p. 191.
   78 Ibid.,     p. 203. Compare Hugo Riemann, Wie Horen Wir Musik?
(1888), pp. 22-23: "It is really not a question of expressing emotions at
all. for .   music only moves the soul in a way analogous to the way
             .   .



emotions move it, without pretending, however, in any way to arouse
them (wherefore it does not signify anything that entirely heterogeneous
affects have similar dynamic forms, and therefore may be expressed'
bv the same music, as has already been observed, quite rightly, by
Hanslick).       .   .
208                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
noting powers to be endowed with power, and sacraments
to be taken for efficacious acts; the principle set forth by
Cassirer, in a passage which I have quoted once before, 79
but cannot refrain from repeating here: "It is typical of the
first naive, unreflective manifestations of linguistic thinking
as well as the mythical consciousness, that its content is not
sharply divided into symbol and object, but both tend to
unite in a perfectly undifferentiated fusion." 80 This prin-
ciple marks the line between the "mythical consciousness"
and the "scientific consciousness," or between implicit and
explicit conception of reality. Music is our myth of the inner
life—  a young, vital, and meaningful myth, of recent inspira-
tion and still in its "vegetative" growth.




          g.     The Genesis of Artistic Import

The roots of music go far back in history, but in its begin-
nings it probably was not art. There seems to have been a
long pre-musical period, when organized sounds were used
for rhythmatization of work and ritual, for nervous excita-
tion, and perhaps for magical purposes. In this period the
elementary materials of music became established, tonal forms
which finally reached a stage of articulation that made them,
quite spontaneously, instinct with meaning. That is why Bii-
cher, in his famous book Arbeit und Rhythmus, 1 can actually
trace so many motifs back to sailors' cries, the long breaths
of corn-grinders, to threshers' flail-strokes and the measure
of bounding hammers in the smithy. All those mechanical
sounds and spontaneous utterances had to be long familiar
before their tonal quality could become abstracted for the
listening ear; they had to attain fixed forms before they could
become elements for musical imagination. Probably song of

   79 In The Practice of Philosophy, p. 178.
   so This identification of symbol and object in music is given remark-
able illustration by a passage from Gehring's The Basis of Musical
Pleasure, which reads: "If the sequence of thoughts which fills our mind
from minute to minute bears any close resemblance to melodic structure,
it is so subtle that nobody has yet been able to detect it. However, is it
necessary to trace an analogy? May not the mental phenomenon and the
musical counterpart here melt together? May not the melody be sub-
stituted for the important train of thought which it is supposed to mirror?
In the case of measure, force, and tempo, music duplicates or photo-
graphs the mind; in the case of melody, it coincides with it." (Page 98.)
   i Karl Bucher, Arbeit und Rhythmus
                                          (4th ed. 1908; first published in
1896).
             THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                209
some kind, as well as drummed dance-rhythm, is older than
any musical interest. If indeed, as von Humboldt says, "Man
is a singing creature," then music is not necessarily given as
soon as there is song; then he may have sung his reveilles
and musters, his incantations and his dances, long before he
knew that vocal forms were beautiful and could be sung
without signifying anything. Group speaking is necessarily
chanting. The length of a sentence that can be spoken in one
breath is a natural verse-limit, as the hold on the end of a
choral verse indicates. Work rhythms, dance measures, choric
utterance, these are some of the influences that formed music
out of the sounds that are natural to man, that he utters at
work, or in festal excitement, or in imitation of the world's
      —
sounds the cuckoo's cry, the owl's hoot, the beat of hooves,
feet, drums, or hammers.
   All such noises are incipient "themes," musical models
which artistic imagination may seize upon to form tonal ideas.
But they do not themselves enter into music, as a rule; they
are transformed into characteristic motifs; intervals, rhythms,
melodies, all the actual ingredients of song are not supplied
but merely inspired by sounds heard in nature. The auditory
experiences which impress us are those which have musical
possibilities, which allow themselves to be varied and devel-
oped, expanded, altered, which can change their emotional
value through harmonic modifications. Ernst Kurth, in his
excellent Musikpsychologie, has made a searching study of
these proto-musical elements, which he calls Ursymbole; his
words are the best statement I can find of the way familiar
sounds are transformed into music, so I quote them bere:
   "In investigating the thematic roots of folksong, one soon
comes upon psychological roots as well; among all races
there appear certain recurrent, simple idioms that are really
nothing but ultimate symbols of their vital consciousness:
calls, chimes, cradle-rhythms, work-rhythms; dance-forms,
often intimately related to certain bodily movements and steps;
shouts, hunting-calls and military signals, highland themes
(Alphornweisen) and tallyhos (symbols of popular humor
persisting even in high artistic composition); also plenty of
borrowings from the national liturgy; in short, all sorts of
motifs in which an undercurrent of popular imagination
reveals itself.
   "Especially impressions from the first phases of childhood
leave their imprint here; hence the fondness for (hidden)
cradle-rhythms in folktunes, for certain beckoning calls, fur-
thermore for religious motifs and the many clear or merely
suggested bell sounds.  .   .   .



   "All these themes are easily detected in folksongs, either
210                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
frankly or obscurely present, sometimes clearly interpretable,
sometimes of indeterminate symbolic character. They are by
no means simply expressive of the momentary literal mean-
ing of the text, but rather may be said to emanate directly
(and sometimes even in defiance of the text) from musical
reflection and formulation in its own right.     .   .They can
                                                         .




hardly be discerned as separate motif-values in the general
easy flow of the tune; neither musically nor ideationally can
a folksong ever be schematically analyzed as a sheer synthesis
of such ultimate symbols." 2
   All these sounds which meet our alert and retentive ear
in the course of the day's work become fixed forms for our
minds, because they are heard over and over again in nature,
industry, or society; but they give rise to music because they
are intrinsically expressive. They have not only associative
value, but value as rhythms and intervals, exhibiting stress
and release, progression, rise or fall, motion, limit, rest. It
is in this musical capacity that they enter into art, not in
their original capacity of signs, self-expressions, religious
symbols, or parrot-like imitation of sounds.
   There is a widespread and familiar fallacy, known as the
"genetic fallacy," which arises from the historical method in
philosophy and criticism: the error of confusing the origin of
a thing with its import, of tracing the thing to its most primi-
tive form and then calling it "merely" this archaic phe-
nomenon. In a philosophy of symbolism this mistake is
particularly fatal, since all elementary symbolic forms have
their origin in something else than symbolistic interest. Signifi-
cance is always an adventitious value. Words were probably
ritualistic sounds before they were communicative devices;
that does not mean that language is now not "really" a means
of communication, but is "really" a mere residue of tribal
excitement. Musical materials, likewise, presumably had other
uses before they served music; that does not imply that music
is "really" not an intellectual achievement, and expression of
musical ideas, at all, but is in reality a mere invocation
of rain or game, or a rhythmic aid to dancers, or what not.
   But just as it is a mistake to reduce music to its origins,
so it is, I think, to elevate primitive emotional sounds, like
bird-songs or the sing-song speech of sentimental persons, to
the dignity of music. They are musical materials, but their
unconscious use is not art. This is true even of certain tunes.
"The Old Gray Mare" was made for marching, and is a real
aid to rhythmic tramping, but its musical function is quite
secondary.    Certain   spinning songs are musically just bad.

 2 Kurth,   Musikpsychologie,   p.   291.
                         THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                               21   1




They have been developed                    in    order to carrj       the    words   oi   i
bailed,     and no one caret about the melody,                        rhe lame is true
of drummed                 dancc-rfn thins         interspersed       with shouts ^r
verses ooal      I         forms
                             casually in answer to practical
                                   arise
demands, just as architeetural. ceramic, and pictorial forms
do. and attain some decree of eonventional development
before an\ one sees them as artistie forms at all.
    he plastic arts find natural models everywhere. Nature
     I



is   tull   ol       individual, beautiful, characteristic forms, and any-
one molding               cla\ or marking with his finger in the sand
naturally recalls            some object           shapes that
                                                 to give sense to the
produce thernsetvei under                  his    hand.
                                                    to achieve
                                                          It   is   io easy
     [lie Unity in I design by making it represent something,

that even when we would experiment with pure forms we are
apt tO find ourselves interpreting the results as human figures,
    I, bowers, or familiar inanimate things. Geometric forms
require purely intellectual and original organization to recom-
mend themselves to the eye as sensible (/estalten, and must
be relatively simple to be handled by their inventor or be-
holders as beautiful forms. But natural objects, by virtue of
their practical significance, carry a certain guarantee of unity
and permanence, which lets us apprehend their forms, though
these forms would be much too difficult to grasp as mere visual
patterns without extraneous meaning. An artistically sensitive
mind sees significant form where such form presents itself.
The profusion of natural models undoubtedly is responsible
for the early development of plastic art.
    But there is a danger in that asset, too; for the purely
visual arts very easily become model-bound. Instead of m
merely providing artistic ideas, a model may dictate to
the artist; its practical functions, which served to organize the
conception of it as a form, may claim his attention to the
detriment of his abstractive vision. Its interest as an object
may conflict with its pictorial interest and confuse the pur-
pose of his work.
    For the average beholder judging an artistic work, this
confusion is inevitable. The first naive comment is always
apt to be that the picture is, or is not, quite accurate; next,
that the subject is or is not worthy of being represented; and
then, probably, that the work is "pleasant" or "unpleasant."
All three of these comments are based on standards which
have nothing to do with art; all three place a premium on
qualities which usually detract from "significant form." The
first demands that the artist should be primarily interested in

the object           —
               as a storekeeper might be. who was to judge it
for his stock. The second concerns the object, not in relation
to the picture           —
                   not its visual virtues or failings but in rela-      —
212                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
tion to everything else in the world but the picture. Its
practical, moral, or historical significance is the criterion of
value here. The third treats the picture in what is really an
"aesthetic" capacity, its power to excite or soothe our senses,
to effect either annoyance or repose, as the colors of a living-
room do; or, if the "pleasure" derives from the theme
of the picture (a pastoral landscape being "pleasant," a St
Sebastian full of arrows "unpleasant" art), it is expected to
stimulate the imagination in agreeable ways.
   But all these virtues may belong to mediocre pictures;
they are, in fact, usually exemplified in the landscapes, ma-
rines, and genre paintings that serve as covers for magazines
whenever the pretty-girl-portrait is not appropriate.   A
                                                        painter
of no insight, judgment, or imagination worth mentioning
might follow Goethe's suggestions for a picture, find a grace-
ful and perfect model to impersonate a noble character, and
depict it with skillful accuracy    "getreue Nachahmung der
Natur," as his mentor called it   —         chosen with fault-
                                      in colors
less taste; 3   and produce a picture that might hangin every
parlor, but mean exactly nothing to the sensibilities of any
real artist. All these factors may, indeed, be materials for
artistic conception; but they are not the conception itself,
they offer no criterion of excellence. A subject which has
emotional meaning for the artist may thereby rivet his atten-
tion and cause him to see its form with a discerning, active
eye, and to keep that form present in his excited imagination
until its highest reaches of significance are evident to him;
then he will have, and will paint, a deep and original con-
ception of it. That is why men long in love or in religious
fervor are inspired to produce great, convincing works of art.
Not the importance of the theme, nor the accuracy of its
depiction, nor the fantasies stirred in the beholder, make a
work of art significant, but the articulation of visual forms
which Hoeslin would call its "melody."
   If the origin of art had to wait on somebody's conception
of this inner meaning, and on his intention to express it, then
our poor addle-brained race would probably never have
produced the first artistic creation. We see significance in
things long before we know what we are seeing, and it takes
some other interest, practical or emotional or superstitious,
to make us produce an object which turns out to have expres-
sive virtue as well.    We cannot conceive significant form ex
nihilo; we can only find it,   and create something in its image;
but because a      man has seen the "significant form" of the

  3 See "Zu malende Gegenstande" and "Maximen und Reflexionen iiber
Kunst." In Werke (Cotta ed.), vol. XXXV.
             THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                 213
thing he copies, he will copy it with that emphasis, not by
measure, but by the selective, interpretative power of his
               A
intelligent eye.   savage may have this insight; in fact, Bush-
men and Indians, Polynesians and Indonesians, seem to be
prone to it, sensitive to forms as the early Egyptians and the
nameless cave-dwellers of paleolithic ages were. Apparently
primitive mankind has a "vegetative" period of artistic ac-
tivity, as he has of linguistic and mythological and ritual
growth. A crude pre-Athenian peasant makes a Herm for
the protection of his home, and produces a statue of archaic
beauty; an Indian carves a totem-pole, and achieves a com-
position; he fashions a canoe or molds a water-jar, and creates
a lovely form. His model is the human body, the tree trunk,
the curled dry leaf floating, the shell or skull or cocoanut
from which he drinks. But as he imitates such models for
practical ends he sees more than the utilitarian import of
their shapes; he literally sees the reflection of human feeling,
the "dynamic" laws of life, power, and rhythm, in forms on
which his attention is focussed; he sees things he cannot
name, magical imports, Tightness of line and mass, his hands
unwittingly express and even overdraw what he sees, and the
product amazes and delights him and looks "beautiful." But
he does not "know," in discursive terms, what he is express-
ing, or why he deviates from the model to make the form
more "significant." When he emerges from his savage state
and takes discursive reason seriously he tries to copy more
accurately; and the ambition for naturalistic, literal represen-
tation, for rational standards of art, moral interpretations,
and so forth, confuse his intuition and endanger his vj$ual
apprehensions. «.
   It has often been remarked that music as we know it, i.e.
as an artistic medium, is of very recent date. William Wal-
lace was so impressed with the lateness of its evolution that
he attributed this sudden growth to the emergence of a new
faculty of hearing, a neurological development which man
was supposed to have just attained. In The Threshold of
Music, he asserted that the Greeks, and even our ancestors
of five or six hundred years ago, could not hear what we can;
they could not distinguish consonance from dissonance. He
points out some interesting facts in support of this theory,
notably that to the Greeks, as to the Chinese before them,
music was essentially an intellectual exercise. Instrumental
music was practiced only as a craft supplying one of the
physical pleasures of life, like catering or massage, and had
none of the prestige of the true arts; wherefore musical
instruments were few and crude, and the ingenious Greeks
who could cast all sorts of delicate sculptured forms in bronze
214                PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
did not use that      same skill to make even the most obvious
improvements     in  the flute and the lyre. So he concludes
that ancient musicians simply had not the "inner ear" that
is normal, now-a-days, not only for gifted persons, but for
the average man, who quite naturally hears melodies in the
context of some harmonic structure. "While the Greeks had
reached the highest attainments in eye-training and mind-
training," he concludes, "as shown by their works of art, by
their dialectics and their poetry, the existing records of their
music go to prove that their sense of hearing lacked the
faculty of discerning the finer shades and subtleties of
sound." 4 Since the professional Greek rhapsodists prided
themselves on singing quarter-tones accurately on pitch, this
statement is certainly open to doubt. Yet it is indeed re-
markable that, although the organ existed throughout the
Middle Ages, no one discovered the possibilities of simul-
taneous tonal combinations; and also that the great classical
period of music is centuries later than that of the other
   —
arts   drama, sculpture, or painting. If we reject Wallace's
hypothesis, that "musical sense" evolved only with a recent
neurological development, we assume the burden of a better
explanation.
   This lies, I think, in the fact that music has very few
natural models. Bird songs, cries, whistles, traditional cattle-
calls, and metallic clangs are scant materials; even the intona-
tions of the human voice, whether purely emotional (as with
us), or semantic (like the Chinese speech-tones), are indefi-
nite, elusive, hard to hold in memory as precise forms. There
are hardly any given musical configurations in nature to sug-
gest organized tonal structures, and reveal themselves as
significant forms to a naive, sensitive, savage ear.
   The molds and scaffoldings in which music had to take
shape were all of extraneous character. Pictures have visual
models, drama has a direct prototype in action, poetry in
story; all may claim to be "copies," in the Platonic sense or
in the simple Aristotelian sense of "imitations." But music,
having no adequate models, had to rest on the indirect sup-
port of two non-musical aids      rhythm, and words.
   Rhythms are more fixed and stable, more definite than
intonations. That is probably why the rhythmic structure
is the first aspect of music to become formalized and precise.
Rhythm can be simultaneously expressed in many ways              —    in
shouts, steps, drum-beats, by voice, bodily motion, and in-
strumental noises. Words and acts and cries, whistles, rattles,
and tom-toms, may all be synchronized in one single rhythm;

  4 William Wallace, The Threshold of Music (1908), esp. pp. 35-42.
                  THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                    215
no wonder the rhythmic figure is easily abstracted, when it is
rendered in such multiple modes! It is obviously one and
the same metric pattern, a general dynamic form, that may
be sung, danced, clapped, or drummed; this is the element
that can always be repeated, and therefore traditionally pre-
served. Naturally it offers us the first logical frame, the
skeletal structure of the embryonic art of music. 5
   The most obvious tonal material is, of course, the human
voice; and the spontaneous function of the voice is natural
utterance     —
            cry or speech. In adults, speech has become such
a dominant habit that even our purely emotional exclama-
tions tend to verbal forms like: "Alas!" "Ach!" "Tiens!"
And Biicher has shown how meaningless vocables carrying
out rhythms are gradually replaced by assonant words, with-
out any particular regard to meaning. Tennyson's farmer
heard his horse's hooves say: "Property, property, property,"
which made sense enough to his mind; but the fisherman who
hears the sails say: "Jerry and Josh, Jerry and Josh," or the
child who listens to the train's wheels repeating: "Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Jerusalem," is simply yielding to the force of
linguistic habit. This sort of mental formulation seems to
underlie the construction of occupational songs, and prob-
ably of many festal songs. The adjustment of speech-im-
pulses to the demands of rhythmic tonal figure is the natural
source of all chanting, the beginning of vocal music. 6
   Since singing aloud requires some resonant, sustained vowel
sounds, one cannot help singing syllables, and their sug-
gestion of words makes the opportunity for poetic expression
too obvious to be missed. But as soon as the silly random
verbiage first efcctated by rhythmic figures and tonal de-
mands is imbued with poetic sense, a new source of artistry
has been created: for the poetic line becomes the choral
verse, which determines the elementary melodic form, the
musical phrase. Patterns of pitch follow patterns of word-
emphasis, and melodic lines begin and end with propositional
lines. This is the second extraneous "model" for musical
form.
   For a long age music was dependent on these two parents,
dance and song, and was not found without them. As ritual
dancing disappeared, and religion became more and more
bound to verbal expression, to prayer and liturgy, occupa-
tional       and secular   festive   music became wedded to dance
forms, sacred music to the chant; 7 so that Goethe, reviewing

  5Cf. R. Wallaschek, "On the Origin of Music," Mind, XVI (1891),
63: 375-386.
  6 Biicher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, p. 380.
  i Cf the observation of Kathi Meyer
         .                               "In antiquity, ritual was a cult
                                          :
216                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the history of the art, and mistaking its guide-lines for its
intrinsic characteristics, was led to say: "The holiness of
sacred music, the jocund humor of folk-tunes, are the pivots
round which all true music revolves.             Worship or
                                                    .   .   .



dance." 8
   But the folksong is by no means restricted to jocose senti-
ments nor always based on dance-rhythms; it derives from
sacred sources as well as from secular excitements, and very
soon abstracts from both the first independent musical prod-
uct—  the "air." Old airs, like our modern hymn tunes, are
neither sad nor gay; any words in the proper metrical pattern
may be sung to them. Such melodies belong to no special
occasion, no special subject-matter, but are merely used for
the purpose of singing a variety of poems. Thus airs them-
selves often acquire names, after places, composers, saints,
as well as after their original words. Airs are national posses-
sions; they may convey ballads, or find their way into semi-
religious settings,solemn graduations, patriotic exercises and
the like, creep into revivalist meetings, and end up in the
most dignified hymnology. 9 If their rhythmic accent is light
and definite they are more apt to have a career on the village
green, the barn floor, the dance hall, sung to endless silly
words and played on fiddles or bagpipes without any words
at all. The dance seems to be their excuse for being; but
presently they are played or whistled on the street where no
one requires their rhythmic measure for any but musical
purposes. At this point music stands without its poetic or
terpsichorean scaffolding, a tonal dynamic form, an expres-
sive medium with a law and a life of its own.
   Because its models are non-musical, they are not as vital
to its mature artistic products as the models of pictures,
statues, plays, or poems are apt to be. Of course a certain
dance has left its stamp on all Mozart's minuets, and another
on Chopin's waltzes; yet the musical works called minuets
and waltzes do not represent those respective dances as pic-

act, a genuine sacrifice which was really carried out. Prayers and songs
were mere accompaniments and remained secondary matter, hence the
low development of these parts of the rite. Now, in the Christian service,
the actual sacrifice is no longer really performed, it is symbolized, tran-
scendentalized, spiritualized. The service is a parable. So prayers and
chants became the realities which had to be emphasized more and more;
they too served ultimately the process of spiritualization. If, in the past,
a symbol was needed for the cult, one could replace the act or even
the god by an image, in painting or sculpture. Now, with the concept-
ualizing of religion, one can spiritualize only the psychic processes, the
'anima.' That is effected by the word, or better yet in music." Bedeutung
und Wesen der Musik (1932), p. 47.
   8 Goethe, "Maximen und Reflexionen iiber Kunst."
   sCf. Biicher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, p. 401.
                THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                           217
tures represent objects. They are abstracted forms reincar-
nated   in           we can take the music and forget the
             music, and
dance far more easily than we can take a painting and forget
what it portrays. The dance was only a framework; the air
has other contents, musical characteristics, and interests us
directly, not by its connotation of a "step" which we may not
even know.
   The same is true of words that have served to frame a tune.
The melody, heard by someone who does not hear or under-
stand the words, recommends itself as a tonal pattern on its
own merit, and makes perfectly good sense when it is played
instead of sung. Music dispenses easily with its models, be-
cause it could never really do them justice as a representative;
they are merely its foster-parents, and it was never their true
image anyway. This orphan estate belated its growth as an
art, and kept it long in a merely auxiliary, even a utilitarian
position; but it has the compensating virtue of making music
more independent of its natural models than any other art
when it does attain its selfhood. We perceive it as "significant
form," unhampered by any fixed,            literal   meaning, by any-
thing it represents. It is easier to grasp the artistic import
of music than of the older and more model-bound arts.
   This artistic import is what painters, sculptors, and poets
express through their depiction of objects or events. Its se-
mantic is the play of lines, masses, colors, textures in plastic
arts, or the play of images, the tension and release of ideas,
the speed and arrest, ring and rhyme of words in poetry
what Hoeslin           "Formenmelodie" and "Gedankenmelo-
                   calls
die."   Artistic            is what these media will convey;
                   expression
and I strongly stfspect, though I am not ready to assert it dog-
matically, that the import of artistic expression is broadly the
                                       —
same in all arts as it is in music the verbally ineffable, yet
not inexpressible law of vital experience, the pattern of
affective and sentient being. This is the "content" of what
we perceive as "beautiful form"; and this formal element is
the artist's "idea" which is conveyed by every great work. It
is this which so-called "abstract art" seeks to abstract by
defying the model or dispensing with it altogether; and which
music above all arts can reveal, unobscured by adventitious
literal meanings. That is presumably what Walter Pater meant
by his much-debated dictum, "All art aspires to the condition
of music." 10
  This does not mean, however, that music achieves the
aim of artistic expression more fully than other arts. An


   10 Walter Pater, The Renaissance. Studies in Art and Poetry   (   1908; 1st
Cd. 1873), p. 140.
218                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
ideal condition  is its asset, not a supreme attainment, and it
is this condition for which the other arts must strive, whereas
music finds it fulfilled from the first stage in which it may
be called an art at all. Its artistic mission is more visible
because it is not obscured by meanings belonging to the
represented object rather than to the form that is made in its
image. But the artistic import of a musical composition is not
therefore greater or more perfectly formulated than that of
a picture, a poem, or any other work that approaches per-
fection as closely after its kind.
   Whether the field of musical meanings, over which its un-
assigned symbols play      —the realm of sentient and emotional
            —
experience is ultimately the subject-matter of all art, is a
moot question. In a general way it probably is so; but within
this very great and uncharted domain there may well be
many special regions, to one or another of which the medium
of one art is more suited than that of another for its articulate
expression. It may well be, for instance, that our physical
orientation in the world       —
                               our intuitive awareness of mass
and motion, restraint and autonomy, and all characteristic
feeling that goes with it      —is the preeminent subject-matter
of the dance, or of sculpture, rather than (say) of poetry;
or that erotic emotions are most readily formulated in musical
terms. I do not know; but the possibility makes me hesitate
to say categorically, as many philosophers and critics have
said, 11 that the import of all the arts is the same, and only
the medium depends on the peculiar psychological or sensory
make-up of the artist, so that one man may fashion in clay
what another renders in harmonies or in colors, etc. The
medium in which we naturally conceive our ideas may restrict
them not only to certain forms but to certain fields, howbeit
they all lie within the verbally inaccessible field of vital
experience and qualitative thought.
   The basic unity of all the arts is sometimes argued from
the apparent beginning of all artistic ideas in the so-called
"aesthetic emotion" which is supposed to be their source and
therefore (by a slightly slipshod inference) their import. 12
  n Cf. S. T. Coleridge's essay, "On the Principles of Genial Criticism
Concerning the Fine Arts, More Especially those of Statuary and Paint-
ing," appended to Biographia Literaria, in the ed. of 1907; also D'Udine,
L'art et le geste, p. 70.
   12 Cf. Clive Bell: "The starting-point for all systems of aesthetics must
be the personal experience of a peculiar emotion.     .   . This emotion is
                                                              .



called the aesthetic emotion; and if we can discover some quality com-
mon to all and absent from none of the objects that provoke it, we
shall nave solved what I take to be the central problem of aesthetics."
(Art, p. 6.) Mr. Bell forgets the logical rule that such a discovery would
prove nothing, unless the quality in question were also peculiar to
aesthetic objects; any quality common to all objects whatever would ful-
fil the condition he states.                               #
            THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                 219
Anyone who has worked in more than one medium probably
can testify to the sameness of the "aesthetic emotion" accom-
panying creation in the various arts. But I suspect that this
characteristic excitement, so closely wedded to original con-
ception and inner vision, is not the source, but the effect, of
artistic labor, the personal emotive experience of revelation,
insight, mental power, which an adventure in "implicit under-
standing" inspires. It has often been stated that it is the same
emotion which overtakes a mathematician as he constructs a
convincing and elegant proof; and this is the beatitude which
Spinoza, who knew it well, called "the intellectual love of
God." Something like it is begotten in appreciation of art, too,
though not nearly in the same measure as in producing; but
the fact that the difference is one of degree makes it plausible
that the emotion springs from the one activity which the artist
                                          —
and the beholder share in unequal parts the comprehension
of an unspoken idea. In the artist this activity must be sus-
tained, complete, and intense; his intellectual excitement is
often at fever pitch. The idea is his own, and if he loses his
command of it, confused by the material or distracted by
pressing irrelevancies, there is no symbol to hold it for him.
His mind is apt to be furiously active while an artistic con-
ception takes shape. To the beholder the work is offered as a
constant source of an insight he attains gradually, more or
less clearly, perhaps never in logical completeness; and al-
though his mental experience also wakens the characteristic
emotion, variously called "feeling of beauty," "aesthetic emo-
tion," and "aesthetic pleasure," he knows nothing like the
exhilaration and tense excitement of an artist before his pris-
tine marble or ^lay, his unmarked canvas or paper, as the
new work dawns in his bfain.
   Perhaps it is inevitable that this emotion which one really
has in producing or contemplating an artistic composition
should become confused with the, content of the work, since
that content is itself emotive. If there is feeling in the work,
and both artist and spectator experience a feeling, and more-
over the artist has more of a feeling than the spectator, would
it not take a very careful thinker to refrain from jumping to

the conclusion that the emotion embodied in the form is
felt by the artist before he begins his work, is "expressed"
in the process of creating as it might be in shouting or weep-
ing, and is sympathetically felt by the audience? Yet I be-
lieve the "aesthetic emotion" and the emotional content of
a work of art are two very different things; the "aesthetic emo-
tion" springs from an intellectual triumph, from overcoming
barriers of word-bound thought and achieving insight into
literally "unspeakable" realities; but the emotive content of
220              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the work is apt to be something much deeper than any intel-
lectual experience, more essential, pre-rational, and vital,
something of the life-rhythms we share with all growing, hun-
gering, moving and fearing creatures: the ultimate realities
themselves, the central facts of our brief, sentient existence.
   "Aesthetic pleasure," then, is akin to (though not identi-
cal with) the satisfaction of discovering truth. It is the
characteristic reaction to a well-known, but usually ill-defined,
                                      —
phenomenon called "artistic truth" well-known to all art-
ists, creative or appreciative, but so ill-defined by most epis-
temologists that it has become their favorite aversion. Yet
truth is so intimately related to symbolism that if we recog-
nize two radically different types of sv*"hnli> ^vnr^^in^ we
should logically look for two distinct meanings of truth;
and if both symbolic modes are rational enough, both senses
of truth should be definable.
   Here it must be noted that the distinction between dis-
cursive and presentational symbols does not correspond to
the difference between literal and artistic meanings. Many
presentational symbols are merely proxy for discourse; geo-
metric relations may be rendered in algebraic terms    —clumsy
                                       —
terms perhaps, but quite equivalent and graphs are mere
abbreviated descriptions. They express facts for discursive
thinking, and their content can be verbalized, subjected to
the laws of vocabulary and syntax. Artistic symbols, on the
other hand, are untranslatable; their sense is bound to the
particular form which it has taken. It is always implicit, and
cannot be explicated by any interpretation. This is true
even of poetry, for though the material of poetry is verbal, its
import is not the literal assertion made in the words, but
the way the assertion is made, and this involves the sound, the
tempo, the aura of associations of the words, the long or short
sequences of ideas, the wealth or poverty of transient imagery
that contains them, the sudden arrest of fantasy by pure
fact, or of familiar fact by sudden fantasy, the suspense of
literal meaning by a sustained ambiguity resolved in a long-
awaited key-word, and the unifying, all-embracing artifice
of rhythm. (The tension which music achieves through dis-
sonance, and the reorientation in each new resolution to
harmony, find their equivalents in the suspensions and peri-
odic decisions of propositional sense in poetry. Literal sense,
not euphony, is the "harmonic structure" of poetry; word-
melody in literature is more akin to tone-color in music.)
   The poem as a whole is the bearer of artistic import, as a
painting or a drama is. We may isolate significant lines, as
we may isolate beauties in any work, but if their meaning
is not determined and supported by their context, the en-
                 THF GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                      221
tire work, then that work is i failure despite tin- gem of
excellence it COOtaim    lh.it is win ProfesaOI I ban's re-   r



statement of T. S. Bliot'i cryptic lines:

          "And  I see the clamp souls of the housemaids
           Sprouting disconsolately at ires gates,"

namely:     That housemaids' souls are damp and sprout." and
his    demand tor a more adequate rendering of this issertkM]
bv wa\ oi philosophical interpretation, seems (0 me I funda-
mental misconception o\ poetic import         A "more adequate
rendering" would be more, not less, poetic; it would be a
better poem. "Artistic truth" does not belong to statements
in the poem or their obvious figurative meanings, but to its
figures and meanings us they are used, its statements us they
arc made, its framework of word-sound and sequence, rhythm
and recurrence and rhyme, color and image and the speed of
their passage    in short, to the poem as "significant form."
The material of poetry is discursive, but the product the          —
artistic phenomenon      —
                         is not; its significance is purely im-
plicit in the poem as a totality, as a form compounded of
sound and suggestion, statement and reticence, and no trans-
lation can reincarnate that. Poetry may be approximated in
other languages and give rise to surprisingly beautiful new
versions revealing new possibilities of its skeletal literal ideas
and rhetorical devices; but the product is new, like an orches-
tral scoring of an organ-fugue, a piano version of a string
quartet, or a photograph of a painting.
                          —
   An artistic symbol which may be a product of hmpan
craftsmanship,     w(on a purely personal level) something in
nature seen as "significant form"          —
                                       has more than discursive
or presentational meaning: its form as such, as a sensory
phenomenon, has what I have called "implict" meaning, like
rite and myth, but of a more catholic sort. It has what L. A.
Reid called "tertiary subject-matter," beyond the reach of
"primary imagination" (as Coleridge would say) and even
the "secondary imagination" that sees metaphorically. "Ter-
tiary subject-matter is subject-matter imaginatively experi-
enced in the work of art ...        something which cannot be
                                       ,



apprehended apart from the work, though theoretically dis-
tinguishable from its expressiveness." 14
   "Artistic truth," sc called, is the truth of a symbol to the

  U Urban, iMn^ua^e and Reality, see passage quoted p. 234, above. To
anyone who cannot grasp the poet's meaning and vision here, Professor
I   ill's "interpretation" certainly would make matters worse i.ither than
better.
    M "Beauty and Significance," p. 132.
222                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
forms of feeling     —
                    nameless forms, but recognizable when
they appear in sensuous replica. Such truth, being bound to
certain logical forms of expression, has logical peculiarities
that distinguish it from propositional truth: since presenta-
tional symbols have no negatives, there is no operation
whereby their truth-value is reversed, no contradiction. Hence
"the possibility of expressing opposites simultaneously," on
which Mersmann commented. Falsity here is a complicated
failing, not a function of negation. For this reason Professor
Reid calls it not falsity but inexpressiveness; and Urban, in
a moment undisturbed by epistemology, abandons not only
the term "falsity," but also "truth," and suggests that artistic
forms should rather be designated as adequate or inadequate
to the ideas they embody. 15 Perhaps he did not see that this
shift of terminology belies his doctrine that all art makes
assertions which must ultimately be paraphrased in language;
for assertions are true or false, and their adequacy has to
be taken for granted before we can judge them as assertions at
all. They are always debatable and may be tested for their
truth-values by the nature of their explicable consequences.
Art, on the other hand, has no consequences; it gives form
to something that is simply there, as the intuitive organizing
functions of sense give form to objects and spaces, color and
sound. It gives what Bertrand Russell calls "knowledge by
acquaintance" of affective experience, below the level of belief,
on the deeper level of insight and attitude. And to this mission
it is either adequate or inadequate, as images, the primitive
symbols of "things," are adequate or inadequate to give us a
conception of what things are "like." 16
   To understand the "idea" in a work of art is therefore more
like having a new experience than like entertaining a new
proposition; and to negotiate this knowledge by acquaintance
the work may be adequate in some degree. There are no de-
grees of literal truth, but artistic truth, which is all signifi-
cance, expressiveness, articulateness, has degrees; therefore
works of art may be good or bad, and each must be judged
on our experience of its revelations. Standards of art are
set by the expectations of people whom long conversance
                         —
with a certain mode music, painting, architecture, or what
    —
not has made both sensitive and exacting; there is no im-
mutable law of artistic adequacy, because significance is

  is Urban, op. cit. See pp. 439-442.
  is Lord Russell fails to appreciate,     I think, the logical, formulative
mission of sense, or else he evades it because it has kept company with
idealism. But to see in certain forms is not to create their contents,
though it is a source of that relativistic character of "data" which makes
them less final and absolute than his empiricism lets him admit.
               THE GENESIS OF ARTISTIC IMPORT                223
always for a mind as well as of a form. But a form, a
harmony, even a timbre, that is entirely unfamiliar is "mean-
ingless," naturally enough; for we must grasp a Gestalt quite
definitely before we can perceive an implicit meaning, or
even the promise of such a meaning, in it; and such definite
grasp requires a certain familiarity. Therefore the most original
contemporary music in any period always troubles people's
ears. The more pronounced its new idiom, the less they can
make of it, unless the impulse which drove the composer to
this creation is something of a common experience, of a yet
inarticulate Zeitgeist, which others, too, have felt. Then they,
like him, may be ready to experiment with new expressions,
and meet with an open mind what even the best of them can-
not really judge. Perhaps some very wonderful music is lost
because it is too extraordinary. It may even be lost to its
composer because he cannot really handle his forms, and
abandons them as unsuccessful. But intimate acquaintance
with all sorts of music does give some versatile minds a power
of grasping new sounds; people so inclined and trained will
have a "hunch," at least, that they are dealing with true
"significant form" though they still hear a good deal of it as
noise, and will contemplate it until they comprehend it,
for better or worse. It is an old story that Bach, Beethoven,
and Wagner were "hard to hear" in their own time. Many
people today, who can follow Rimsky-Korsakoff or Debussy
as easily as Schumann, cannot hear music in Hindemith or
Bartok; yet the more experienced probably know, by certain
signs, that   it   is   there.
   On the other hand,        artistic forms are exhaustible/ <oo.
Music that has*fulfilled its mission may be outgrown, so that
its style, its quality, its Whole conception, palls on a genera-

tion that is ardently expressing or seeking to express some-
thing else. 17 Only very catholic minds can see beauty in
many styles even without the aid pf historical fancy, of a con-
scious "self -projection" into other settings or ages. It is prob-
ably easiest in music, where typical forms are not further
bound down by literal references to things that have a tran-
sient and dated character.
   The worst enemy of artistic judgment is literal judgment,
which is so much more obvious, practical, and prompt that
it is apt to pass its verdict before the curious eye has even

taken in the entire form that meets it. Not blindness to
"significant form," but blindedness, due to the glaring evi-
dence of familiar things, makes us miss artistic, mythical, or
sacred import. This is probably the source of the very old

  17 Cf. Hanslick,      Vom Musikalisch-Schonen, p. 57.
224                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
and widespread doctrine that the so-called "material world"
is a curtain between humanity and a higher, purer, more
satisfying Truth       —
                 a "Veil of Maya," or Bergson's false, "spa-
tialized" Reality.
   Is   it   conceivable that mysticism   is   a   mark of inadequate
art?  That might account for the fact that all very great
artistic conceptions leave something of mysticism with the
beholder; and mysticism as a metaphysic would then be the
despair of implicit knowledge, as skepticism is the despair
of discursive reason.
   To us whose intelligence is bound up with language,
whose achievements are physical comforts, machines, medi-
cines, great cities, and the means of their destruction, theory
of knowledge means theory of communication, generaliza-
tion, proof, in short:   critique of science. But the limits of
language are not the last limits of experience, and things
inaccessible to language may have their own forms of con-
ception, that is to say, their own symbolic devices. Such non-
discursive forms, charged with logical possibilities of meaning,
underlie the significance of music; and their recognition
broadens our epistemology to the point of including not
only the semantics of science, but a serious philosophy of art




                 io.       The Fabric of Meaning

All thinking begins with seeing; not necessarily through
the eye, but with some basic formulations of sense perception,
in the peculiar idiom of sight, hearing, or touch, normally
of all the senses together. For all thinking is conceptual, and
conception begins with the comprehension of Gestalt.
  The first product of intellectual seeing is literal knowledge,
the abstracted conception of things, to which those things
themselves stand in the relation of instances. So-called "com-
mon sense" does not carry this literal formulation of its ideas
of things, acts, persons, etc., very far in the way of elabora-
tion. Common-sense knowledge is prompt, categorical, and
inexact. A mind that is very sensitive to forms as such and
is aware of them beyond the common-sense requirements for
recognition, memory, and classification of things, is apt to
use  its images metaphorically, to exploit their possible sig-
nificance for the conception of remote or intangible ideas;
that is to say, if our interest in Gestalten goes beyond their
common-sense meanings it is apt to run us into their dynamic,
                     THE FABRIC OF MEANING                          225
mythical, or artistic meanings.   To some people this happens
very easily; in savage society, at least in certain stages of
development, it seems to be actually the rule, so that second-
ary imports of forms     —
                         plastic, verbal, or behavioral forms
often eclipse what Coleridge called the "primary imagination"
of them. Sense-data and experiences, in other words, are
essentially meaningful structures, and their primary, second-
ary, or even more recondite meanings may become crossed in
our impression of them, to the detriment of one value or an-
other. 1 But our first awareness of presented forms usually
serves to label them according to their kinds, and add them
to the general stock of our "knowledge by acquaintance."
   It is fortunate that our first understanding of forms is
normally a literal comprehension of them as typical things
or such-and-such events; for this interpretation is the basis
of intelligent behavior, of daily, hourly, and momentary
adjustment to our nearest surroundings. It is non-discursive,
spontaneous abstraction from the stream of sense-experience,
elementary sense-knowledge, which may be called practical
vision. This is the meeting-point of thought, which is sym-
bolic, with animal behavior, which rests on sign-perception;
for the edifice which we build out of literal conceptions, the
products of practical vision, is our systematic spatio-temporal
world. The same items that are signs to our animal reflexes
are contents for certain symbols of this conceptual system.
If we have a literal conception of a house, we cannot merely
think of a house, but know one when we see it; for a sensory
sign stimulating practical action also answers to the image
                                                           y*
with which we think.
   This dual operation of^ a datum as sign and symbol to-
gether is the key to realistic thinking: the envisagement of
fact. Here, in practical vision, which makes symbols for
thought out of signs for behavior, we have the roots of
practical intelligence. It is more^ than specialized reaction
and more than free imagination; it is conception anchored in
reality.
   "Fact" is not a simple notion. It is that which we conceive
to be the source and context of signs to which we react
successfully; this is a somewhat vague definition, but when
all is said, "fact" is a somewhat vague term. When logicians
try to define it, it becomes a hypostatized proposition; 2 there

           Fry has said in this connection: "Biologically speaking, art
     i Roger
is a blasphemy. We     were given our eyes to see things, not to look at
them." (Vision and Design, p. 47.)
  2 As it certainly is, in the writings of Moore, Stebbing, Ramsey, Wis-
dom, and other British philosophers. Cf. L. S. Stebbing, "Substances,
Events, and Facts," The Journal of Philosophy, XXIX (1932), 12: 309-
322; F. P. Ramsey and G. E. Moore, 'Symposium: Facts and Proposi-
226                 PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
are positive and negative, specific and general, universal and
particular facts; 3 Professor Lewis even speaks of actual and
unreal facts. 4 On the other hand, when pyschologists or their
philosophical cousins, the pragmatists, offer a definition, fact
becomes hardly distinguishable from the animalian sign-
response. The best attempt I have seen at a definition of
"fact," in relation to what might be called "stark reality" on
the one hand, and language, or literal formulation, on the
other, is made by Karl Britton in his recent book, Commu-
nication.
   "A fact," says Britton, "is essentially abstract but there.
    what is an object of attention, of discriminating aware-
It is
                      ... A fact is that in events to which
ness, in present events.
we make a learned and discriminating response determined
in part by the understanding of statements. .    .                  .



   "A fact is that which determines assent or dissent, without
inference and in accordance with the rules.                 .           .   .



   "The formal rules of language determine the structure of
propositions and show in a general way the sort of thing
that a proposition is.      .   But the fact which shows the
                                .   .



proposition to be true, is that in events to which I make
a response that has the same structure as the proposition p.
Can I then learn about the general structural character of
facts from the formal laws of language? Yes, but not about
the general structural character of events.         .   .       .


   "To the same events an infinite variety of responses is
possible: he who understands 'p' makes only certain responses
and not others. It is this that introduces limitation, structure;
events as such have no structure.       .   .   .



   "It follows that it is only for thinking minds that there
is structure in nature. ...         A
                                world without minds is a world
without structure, without relations and qualities, without
facts." 5
   This excerpted passage shows at once the logician's con-
viction that the form of fact is the form of proposition, and
the behaviorist's desire to dispense with concepts and speak
only in terms of "response." So the form of a fact becomes
the form of a specific human response to a specific event.
This response, I take it, is his conceiving of the event (though

tions," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, suppl. vol.
                                                          VII (1927),
153-206; John Wisdom, "Time, Fact, and Substance," ibid., N.S. XXIX
(1928-29), 67 94.
  3 Cf. Hugh Miller, "The Dimensions of Particular Fact," The Journal
of Philosophy, XXXVI (1939), 7: 181-188.
  4 C. I. Lewis, "Facts, Systems, and the Unity of the World," The
Journal of Philosophy, XX (1923), 6: 141-151. See p. 142.
  s Karl Britton, Communication: A Philosophical Study of Language
(1939), pp. 204-206.
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                     227
I should regard his conceiving as only a component of the
"response," which probably has other aspects not deter-
mining the fact at all). At any rate, allowing for special
wordings required by operationalism, behaviorism, etc., we
probably agree on the main tenet that a fact is an intellec-
tually formulated event, whether the formulation be per-
formed by a process of sheer vision, verbal interpretation, or
practical response. Afact is an event as we see it, or would
see it if it occurred for us. It is something to which a propo-
sition is applicable; and a proposition that is not applicable
to any event or events is false. We    can construct propositions
that apply to all events; these are necessary propositions, or,
in Wittgenstein's phrase, "tautologies." Some propositions
apply directly, some indirectly, to events; hence our specific
and general, universal and particular, positive and negative
facts. Only "unreal facts" seem to me to be pure hyposta-
tizations of propositional content, and defy the purpose of
the concept "fact," which is to recognize the link between
symbolic process and signific response, between imagination
and sensory experience.
   In a naive stage of thought, facts are taken for granted;
matters of fact are met in practical fashion as they become
obvious. If it requires further facts to explain a given state
of affairs, such further facts are simply assumed. Imagination
supplies them, philosophical interest sanctions them, and the
popular mind accepts them on quite other grounds than
empirical evidence. This pre-scientific type of thought, sys-
tematic enough in its logical demonstrations, but unconcerned
about any detailed agreement with sense-experience, has r5e*en
described and commented pn as often as the history of philoso-
phy has been written: how Plato ascribed circular orbits to
the planets because of the excellence of circular motion, but
Kepler plotted those orbits from observation and found them
to be elliptical; how the schoolmen argued about the speed
of falling bodies until Galileo, that enfant terrible of learning,
dropped his weights from the leaning tower, and so forth.
And everybody knows how these and other demonstrations
undermined and finally demolished scholasticism, and gave
birth to science; for, as Francis Bacon said, all it required
was "that men should put their notions by, and attend solely
to facts."
   Now if men had really "put their notions by," and merely
paid attention to facts, they would have returned to the con-
dition of Hobie Baker the cat, whose mentality Mr. Stuart
Chase covets so wistfully. Religion, superstition, fantastic
Biblical world-history, were not demolished by "discoveries";
they were outgrown by the European mind. Again the in-
228               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
dividual life shows in microcosm the pattern of human evolu-
tion: the tendency of intellectual growth, in persons as in
races, from dreamlike fantasy to realistic thinking. Many
of the facts that contradicted theology had been known for
ages; many discoveries required no telescope, no test-tube,
no expedition round the world, and would have been just
as possible physically hundreds of years before. But so long
as the great Christian vision filled men's eyes, and systems
of ethical symbols or great artistic ventures absorbed their
minds, such facts as that wood floats on water and stones
sink, living bodies have a uniform temperature and others
vary with the weather, were just meaningless. Surely sailors
had always known that ships showed their topsails over the
horizon before they hove into full view. Surely the number
of known animal species, had any hunter or farmer bothered
to count them up, would always have made it obvious that
the measurements of the ark could not have accommodated
them by two and two, with food-supplies for eight or nine
months. But nobody had chosen to take stock of these num-
bers while reading the measurements. For mythological pur-
poses, the ark was "very big," the animals "very many," and
theirLebensraum was God's problem.
   Not in better information, but in a   natural tendency of
maturing thought toward realism, lay the doom of the dog-
matic age. When logical acumen reaches a certain height,
and the imaginative power has been disciplined into real
skill and ingenuity, then the normal growth of men's interest
in facts reveals a new challenge to philosophical thinking
the intellectual challenge of "contingent" things. The most
insistent facts have always been respected in practice, or we
would not be here. But a society that has its mind fixed on
religious symbols deals with facts in a purely practical spirit
and disposes of them as fast as they arise. To take philosophi-
cal interest in their concomitant variations, their sequences,
their uniformities, demands a change of outlook. 6 It sets
up a new aim for constructive thought: not only to form a
system out of traditional premises, but to construct a logically
coherent cosmology such that its premises shall imply certain
propositions exemplified by observable facts. When this chal-
lenge is felt (it need not be consciously recognized), its im-
mediate effect is a new interest in facts, not as distracting
interruptions to pure thought, but as its very sources and
terminals, the fixed points on which theories and inventions
must hinge.
  The power      that   comes with    scientific   knowledge could
  6 The importance of this change has been pointed out and discussed
by A. N. Whitehead, in Science and the Modern World (1926), chap. L
                    THE FABRIC OF MEANING                            229
become apparent only after science had attained a consider-
able growth. Practical gain, dominion over nature, were
therefore not its early motives; its motives were intellectual,
they lay in the restless desire of an ever-imaginative mind
to exploit the possibilities of the factual world as a field for
constructive thought. 7 Just as a person addicted to cross-
word puzzles becomes a maniac for new words, so the pio-
neers of science were avid for facts that could conceivably be
used in their business. Looking, measuring, analyzing things,
became something like sports in their own right. But great
scientists were never distracted by the fact-finding rage; they
knew from the first what they were doing. Their task was
always to relate facts to each other, either as different cases
of the same general fact, or as successive transformations of
an initial fact according to some systematic principle, or (at
an elementary stage of conception) as more and more ex-
emplifications of "contingent laws," or generally observed
uniformities.
   The interest in facts led to their progressive discovery, to
the invention of aids and implements of discovery, and so
to an unprecedented acquaintance with the world. But it
was far less the information men acquired that undid their re-
ligious beliefs than the change of heart which prompted such
research. The desire to construct a world-picture out of
facts superseded the older ambition to weave a fabric of
"values," in which things and events were interpreted as
manifestations of good and evil, related to powers, wills,
minds, but not essentially to each other; their own laws
having been given short shrift as mere "contingencies,"
which might e^en be expected             to yield,   upon   occasion^,* to
higher principles, with the result known as "miracle." No
matter how much the old order thundered against new facts,
declaring them not so, unknowable, uncertain, dangerous
half-truths, or what-not, the new facts were not its real de-
stroyers, but the new eyes that saw them.
   We have inherited the realistic outlook and its intellectual
ideal, science. We have inherited a naive faith in the sub-
stantiality and ultimacy of facts, and are convinced that

   7 In this opinion, too, I find myself supported by the judgment of
Professor Whitehead, who said in one of his published lectures: "Science
has been developed under the impulse of speculative Reason, the desire
for explanatory knowledge. Its reaction on technology did not commence
until after the invention of the improved steam engine in the year 1769.
Even then, the nineteenth century was well advanced before this reaction
became one of the dominating facts.  .   . There was nothing systematic
                                             .



and dominating in the interplay between science and technical procedure.
The one great exception was the foundation of the Greenwich Observa-
tory for the improvement of navigation." (The Function of Reason,
1929, pp. 38-39.)
230                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
human life, to have any value, must be not only casually and
opportunely adapted to their exigencies (as even the most
other-worldly lives have been), but must be intellectually
filled with an appreciation of "things as they are." Facts are
our very measure of value. They are the framework of our
lives;thinking that leads to the discovery of observable fact
takes us "down to reality"; Wittgenstein has really caught
and recorded the modern man's intellectual attitude, in his
metaphysical aphorisms: 8
   "The world is everything that is the case." (1)
   "The totality of atomic facts is the world." (2.04)
   "The world divides into facts." (1.2)
   Our world "divides into facts" because we so divide it.
Facts are our guarantees of truth. Every generation hankers
for "truth," and whatever will guarantee the truth of propo-
sitions to its satisfaction, is its zero-point of theory where
thought comes to rest in "knowledge." To us it seems utterly
unimaginable that anyone could really resist a demonstratio
                                                  —
ad occulos and hold his deepest convictions those which
                          —
command his actions on any other basis. Yet people have
acted with lordly disregard of "appearances," and do so yet
Christian Scientists flatly deny the reality of visible facts that
are unpleasant, and act on their disbelief. Not only idealists,
but even their great antagonist William James held it possible
that, from the intellectual vantage-point of "higher beings'
than men, our evils might prove to be illusions. 9 The ancient
Greeks had such a respect for pure reason that they could
seriously accept, on its logical merits, a doctrine of reality
which was never exemplified in fact at all, but flatly contra-
dicted by experience; Parmenides could declare all events
to be illusory because change was not possible under the
premises of his systematic thought. Such heroic independence
from sense-evidence is not often found, and of course the most
hard-bitten Eleatic could not act on this faith until he was
ready to die in it (which, ex hypothesi, could not happen).
But all these doctrines show how in different stages of thought
people demand different kinds of security for their convic-
tions.
   We  find sense-evidence a very gratifying conclusion to
the process of thought. Our standards of rationality are the
                                   —
same as Euclid's or Aristotle's generality, consistency, co-
herence, systematic inclusion of all possible cases, economy
                                   —
and elegance in demonstration but our ideal of science

  8 Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
  9 See   "Is     Worth Living?" in The Will to Believe, and Other
                Life
Essays in Popular Philosophy (1905), p. 58.
                     THE FABRIC OF MEANING                           231
makes one further demand: the demand of what has been
called "maximal interpretability." This means that as many
propositions as possible shall be applicable to observable fact.
The systems of thought that seem to us to represent "knowl-
edge" are those which were designed as hypotheses, i.e. de-
signed with reference to experience and intended to meet
certain tests: at definite points their implications must yield
propositions which express discoverable facts. If and only
if these crucial propositions do correspond to facts, a hypothe-

sis is ranked as "truth," its premises as "natural laws."
   I will not enlarge on the assumptions, methods, standards,
and aims of science, because that has been done a dozen times
over, since Henri Poincare's La Science et I'hypothese; 10 even
the part played by symbolism in science has been exhaustively
and, I think, well treated by mathematicians and philosophers
from Charles Peirce to the Vienna Circle. The upshot of
it all is that the so-called "empirical spirit" has taken posses-
sion of our scholarship and speculation as well as our common
sense, so that in pure theory as well as in business and politics
the last appeal is always to that peculiar hybrid of concept and
percept, the "given fact." 11
  The realistic turn of mind which marks our civilization,
and   is probably a sign of our coming-of-age as a race, is
further manifested in our rigorous standards of historical fact.
This is not at all the same thing as scientific fact; nor is
historical truth judged by the same criteria as the truth of
scientific propositions. For to science, as Lord Russell once
remarked in an academic seminar, 12 "A miracle would nqtjbe
important if it happened only once, or even very rarely";
but in history the point is to find out what did happen just
once, what were the specific facts about a specific occasion.
Science never cares about historic instances as such: its "given
facts" are always noted as illustrations, and occurrences which
do not illustrate anything are not "scientific." If miracles oc-
       —
curred events which could not be explained, but also could
                                                            —
not be repeated or expected to repeat themselves we could
discount them as "inexactnesses" in our general picture of na-
ture. But to a historian a miracle, though there were but one
in the world, would be of great importance if it had conse-
quences which ultimately involved many people. If there
were any indubitable record of it which clearly established
it as a miracle, history would simply accept it; but science


  10 Published in 1903.
  ii Karl Schmidt has discussed the scientific versus the naive conception
of fact, in his article, "The Existential Status of Facts and Laws in
Physics," The Monist, XLIII (i^J), i.\ 161 i,2.
  12 Held at Harvard University in the autumn of 1940.
232              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
would either exclude the fact, or would have to be entirely
rewritten. Now if this miracle were really unique, or so
rare as to be practically unique, the disadvantages of re-
writing science would make it advisable to put a "scientific
fiction," such as for instance an unfounded denial of the
alleged "fact," in place of its record.
    Science is an intellectual scheme for handling facts, a vast
and relatively stable context in which whole classes of facts
may be understood. But it is not the most decisive expression
of realistic thinking: that is the new "historical sense." Not
our better knowledge of what are the facts of history there —
is no judging that —    but the passion for running down evi-
dence, all the evidence, the unbiassed, objective evidence for
specifically dated and located events, without distortion, hy-
pothesis, or interpretation—   the faith in the attainability and
value of pure fact is that surest symptom; the ideal of truth
which made the whole past generation of historians believe
that in archives as such there was salvation.
    Now this ideal may be as extravagant as Carl Becker es-
teemed it, when he wrote: "Hoping to find something with-
out looking for it, expecting to obtain final answers to life's
riddle by resolutely refusing to ask questions  —   it was surely

the most romantic species of realism yet invented, the oddest
attempt ever made to get something for nothing!" 13 But it
does sum up the attitude of that mighty and rather terrible
person, the Modern Man, toward the world: the complete
submission to what he conceives as "hard, cold fact." To
exchange fictions, faiths, and "constructed systems" for facts
is his supreme value; hence his periodic outburst of "de-
bunking" traditions, religious or legendary; his satisfaction
with stark realism in literature, his suspicion and impatience
of poetry; and perhaps, on the naive uncritical level of the
                                           —
 average mentality, the passion for news news of any sort,
if only it purports to be so; which, paradoxically enough,
 makes us peculiarly easy victims to propaganda. Where a
former age would have judged persuasive oratory largely on
 its origins in God or Devil, i.e. in the right or the wrong
 camp, we profess to judge it on the merit of alleged facts, and
fall to the party that can muster the most spectacular "cases."
    The better minds of our age hold a heroic pride in being
unafraid of truth, in wanting to face it and being able to
 "take it." William James, whose feeling was really rooted
deeply in the old order of traditional "values," and bound
to religious myths of Providence, progress, and the pilgrim

  13 "Everyman His Own Historian," American    Historical   Review.
XXXVII (1932), 2: 221-236. See p. 233.
                      THE FABRIC OF MEANING                    233
soul, nevertheless had to cast his lot for the new ideal. His
famous distinction between "tender-minded" and "tough-
minded" philosophers and his praise of the latter, the truer
breed, mark his confession of the new faith, despite his occa-
sional nostalgic pleas for a "will to believe," for "life's ideals."
The same sense of heroism, not to say heroics, rings in almost
every paragraph of Bertrand Russell's early essay,         A Free
Man's Worship; 14 save that this thrilling disillusionment, this
nobler worship of "hard fact," is never spoiled by any flirtation
with the old gods. James' generation (at least its best souls,
of whom he was one) could take the new standard of truth;
Russell's generation can take it and like it. As for the chil-
dren of the present age, they know no other measure, for
fact-finding has become their common sense. Their uncon-
scious orientation is empirical, circumstantial, and historical.
   It is the historical mind, rather than the scientific (in the
physicist's sense), that destroyed the mythical orientation of
European culture; the historian, not the mathematician, in-
troduced the "higher criticism," the standard of actual fact.
It is he who is the real apostle of the realistic age. Science
builds its structure of hypothetical "elements" and laws of
their behavior, touching on reality at crucial points, and if
all those propositions which ought to correspond to observ-
able events can be "cashed in" for the proper sense-experi-
ences, the hypotheses that frame them stand acknowledged.
But the historian does not locate known facts in a hypotheti-
cal, general pattern of processes; his aim is to link fact to
fact, one unique knowable event to another individual one
that begot it. l^pt space and time, but a geographical rtface
and a date, B.C. or A.D.^ anchor his propositions to reality.
Science has become deeply tinged with empiricism, and yet
its ideal is one of universality, formalism, permanence      —the
very ideal that presided over its long life since the days of
Euclid and Archimedes. The fact that it has shared the
intellectual growth of the modern world is rather a mark
of the continuity of human thought, the power of rationality
to cope gradually with phase after phase of experience, than
a novel departure. Science is almost as old as European cul-
ture; but history (not contemporaneous chronicle and gene-
alogy, but epochal, long-range history) is only a few hundred
years old; it is peculiarly a product of the realistic phase, the
adult stage of judgment.
   In a recent book entitled History and Science, Dr. Hugh
Miller proposes to carry the ideal of complete factual knowl-
edge even into the camp of the mathematical sciences. He

  14 In Mysticism   and Logic (1918).
234              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
regards the factual standard of knowledge in the light of a
new generative idea; physical science, if perfected, should
describe a system of reality in which each event would be
uniquely determined, and the pattern of the physical world
would appear as an evolution, fitting exactly the actual course
of natural history. "The doctrine of evolution," he says, "is
sometimes called a 'theory of evolution,' as if it were just one
more theoretical hypothesis, and not a reorientation of all
theoretical knowledge toward historical fact." 15 Here is the
realistic ideal with a vengeance!
                                                         —
   Underlying these great intellectual structures science, his-
tory, and the hybrid we call "natural history"           —
                                                  is the domi-

nant principle that rules our individual minds, the implicit
belief in causation. On this belief we base our personal hopes
and fears, our plans and techniques of action. It really rules
our minds, for it inspires what I have called our "practical
vision"— the carving out of general concepts in such a way
that temporal events shall answer to a certain number of
our images, which therefore function both as symbols of
thought and as signs for behavior. The tendency to demand
ever more signs to replace symbols at certain terminals of
thought, more symbols to direct one to expect new signs,
makes our lives more and more factual, intellectually stren-
uous, wedded to the march of mundane events, and beset
by disconcerting surprises. Our increasing command of causal
laws makes for more and more complicated activities; we have
put many stages of artifice and device, of manufacture and
alteration, between ourselves and the rest of nature. The
ordinary city-dweller knows nothing of the earth's produc-
tivity; he does not know the sunrise and rarely notices when
the sun sets; ask him in what phase the moon is, or when the
tide in the harbor is high, or even how high the average
tide runs,and likely as not he cannot answer you. Seed-time
and harvest are nothing to him. If he has never witnessed an
earthquake, a great flood, or a hurricane, he probably does
not feel the power of nature as a reality surrounding his life
at all. His realities are the motors that run elevators, subway
trains, and cars, the steady feed of water and gas through the
mains and of electricity over the wires, the crates of food-
stuff that arrive by night and are spread for his inspection
before his day begins, the concrete and brick, bright steel and
dingy woodwork that take the place of earth and waterside and
sheltering roof for him. His "house" is an apartment in the
great man-made city; so far as he is concerned, it has only an
interior, no exterior of its own. It could not collapse, let in

  is Hugh Miller, History   and Science (1939), p. 30.
                    THE FABRIC OF MEANING                     235
rain, or blow away. If it leaks the fault is with a pipe or with
the people upstairs, not with heaven.
   Nature, as man has always known it, he knows no more.
Since he has learned to esteem signs above symbols, to sup-
press his emotional reactions in favor of practical ones and
make use of nature instead of holding so much of it sacred,
he has altered the face, if not the heart, of reality. His parks
are "landscaped," and fitted into his world of pavements and
walls; his pleasure resorts are "developments" in which a
wild field looks unformed, unreal; even his animals (dogs
and cats are all he knows as creatures, horses are parts of
milk-wagons) are fantastic "breeds" made by his tampering.
No wonder, then, that he thinks of human power as the
highest power, and of nature as so much "raw material"!
But human power is knowledge, he knows that; the knowledge
of natural facts and the scientific laws of their transformation.
   With his new outlook on the world, of course the old
symbolism of human values has collapsed. The sun is too
interesting as an object, a source of transformable energies,
to be interpreted as a god, a hero, or a symbol of passion;
since we know that it is really the ultimate source of what
we call "power," transformable energy measurable by units,
we take a realistic, not a mystical, attitude toward it; its image
is no longer "distanced" in a perspective of non-discursive
thought; our literal concepts have caught up with it. As for
the moon, it is too rarely seen to be a real presence to us,
and fits too well into the cosmological scheme governed by
science to arouse wonder. We read about its beauties, mpre
often than we actually see them unchallenged by neon-lights
or blinking bulbs. The ^arth, laid bare in building-lots or
parks, does not put forth unplanted life, as it always did for
the savage; only our farmers    — a small portion of mankind
—                                                        —
   know "Mother Earth" any longer; only our sailors a still
smaller portion —  know the might of a raging sea. To most
people, the ancient, obvious symbols of nature have become
literary figures, and to many these very figures look silly.
Their significance has been dissolved by a more mature,
literal-minded conception of reality, the "practical vision"
that sees sun and moon and earth, land and sea, growth and
destruction, in terms of natural law and historical fact.
   The modern mind is an incredible complex of impressions
and transformations; and its product is a fabric of meanings
that would make the most elaborate dream of the most ambi-
tious tapestry-weaver look like a mat. The warp of that fabric
consists of what we call "data," the signs to which experience
has conditioned us to attend, and upon which we act often
236                     PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
without any conscious ideation. The woof is symbolism. Out
of signs and symbols we weave our tissue of "reality."
   Signs themselves may be very complicated and form intri-
cate chains; many signs are nameless, and linked into con-
tinuous situations, to which we react not with a single deed,
but with a steady, intelligent behavior. Driving an automo-
bile is an example of such a chain of reactions to signs. It is
not a habitual act, though every individual response in it is
a reaction to a certain sort of sign, facilitated by practice.
The only single habit involved in the whole process is the
habit of constantly obeying signs. A moment of yielding to
habitual motions, as in distraction or stupor, is likely to
wreck the car. We can drive without thinking, but never
without watching.
   Our response to a sign becomes, in its turn, a sign of a
new situation; the meaning of the first sign, having been
"cashed in," has become a context for the next sign. This
gives us that continuity of actual experience which makes
it the sturdy warp of reality, through which we draw the

connecting and transforming woof-threads of conception.
   As in an elaborate tapestry one often cannot tell how the
fibers are involved with each other, so any namable item of
reality may stem from a signific experience and enter into
the role of a symbol, or a symbolic element, e.g. a word,
uttered on an occasion, may act momentarily as a sign. Lan-
guage is symbolical, but in communication it does more than
express conceptions; it describes, but it also points. Whenever
we    talk   in    present tense, saying: "Here is
                  the                               —   ," "Over

there  is—   ,""Look out," "I thank you," etc.,   we  signify the
realities to which our propositions apply. This signific function
of language has become incorporated in its very structure; for
in every proposition there is at least one word   —   the verb
which has the double function of combining the elements
named into one propositional form, and asserting the proposi-
tion,  i.e. referring the form to something in reality. It is be-

cause of this implicit function of assertion, involved in the
very meaning of a true verb, that every proposition is true or
false.  A  symbol that merely expresses a concept, e.g. an image
or a name, is neither true nor false, though it is significant.
   Sign and symbol are knotted together in the production of
those fixed realities that we call "facts," as I think this whole
study of semantic has shown. But between the facts run the
threads of unrecorded reality, momentarily recognized, wher-
ever they come to the surface, in our tacit adaptation to
signs; and the bright, twisted threads of symbolic envisage-
                                  —
ment, imagination, thought memory and reconstructed
                        THE FABRIC OF MEANING                                     237
memory, belief beyond experience, dream, make-believe, hypo-
thesis, philosophy      —
                    the whole creative process of ideation,
metaphor, and abstraction that makes human life an adventure
in understanding.
   It is the woof-thread that creates the pattern of a fabric,
howbeit the warp may be used here and there to vary it, too.
The meanings which are capable of indefinite growth are
symbolic meanings: connotations, not significations. There
are two fundamental types of symbolism, discursive and
presentational; but the types of meaning are far more numer-
ous, and do not necessarily correspond to one or the other
symbolic type, though in a general way literal meaning be-
longs to words and artistic meaning to images invoked by
words and     to presentational symbols. But such a rule is a
crude, simplified, and very inexact statement. Maps, photo-
graphs, and diagrams are presentational symbols with purely
literal significance; a poem has essentially artistic significance,
though a great factor in its complex, global form is discursive
statement. The sense of a word may hover between literal
and figurative meaning, as expressions that were originally
frank metaphors "fade" to a general and ultimately literal
meaning. For instance, our newspapers overwork such figura-
tive expressions as: "Candidate Raps Opponent," "Mayor
Flays Council," "Scores New Dealers at Meeting." These
words were originally strong metaphors; but we have learned
to read them as mere synonyms for "scolds." 16 We still know
them as figurative expressions, but they are rapidly acquiring
a dual meaning, e.g. "To flay: (1) to remove the skin; (2) to
criticize   harshly.^
   Every word has a history, and has probably passed through
stages where its most important significance lay in associa-
tions it no longer has, uses now obsolete, doubles entendres
we would not understand. Even the English of Shakespeare
has changed its color since it was written, and is lucid only
to the historian who knows its setting. Sometimes a word of
general import becomes a "technical term" and is practically
lost to its former place in the language; sometimes a pre-
eminent denotation narrows it again to a proper name (as
for instance "Olympos," literally a high mountain, became

  16 American English is full of such transient figures, passing swiftly
from one literal meaning to nother, by the twin bri ges of literary device
and popular slang. Perhaps the new country, the new race springing
from a medley of nationalities, the new culture in its rapid growth, cause
this instability of language, the tendency to extravagant metaphorical ex-
pression and the wilii gness of people to interpret and accept quite
extreme figures of speech. Certainly no European language               —  not even the
highly idiomatic French     —   is   as rich    in slang,   in   fashions, in informal
expressive jargon, as our   American           dialect.
238                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
the   name of a certain mountain; and "Adam," first "man,"
then by abstraction, "Man," is to us the name of a certain
man). And through all the metamorphoses of its meaning,
such a word carries a certain trace of every meaning it has
ever had, like an overtone, and every association it has ac-
quired, like an aura, so that in living language practically
no word is a purely conventional counter, but always a symbol
with a "metaphysical pathos," as Professor Lovejoy has called
it.  Its meaning depends partly on social convention, and
partly on its history, its past company, even on the "natural
symbolism" or suggestiveness of its sound.
    The intellect which understands, reshapes, and employs
linguistic symbols, and at the same time tempers its activities
to the exigencies of ever-passing, signific experience, really
works with a minimum of actual perception or formal judg-
ment. As Roger Fry has put it, "The needs of our actual life
are so imperative, that the sense of vision becomes highly
specialized in their service. With an admirable economy we
see only so much as is needful for our purposes; but this is
in fact very little, just enough to recognize and identify each
object or person; that done, they go into our mental catalogue
and are no more really seen. In actual life the normal person
really only reads the labels as it were on the objects around
him and troubles no further. Almost all the things which are
useful in any way put on more or less this cap of invisi-
bility." 17
          Signs and discursive symbols are the stock-in-trade
of conscious intelligent adjustment, and they are telescoped
into such small cues of perception and denotation that we are
tempted to believe our thought moves without images or
words. The tiniest black spot of a certain shiny quality tells
us that the cat is under the sofa with just its tail-tip showing.
The word "cat," or a momentary, fragmentary image may
be all that comes into our mind in recognition. Yet if some-
one asks us later: "Where's the cat?" we do not hesitate to
answer: "I saw him under the sofa." By such signals we steer
our course through the world of sense, and by one-word con-
tacts we throw whole systems of judgment, belief, memory,
and expectation into action.
   Yet all these familiar signs and abbreviated symbols have
to be supported by a vast intellectual structure in order to
function so smoothly that we are almost unware of them; and
this structure is composed of their full articulate forms and all
their implicit relationships, which may be exhumed from the
stock of our buried knowledge at any time. Because they do
fit so neatly into the frame of our ultimate world-picture, we

can think with them and do not have to think about them;
  I? Fry,   Vision and Design, pp. 24-25.
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                      239
but our full apprehension of them is really only suppressed.
They wear a "cap of invisibility" when, like good servants,
they perform their tasks for our convenience without being
evident in themselves. Yet all our signs and symbols were
gathered from sensuous and emotional experience and bear
the marks of their origin —   perhaps a remote historical origin.
Though we ordinarily see things only with the economy of
practical vision, we can look at them instead of through them,
and then their suppressed forms and their unusual meanings
emerge for us. It is just because there is a fund of possible
meanings in every familiar form, that the picture of reality
holds together for us, that we believe in the ultimate causal
connection of all physical nature and the ultimate coherence
of moral demands.     A   form that is both sign and symbol ties
action and insight together for us; it plays a part in a momen-
tary situation and also in the "science" we constantly, if tacitly,
assume.  A    fine sunset demonstrates the earth's rotation with
relation to the sun, marks a "time of day," signifies that
dinner is ready or should be so, suggests continued fair
weather, and also is sublime, peaceful, and beautiful. The
chances are that most observers will take all its significations
for granted and attend to its aesthetic significance only. Yet
its reality in "nature" is a factor of that significance; were the
display a product of screen and camera, it would lack its
vague, traditional, religious meaning, and affect one very dif-
ferently. It might be beautiful but not sublime. The interplay
of beauty and reality, of spectacular color in empty air, lends
it that cosmic importance which permeates our very vision

of it.
                  —
   Many symbols not only words, but other forms may be  —
said to be "charged" with meanings. They have many sym-
bolic and signific functions, and these functions have been
integrated into a complex so that they are all apt to be sym-
pathetically invoked with any chosen one. The cross is such
a "charged" symbol: the actual instrument of Christ's death,
hence a symbol of suffering; first laid on his shoulders, an
actual burden, as well as an actual product of human handi-
work, and on both grounds a symbol of his accepted moral
burden; also an ancient symbol of the four zodiac points, with
a cosmic connotation; a "natural" symbol of cross-roads (we
still use it on our highways as a warning before an inter-

section), and therefore of decision, crisis, choice; also of being
crossed, i.e. of frustration, adversity, fate; and finally, to the
artistic eye a cross is the figure of a man. All these and many
other meanines lie ^or^ant in that simple, familiar, signifi-
cant shape. No wonder that it is a magical form! It is charged
with meanings, all human and emotional and vaguely cos-
240              PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
mic, so that they have become integrated into a connotation
of the whole religious drama  —  sin, suffering, and redemption.
Yet undoubtedly the cross owes much of its value to the fact
that it has the physical attributes of a good symbol: it is
easily made —   drawn on paper, set up in wood or stone,
fashioned of precious substance as an amulet, even traced
recognizably with a finger, in a ritual gesture. It is so obvious
a symbolic device that despite its holy connotations we do
not refrain from using it in purely mundane, discursive capa-
cities, as the sign of "plus," or in tilted position as "times,"
or as a marker on ballot sheets and many other kinds of
record.
   There are many "charged" symbols in our thought, though
few that play as many popular roles as the cross.      A   ship is
                  —
another example the image of precarious security in all-
surrounding danger, of progress toward a goal, of adventure
between two points of rest, with the near, if dormant, conno-
tation of safe imprisonment in the hold, as in the womb.
Not improbably the similar form of a primitive boat and of
the moon in its last quarter has served in past ages to re-
inforce such mythological values.
   The fact that very few of our words are purely technical,
and few of our images purely utilitarian, gives our lives a
background of closely woven multiple meanings against which
all conscious experiences and interpretations are measured.
Every object that emerges into the focus of attention has
meaning beyond the "fact" in which it figures. It serves by
turns, and sometimes even at once, for insight and theory
and behavior, in non-discursive knowledge and discursive
reason, in wishful fancy, or as a sign eliciting conditioned-
reflex action. But that means that we respond to every new
datum with a complex of mental functions. Our perception
organizes it, giving it an individual definite Gestalt. Non-
discursive intelligence, reading emotive import into the con-
crete form, meets it with purely sensitive appreciation; and
even more promptly, the language-habit causes us to assimi-
late it to some literal concept and give it a place in discursive
thought. Here is a crossing of two activities: for discursive
symbolism is always general, and requires application to the
concrete datum, whereas non-discursive symbolism is specific,
is the "given" itself, and invites us to read the more general
meaning out of the case. Hence the exciting back-and-forth
of real mental life, of living by symbols. We play on words,
explore their connotations, evoke or evade their associations;
we identify signs with our symbols and construct the "intelli-
gible world"; we dream our needs and fantasms and construct
the "inner world" of unapplied symbols. We impress each
                    THE FABRIC OF MEANING                   241
other, too, and build a social structure, a world of right and
wrong, of demands and sanctions.
   Because our moral life is negotiated so largely by symbols,
it is more oppressive than the morality of animals. Beasts

have their moral relations, too; they control each other's ac-
tions jealously or permit them patiently, as a dog permits her
puppies to bite and worry her, but growls at another dog
that trespasses on her premises. But animals react only to the
deed that is done or is actually imminent; they use force only
to frustrate or avenge an act; whereas we control each other's
merely incipient behavior with fantasies of force. We employ
sanctions, threaten vague penalties, and try to forestall of-
fenses by merely exhibiting the symbols of their consequences.
That is why man is more cruel than any beast. We make our
punishments effective as mere connotations, and to do so we
have to make them disproportionately harsh. Misdemeanors
that merit no more than a serious rebuke or a half-hour in
jail have to carry a penalty of a month's imprisonment if the
very thought of the punishment is to prevent them. Then, be-
cause symbols have to have reference to fact if they are to
remain forceful at all, wherever the threat has not served as
a deterrent it has to be fulfilled. And more than that; the
power of symbols enables us not only to limit each other's
actions, but to command them; not only to restrain one an-
other, but to constrain. That makes the weaker not merely the
timid respecter of the strong, but his servant. It gives us duty,
conscription, and slavery. The story of man's martyrdom is
a sequel to the story of his intelligence, his power of symboli-
cal envisagement.
   For good or evil, man. has this power of envisagement,
which puts on him a burden that purely alert, realistic crea-
tures do not bear —the burden of understanding. He lives not
only in a place, but in Space; not only at a time, but in His-
tory. So he must conceive a world and a law of the world, a
pattern of life, and a way of meeting death. All these things
he knows, and he has to make some adaptation to their
reality.
   Now, he can adapt himself somehow to anything his imagi-
nation can cope with; but he cannot deal with Chaos. Because
his characteristic function and highest asset is conception, his
greatest fright is to meet what he cannot construe   — the "un-
canny," as it is popularly called. It need not be a new object;
we do meet new things, and "understand" them promptly, if
tentatively, by the nearest analogy, when our minds are func-
tioning freely; but under mental stress even perfectly familiar
things may become suddenly disorganized, and give us the hor-
rors. Therefore our most important assets are always the
242                  PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
symbols of our general orientation in nature, on the earth, in
society, and in what we are doing: the symbols of our Welt-
anschauung and Lebensanschauung. Consequently, in primi-
tive society, a daily ritual is incorporated in   common activities,
in     eating,washing, firemaking, etc., as well as in pure
ceremonial; because the need of reasserting the tribal morale
and recognizing its cosmic conditions is constantly felt. In
Christian Europe the Church brought men daily (in some
orders even hourly) to their knees, to enact if not to con-
template their assent to the ultimate concepts.
   In modern society such exercises are all but lost. Every
person finds his Holy of Holies where he may: in Scientific
Truth, Evolution, the State, Democracy, Kultur, or some
metaphysical word like "the All" or "the Spiritual." Human
life in our age is so changed and diversified that people cannot
share a few, historic, "charged" symbols that have about the
same wealth of meaning for everybody. This loss of old uni-
versal symbols endangers our safe unconscious orientation.
The new forms of our new order have not yet acquired that
rich, confused, historic accretion of meanings that makes
many familiar things "charged" symbols to which we seem to
respond instinctively. For some future generation, an aero-
plane may be a more powerful symbol than a ship; its poetic
possibilities are perhaps even more obvious; but to us it is
too new, it does not sum up our past in guarantee of the
present. One can see this in the conscious symbol it presents
to Marcel Proust, in La Prisonniere, as "one of these frankly
material vehicles to explore the Infinite." Poetic simile, not
spontaneous metaphor, is its status as yet; it is not a repository
of experience, as nature-symbols and social symbols are. And
virtually all the realities of our modern life are thus new,
their material aspects are predominant, practical insight still
has to cope with them instead of taking them for granted.
Therefore our intelligence is keen but precarious; it lacks
metaphysical myth, regime, and ritual expression.
   There are relatively few people today who are born to an
environment which gives them spiritual support. Only per-
sons of some imagination and effective intelligence can pic-
ture such an environment and deliberately seek it. They are the
few who feel drawn to some realm of reality that contains
their ultimate life-symbols and dictates activities which may
acquire ritual value. Men who follow the sea have often a
deep love for that hard life, which no catalogue of its practical
virtues can account for. But in their dangerous calling they
feel    secure; in their comfortless quarters they are at ease.
Waters and        heaven and storm and harbor, somehow
                 ships,
contain the symbols through which they see meaning and
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                              243
sense in the world, a "justification," as we call it, of trouble,
a unified conception of life whereby it can be rationally lived.
Any man who loves his calling loves it for more than its use;
he loves it because it seems to have "meaning."          A   scholar
who will defy the world in order to write or speak what he
knows as "scientific truth," the Greek philosopher who chose
to die rather than protest against Athens, the feminists to
whom woman-suffrage was a "cause" for which they accepted
ridicule as well as punishment, show how entirely realistic
performances may point beyond themselves, and acquire the
value of super-personal acts, like rites. They are the forms
of devotion that have replaced genuflexions, sacrifices, and
solemn dances.
  A   mind that is oriented, no matter by what conscious or
unconscious symbols, in material and social realities, can
function freely and confidently even under great pressure of
circumstance and in the face of hard problems. Its life is a
smooth and skillful shuttling to and fro between sign-functions
and symbolic functions, a steady interweaving of sensory
interpretations, linguistic responses, inferences, memories,
imaginative prevision, factual knowledge, and tacit apprecia-
tions. Dreams can possess it at night and work off the heaviest
load of self-expressive needs, and evaporate before the light
of day; its further self-expressions being woven intelligently
into the nexus of practical behavior. Ritual comes to it as a
natural response to the "holiness" or importance of real oc-
casions. In such a mind, doubts of the "meaning of life" are
not apt to arise, for reality itself is intrinsically "meaningful":
it incorporates the symbols of Life and Death, Sin and Salva-

tion. For a balanced active intelligence, reality is historical
fact and significant form, the all-inclusive realm of science,
myth, art, and comfortable common sense.
   Opportunity to carry on our natural, impulsive, intelligent
life, to realize plans, express ideas in action or in symbolic
formulation, see and hear and interpret all things that we
encounter, without fear of confusion, adjust our interests and
expressions to each other, is the "freedom" for which humanity
strives. This, and not some specific right that society may grant
or deny, is the "liberty" that goes necessarily with "life" and
"pursuit of happiness." Professor Whitehead expressed this
view precisely, when he said:
   "The concept of freedom has been narrowed to the picture
of contemplative people shocking their generation.       This
                                                          .   .   .



is a thorough mistake. The massive habits of physical nature,
its iron laws, determine the scene for the sufferings of men.
Birth and death, cold and hunger, separation, disease, the
general impracticability of purpose, all bring their quota to
 244               PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
imprison the souls of women and men. Our experiences do
not keep step with our hopes.        .  The essence of freedom
                                         .   .



is the practicability of purpose. Mankind has chiefly suffered

from the frustration of its prevalent purposes, even such as
belong to the very definition of its species." 18
   Any miscarriage of the symbolic process is an abrogation
of our human freedom: the constraint imposed by a foreign
language, or a lapse of one's own linguistic ability such as
Sir Henry Head has described as loss of abstract concepts, 19
or pathological repression that causes all sorts of distorted
personal symbols to encroach on literal thought and empirical
judgment, or lack of logical power, knowledge, food for
thought, or imagination to envisage our problems clearly and
negotiably. All such obstacles may block the free functioning
of mind. But the most disastrous hindrance is disorientation,
the failure or destruction of life-symbols and loss or repression
of votive acts. A life that does not incorporate some degree
of ritual, of gesture and attitude, has no mental anchorage.
It is prosaic to the point of total indifference, purely casual,
devoid of that structure of intellect and feeling which we call
"personality."
   Therefore interference with acts that have ritual value
 (conscious or unconscious) is always felt as the most intoler-
able injury one man, or group of men, can do to another.
Freedom of conscience is the basis of all personal freedom.
                                                 —
To constrain a man against his principles make a pacifist
bear arms, a patriot insult his flag, a pagan receive baptism
is to endanger his attitude toward the world, his personal

strength and single-mindedness. No matter how fantastic may
be the dogmas he holds sacred, how much his living rites
conflict with the will or convenience of society, it is never a
light matter to demand their violation. Men fight passionately
against being forced to do lip-service, because the enactment
of a rite is always, in some measure, assent to its meaning;
so that the very expression of an alien mythology, incompatible
with one's own vision of "fact" or "truth," works to the
corruption of that vision. It is a breach of personality. To be
obliged to confess, teach, or acclaim falsehood is always felt
as an insult exceeding even ridicule and abuse. Common in-
sult is a blow at one's ego; but constraint of conscience strikes
at one's ego and super-ego, one's whole world, humanity, and
purpose. It takes a strong mind to keep its orientation without
overt symbols, acts, assertions, and social corroborations; to

  is From A. N. Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas (1933), p. 84. (Italics
mine.) By permission of The Macmillan Company, publishers.
  19 See "Disorders of Symbolic Thinking and Expression," British
Journal of Psychology, XI (1920-21, part II, 179-193.
                  THE FABRIC OF MEANING                     245
maintain it in the face of the confounding pattern of enacted
heresy is more than average mentality can do.
   We have to adapt our peculiarly human mental functions
—  our symbolific functions —  to given limitations, exactly as
we must adapt all our biological activities. The mind, like all
other organs, can draw its sustenance only from the surround-
ing world; our metaphysical symbols must spring from reality.
Such adaptation always requires time, habit, tradition, and
intimate knowledge of a way of life. If, now, the field of our
unconscious symbolic orientation is suddenly plowed up by
tremendous changes in the external world and in the social
order, we lose our hold, our convictions, and therewith our
effectual purposes. In modern civilization there are two great
threats to mental security: the new mode of living, which has
made the old nature-symbols alien to our minds, and the new
mode of working, which makes personal activity meaningless,
inacceptable to the hungry imagination. Most men never see
the goods they produce, but stand by a traveling belt and turn
a million identical passing screws or close a million identical
passing wrappers in a succession of hours, days, years. This
sort of activity is too poor, too empty, for even the most in-
genious mind to invest it with symbolic content. Work is no
longer a sphere of ritual; and so the nearest and surest source
of mental satisfaction has dried up. At the same time, the
displacement of the permanent homestead by the modern
rented tenement  —                         —
                      now here, now there has cut another
anchor-line of the human mind. Most people have no home
that is a symbol of their childhood, not even a definite memory
of one place to serve that purpose. Many no longer kno#*the
language that was once their mother-tongue. All old symbols
are gone, and thousands of average lives offer no new mater-
ials to a creative imagination. This, rather than physical want,
is the starvation that threatens the modern worker, the tyranny

of the machine. The withdrawals of all natural means for ex-
pressing the unity of personal life is a major cause of the
distraction, irreligion, and unrest that mark the proletariat of
all countries. Technical progress is putting man's freedom of
mind in jeopardy.
   In such a time people are excited about any general con-
victions or ide?ls they may have. Numberless hybrid religions
spring up, mysteries, causes, ideologies, all passionately em-
braced and b dly argued.   A    vague longing for the old tribal
unity makes nationalism look like salvation, and arouses the
most fantastic bursts of chauvinism and self-righteousness;
the wildest anthropological and historical legends; the dep-
recation and distortion of learning; and in place of ortho-
dox sermons, that systematic purveying of loose, half-baked
246                    PHILOSOPHY IN A NEW KEY
ideas which our generation knows as "propaganda." There
are committees and ministries of propaganda in our world,
as there were evangelical missions and watch-and-ward so-
cieties in the world of our fathers. No wonder that philoso-
phers looking at        this     pandemonium        of self-assertion,   self-
justification,   and    social    and  fantasy, view it as a
                                        political
reaction against the Age of Reason. After centuries of science
and progress, they conclude, the pendulum swings the other
way: the irrational forces of our animal nature must hold their
Witches' Sabbath.
  A   philosophy that knows only deductive or inductive logic
as reason, and classes all other human functions as "emotive,"
irrational, and animalian, can see only regression to a pre-
logical state in the present passionate and unscientific ideolo-
gies. All it can show us as the approach to Parnassus is the
way of factual data, hypothesis, trial, judgment, and general-
ization. All other things our minds do are dismissed as irrele-
vant to intellectual progress; they are residues, emotional
disturbances, or throwbacks to animal estate.
   But a theory of mind whose keynote is the symbolific func-
tion, whose problem is the morphology of significance, is not
obliged to draw that bifurcating line between science and
folly. It can see these ructions and upheavals of the modern
mind not as lapses of rational interest, caused by animal im-
pulse, but as the exact contrary          —
                                    as a new phase of savage-
dom, indeed, but inspired by the rational need of envisagement
and understanding. The springs of European thought have run
   —
dry those deep springs of imagination that furnish the basic
concepts for a whole intellectual order, the first discernments,
the generative ideas of our Weltanschauung. New conceptual
forms are crowding them out, but are themselves in the mythi-
cal phase, the "implicit" stage of symbolic formulation. We
cannot analyze the contents of those vast symbols Race,            —
Unity, Manifest Destiny, Humanity             —
                                        over which we fight so
ruthlessly; if we could, it would mean that they were already
furnishing discursive terms, clear issues, and we would all be
busy philosophizing instead of waging holy wars. We would
have the new world that humanity is dreaming of, and would
be eagerly building the edifice of knowledge out of new in-
sights. It is the same, efficient, work-a-day business of free
      —
minds discursive reasoning about well-conceived problems
that is disturbed or actually suspended in this apparent age of
unreason; but the force which governs that age is still the
force of mind, the impulse toward symbolic formulation, ex-
pression, and understanding of experience.
                                               —
   The continual pursuit of meanings wider, clearer, more
negotiable, more articulate meanings           —
                                         is philosophy. It per-
                   THE FABRIC OF MEANING                      247
meates all mental life: sometimes in the conscious form of
metaphysical thought, sometimes in the free, confident ma-
nipulation of established ideas to derive their more precise,
detailed implications, and sometimes    —   in the greatest crea-
tive periods—  in the form of passionate mythical, ritual, and
devotional expression. In primitive society such expression
meets with little or no obstacle; for the first dawn of mental-
ity has nothing to regret. Only as one culture supersedes an-
other, every new insight is bought with the life of an older
certainty. The confusion of form and content which char-
acterizes our worship of life-symbols works to the frustration
of well-ordered discursive reason, men act inappropriately,
blindly, and viciously; but what they are thus wildly and
mistakenly trying to do is human, intellectual, and necessary.
Standards of science and ethics must condemn it, for its overt
form is rife with error; traditional philosophy must despair of
it because it cannot meet any epistemological criterion; but

in a wider philosophy of symbolism it finds a measure of
understanding. If there is any virtue in the theory of what I
have called "symbolic transformation," then this theory should
elucidate not only the achievements of that function, but also
its miscarriages, its limitations, and its by-products of illusion
and error. Freedom of thought cannot be reborn without
throes; language, art, morality, and science have all given us
pain as well as power. For, as Professor Whitehead has
frankly and humbly declared: "Error is the price we pay for
progress."
            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Passages from the following works have been quoted in this
book: from The Story of My Life, by Helen Keller, by per-
mission of Doubleday, Doran & Company; from Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus, by Ludwig Wittgenstein, The Growth of
Reason, by Frank Lorimer, The Mentality of Apes, by Wolf-
gang Kohler, and The Tyranny of Words, by Stuart Chase, by
permission of Harcourt, Brace and Company, publishers; from
The Ape and The Child, by W. N. and L. A. Kellogg, by per-
mission of McGraw-Hill Book Company, publishers; from
"How Can Music Express Emotion?" by Donald N. Ferguson,
reprinted by permission from the Music Teachers National
Association Volume of Proceedings for 1925; from "Observa-
tions on the Mentality of Chimpanzees and Orang-Utans," by
W. H. Furness, courtesy of the American Philosophical So-
ciety; from "Musical Symbolism," by Henri Prunieres, by
permission of The Musical Quarterly; from Philosophy and
Mysticism and Logic by Bertrand Russell, courtesy of W. W.
Norton and Company, publishers; from "Reason and Feeling,"
by J. E. Creighton, by permission of The Philosophical Re-
view; from Gestalt Psychology, by Wolfgang Kohler, courtesy
Liveright Publishing Corporation; from Oceanic Mythology,
by Roland Dixon, by permission of the Marshall Jones Com-
pany; from Primitive Culture, by E. B. Tylor, courtesy of G. P.
Putnam's Sons; from Speech: Its Function and Development,
by Grace De Laguna, by permission of the Yale University
Press; from Experience and Nature, by John Dewey, Open
Court Publishing Company; from Five Stages of Greek Reli-
gion, by Gilbert Murray, Columbia University Press, publisher.
   My thanks are due to all these copyright holders.
   I also wish to acknowledge my indebtedness to the following
English publishers: to George Allen & Unwin, for passages
from Language and Reality, by W. M. Urban, and Language:
Its Nature, Development and Origin, by Otto Jespersen; to
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Company, for passages from
Philosophy and Logical Syntax, by Rudolf Carnap, Communi-
cation: a Philosophical Study of Language, by Karl Britton,
and Art and the Unconscious, by J. M. Thorburn; to Chatto and
Windus, for some lines from Vision and Design, by Roger Fry;
and to the editor of Philosophy, for quotations from "The
Sense of the Horizon," by C. D. Burns.
                             248
                                           Su                                 Further Rcadi;

      More books arc                                  listed   here lhan the reader is likely to find in his
Itv    rnxAstorc or puhlu
      ,1                                                                   long those           ted sonic at      I




feast will be        ailablc.     t


                                                                               M'HR     1

                                           Experience bv C                      I)  Burnt,   W \,«rtonW                                    &.   Co., Inc.,
                                                                         •i   H arid by A. N. Whitchca
millan           (                                     *6
                                                                               aMiR     2
                         m and I\                                    I
                                                                                    OOdon) Allen & Inwin,                                                 I

193""                  jfural H                                                 nd by A. I). Ritchie. Longm
                         1936;    .                                      wth of Reason by Frank. Lorin.'
court,           Brace & Co.. Inc.,
                                                                               \F'U-R   3
Philosophy and Logical                                         s
                                                                                v     Rudolf Carnap.                              (Iondon)            Rout-
ledge & Son*, ltd. 1932                                                               and    .   r,                   i                                       tries
           is,           Prentice-Hall.                     Inc.,        1946; Our Knowledge                                      of   .
                                                                                                                                                      i       rruil
                  nd Russell.                          Inc.. 1929 ((     \S  W. Norton & Co.,
     ic  as the Essence of Philosophy"        holism: lis Meaning and                            x



i    t  by A. N. Whitehead. I he Macmillan Co., 1927
                                  vf'II R 4

Gestalt Psychology by Wolfgang kohler, Boni & Livcright. 1929; Art
and the                b> J
                         l    M. Thorburn, (London) K.. Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co., 1925
                                                                         Chaptfr        5
Languace: Its Nature, Development and Origin by Otto Jespersen,
Henr> Holt & Co.. 1922; The Ape and the Child by W. N. and 1
Kellogg, McGraw-Hill Book Co.. 1933; The Mentality of Apes by
           kohler, Harcourt, Brace & Co.. Inc., 1926; Language and
                     .




                      irer, Harper & Brothers. 1^46; Language and
Reality; the Philosophy of Language and the Principles of Symbolism
by W. M. Urban.                     .1939     1



                                  iltR 6
Prolegomena          Study of Greek Religion by Jane Harrison, The
                                      to   tfil
     ullan Co.; Five Stages of Greek Religion by Gilbert Murray.                                                                                              I




lumbia University Press, 1925; The Principles         tous Ceremonial
by W. H. Frere. Morehouse Publishing Co., 1928
                                                                         Chaptbi        7
Legends of Maui, a Demigod of Polynesia, and of his Mother Hina by
W 1) Westervelt; The Mind of Primitive Man by Franz Boas, The
     •ullan Co., 1911; 77it                                         (iolden          Bough by J. G.                           I   ra/er,        The   M
millan Co., 1907
                                                                         Chuijr 8
A Study in Aesthetics by L. A. Reid. The Macmillan Co., 1931; Vision
and Design bv Rogei                                                                                  n.   Inc..           1   ^24;     7 he      Meaning
                             b)   (.                       Bach by
                                           C. Pratt, McGraw-Hill                        B-
Albert Schweit/c       Macmillan to, 1935;        ,
                                                               Otto
       Alfred A. Knopf. Inc.. 1932; On the Beautiful in Music by
Eduard Hanslick, H W Gray i       Irts and the Man by Irwin Fdman,
W. W. Norton &. Co., Inc., 1939
                            Chaftbi 9
The Threshold of Music bv William Wallace. The Macmillan                                                                                                  (


1908; The Birth of Ti                          Friedrid
sche, The Macmillan Co. 192       Spirit of
of Art), by Elie Faure. Harper                                                A Brothel
                                                                     Chaftu             10
Adventures of Ideas by A. N. Whitehead. The Macmillan Co., 1933
                                                                            Index

abstraction, 27, 41, 70, 85,                                        86,    113,      Badouin, Ch., 176n
   125, 128, 173, 203, 237                                                           Bartok, Bela, 223
act, 134, 137                                                                        Baumann, O., 95n
  audible — 111114, 133, 139n
                   ,                                                                 Beauquier, C, 193n
  expressive—                  ,                                                     beauty,     174,      178,        194n
           — 135, 136
   religious
   symbolic — 103
                       ,


                           ,
                                                                                     Becker, Carl, quoted, 232
                                                                                     Beethoven, Ludwig van, 178,                         183,
Aesop,   150n                                                                            190,    206n,       223
"aesthetic emotion," 218ff                                                           Bell,      Clive,  quoted, 174, 180,
                                                                                                             204;
aesthetics, 174, 177,                                     180,    186,    191          218
affect, see feeling                                                                  Bergson, Henri, 90, 224
air,   216                                                                           Berlioz, Hector, 188, 200n, 205n
Aldrich, Richard, 187n; quoted, 188                                                  Bethe, E., quoted, 153n
analogy, 123, 128, 193, 197, 207n                                                    Bittner, Julius, 197n
Anaximenes, 18                                                                       Boas, Franz, 52; quoted, 53, 118
animal     activities,                   36,              117, 241                   Bodkin, A. M., 176n
  —        150
       fable,                                                                        Bridgman, Laura, 34
  —    intelligence,                         59                                      Brinton, D., 157; quoted, 158
  — mind, 37                                                                         Britton, Karl, quoted, 226
  — semantic,                   62,                  95                              Brown, J. W., 176n
  — worship,                   143,                  144,    145                     Brunschwigg, Leon, 33
  attributive, 168-169                                                               Bucher, Karl, 208n, 215n
animals, 34, 35, 38, 40, 44, 98,                                            102,     Buhler, Karl, 7 In, 121; quoted,
   107, 132, 140, 142, 143, 171,                                            172,       121n
   235                                                                               Bullough,               Edward,           179n,     189;
apes,  38,   95, 96,   100-107,                                          passim,         quoted,       190
   113, 114, 115, 116, 120                                                           Burnett, J., Lord Monboddo, 98n
application, 64, 65, 118, 173                                                        Burns, C. D., quoted, 17, 18
ambivalence,                   206                                                   Busom, Ferruccio, 216n; quoted, 189
Andersen, J. C, 159n,                                             160n
Andrews, L., 160n                                                                    Caillet, Emile,               131
appreciation,                  90,           219,           240                      Carnap, Rudolf, 30n, 34, 78; quoted,
architecture,                  178                                                      78-79, 81, 183
Aristotle,             18,    20, 70, 134                                            Carriere, Moritz, 202, 203
art,   41,   94,           127, 151, 174,                           178,    198,     Caspari, Wilhelm, 183n
   206                                                                               Cassirer, Ernst, 30n, 34, 47,                        81;
   adequacy in
   —
               — 222                     ,                                             quoted, 208
     -and artifact, 174                                                              causation, 234
   beginnings   — Chapter 9 passim
                               of            ,                                       ceremonial, 132, 137, 242
   function   —186 222
                   of                ,                                               chaos,
                                                                                                ",r
                                                                                                  :\
   logic    —of            ,


   materials of—, 208, 210, 212, 214
                                                                                     Chase,
                                                                                         48
                                                                                                  Stuart,          227;       quoted,   40-41,

   215, 220                                                                          chatter, 38, 105, 109
   philosophy of
   plastic—, 175,
                                     — 178,
                                         176
                                             211
                                                 ,                                   Chijs, A. van der, 176n
                                                                                     childhood, see children
   seriousness of                    —106, 134, 172,
                                             ,   176  42,
                                                     175,
                                                             43,                     children, 35, 47, 48, 96, 97, 98, 99,
articulation, 86,                                                                       109, 110, 111, 113, 130, 131, 132,
   192, 204, 208,  212                                                                  135, 137, 138, 150, 154
assumption, 15, 16, 17, 32, 35, 81, 91                                                  "wild"—, 97, 98, 100, 107, 109
attitude, 134, 148, 173, 192, 244                                                    Clarck,          J.   V.,    157n
Augustine, St., 50                                                                   Christianity,         21,     26
Avison, Charles, quoted, 182                                                         Cohen, Felix, 16n
Ayer, A. J., 30n                                                                     Coleridge, Samuel T m                83, 218n, 221
                                                                                     common sense,               15, 132, 148, 168, 224
babble, 96, 104, 109, 110, 118
                                                                                     communication,               108,  113,  115, 121,
Bach, C. Ph. E., quoted, 182, 183,
                                                                                         122,    123, 206, 210, 236
   189
Bach, J. S., 178, 187, 197, 223                                                      composer.       183, 185, 187, 188,                  189,
Bacon, Francis, 15; quoted, 23, 25;                                                      204,    205, 223
  quoted, 227                                                                        COMTE, AUGUSTE, 26
                                                                                   250
                                                            INDEX                                          251
concept,  17, 18. 20,                 23,    28,    31,    70,   experience, 43, 90, 91, 92,        102,   111,
  74, 75, 116, 173                                                  112, 120, 121, 130, 131,        153,   173,
  non-scientific, 198                                                 194
  physical, 85                                                        aesthetic, 100, 102, 177, 222
conception, 61,               62, 63, 64, 69,              70,      animal, 83
  99, 106, 119,               129, 138, 208                           — as a generative idea, 22, 27
  power      133
             of,                                                    continuity of, 236
concepts and conceptions, 61n, 69, 70,                              formulation of, 17, 18, 82, 83
   125                                                              "horizons of    —," 16, 17, 18
CoNDILLAC, ETIENNE B. DE, 109                                       transformation of, 49, 52, 53, 113
connotation, 55, 64, 65, 66, 73ff 123,                           exposition, 122, 123, 125
   194, 197, 203, 217, 237                                       expression, 80, 89, 110, 111, 125
Conradi, Edward,                11 On                               artistic, 217
context, 121, 122, 123,                  124,      128,   186       logical, 132, 185, 186, 189
   musical, 179, 194                                                  — of feelings, 78, 79
  scientific,      232                                                —   of  ideas, 47, 52, 172,   174, 210
Creighton, J. E., quoted, 91                                          self-,  134, 150, 182, 183,   184, 185,
Croce, Benedetto, 183                                                     188, 189, 190, 243

dance,     114,        116,    117,     133,    139,      151,   fact,   24ff, 27, 29, 39, 76f 82, 173,
  179,     192,        193,    209,     215,    216,      217,      226, 235 passim, 90, 156
  218                                                               atomic, 75, 79, 230
Day. Clarence, quoted, 105                                          historical, 231-234 passim, 243
death, 132, 133,               134,     135,    148,      153,      significant, 120, 166
   159, 163, 165                                                 fairytale,    151, 152,  153, 154, 156,
Debussy, Claude, 223                                                159, 164
Delacroix, Henri, 33, 81                                         fantasy, 69, 92, 94, 111, 128, 129,
De Lacuna, Grace, 33; quoted, 48,                                   130, 131, 132, 148, 150, 151, 153,
   51                                                               154, 155, 159, 166, 167, 168, 169,
denotation,       40, 62, 63, 64, 65, 73ff,                         170, 171, 173, 176, 177
  75,     92,    103, 119, 123, 202, 203                         feeling, 85, 90, 91, 92, 110, 111, 133,
Dent, E.         J.,    201n                                        134, 174, 189, 190
design,    178                                                      see also expression
Dewey, John,              34,     81;       quoted,       137-      blind, 81
   138                                                                — in  music, 181, 182f, 184, 185,
diagram, 69, 71                                                     188, 192, 193, 202
discourse,       66,    87,    89,     123                          knowledge of, 188, 189, 199, 205
  logic    of,     66                                              morphology of, 202
Disserens, Ch. M.,                    181n                       Ferguson, D. M., quoted,           205n
dissonance,        175                                           fetish,   100, 102, 103, 132, 135, 142
Dixon,          Roland,       149,  159n, 160n,                  fire,  157, 161, 164, 171
  167n;         quoted,     149, 161, 163                           origin of, 157
                                                                                                 ym
Donovan,         J.,     115,^18; quoted, 116,                   Flaubert, G., 175
  117, 118                                                       form, 19, 68, 69, 72, 83, 84, 84n, 86,
drama, 141n, 155, 159, 169, 179, 214                                87, 111, 114, 125, 136, 143, 148,
dream, 42, 43, 94, 114, 127, 131, 132,                               149, 164, 174, 178, 184, 191, 211
  148,     149,        150,    152, 153, 154, 155,                    — and content, 131, 178, 191, 192,
  156,     157,        168,    169, 171, 172, 177                      199, 201, 217
D'Udine,         Jean,         218n; quoted, 192,                     correct, 140
  193                                                             '
                                                                      discursive, 80
Durkheim,              Emile,     quoted,          144                expressive, 175,   177
                                                                      picture of, 69
eating,     136,        137,    140                                   poetic, 169
  ceremonial—, 50, 139, 142, 144                                      significant, 174, 175, 176, 180n, 186,
Eaton, Ralph Monroe, 30n                                              202,   204, 211, 212, 214, 217,
Eckermann, J. P., 177n, 206n                                          221, 223, 243
Eggar, K., 176n                                                  forms,    equivalence of, 78, 193
Ehrenreich, P., 151n                                             formulation, 210, 215
Eliot, T. S., 221                                                  logical, 90, 191
Ellis, Havelock,   193                                                —of conceptions, 106
Elster, A., 176n                                                      —of experience, 83, 90n, 131, 246
emendation, 121, 122                                                  —of feelings, 188, 199, 207
emotive theory, 180ff,        189, 201  186,                          —of problems, 16
empiricism,        22,    32
                          24ff,       29,                        freedom, 18, 243, 244, 245, 247
"empractic" speech, 121, 122, 123, 124                           Frege, Gottlob, 78
envisagement, 153, 173, 241                                      Frere, W. H., quoted, 141n
epistemology, 29, 54, 224                                        Freud, Sigmund, 43, 53,        54,   153n
Eucken, Rudolph, 27                                              Frobenius, Leo, 50, 51;        quoted,      50
252                                                INDEX
Fry, Roger, 175, 204;                quoted, 22Sn,       Hobie       Baker        (the           cat),      40,     41,    48,
  238                                                      227
function,     logical,    see logical       structure    Hoeslin, J. K. von,                           193     217
  —   of    terms,     57, 58, 66                        Holy One, 135, 142
Furness,       W.      H.,    106;     quoted,     95,   Homer,       146,       147,           168, 170
  106n,     107n                                         Huber,         Kurt,                   194ff,   197,             205;
                                                           quoted,       195, 196n
Galilei, Galileo, 227                                    Huller,       J. A., quoted,                    187, 200
Garner, R. L., 95n                                       Humboldt,               Wilhelm                 von,        quoted,
Gatewood, Esther, 181n,                    194              115
Gatschenberger,  R., 30n                                 Husserl, Edmund, 56
Gatz, F. M., 179n, 183n, 190n, 199n,
  200n, 205n                                             ideation, 46, 237
Gehring,      A.,    199;     quoted, 194n, 198,         image, 127, 128, 131, 132, 143, 153,
  208n                                                      185, 222,   224
generalization, 55, 66, 70, 88, 89, 124,                 imagination, 41, 52, 83, 113, 116, 127,
   179, 203                                                 136, 145, 151, 167, 169, 172, 202,
   hasty, 178                                               205,      208,       209,           212,    227,      241
generative idea, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,                       frustrated, 245
   29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 126, 234, 246                     imitation,   117, 136,                        137,       143,     197,
Gesell, Arnold, 98n                                         210,      214
Gestalt, 72, 84, 90, 100, 111, 112,                      insight,      85,       92,        138,       143,       153,     172,
   192, 196n, 211, 223, 224, 240                            179,      247
gesture, 53, 61, 72, 81n, 103,   105,                       artistic,       188,       190,           219
   116, 134, 135, 136, 137, 140, 141,                       SOCM3.1     155
   172, 185, 192, 244                                    instinct,'     41,      90,        109,       110,       115
ghosts, 150, 154, 157, 160                                  myth-making            — 148, 151
                                                                                            ,



god, gods, 50, 51, 52, 132, 135, 142-                       -theory of               98, 99
                                                                                 language, 97,
   143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 152,                    interpretability, 231
   156, 157, 158, 159, 166, 167, 168,                    interpretation, 21, 27, 53, 71, 74, 75,
   174,     215n,    232                                    113, 156, 166, 198, 203
 Goethe,            W. von,         177n, 205, 212;         —  of music, 185, 187, 197, 206
   quoted,
              J.
               216
                206,                                        —  of poetry, 199, 221
 Graf, Max, 176n                                            —  of signs, 59, 60, 64
 grammar, 66, 82                                         intuition, 85, 90, 110, 202, 213
   logical,    78                                        Itard, E. M., 98n, 107, 108; quoted,
   musical,        194,    197                              108
 Great     Hare,     158
 Grey, Sir George, quoted,                   163         James, D. G., 83n; quoted, 33
 Grudin, Louis, 30                                       James, William, 35n, 111, 230, 232;
 Guyau, J.-M., 194n                                         quoted,         179
                                                         Jesperson,              Otto,            95n,        115,        131n;
 Hale, Horatio, 97, 98; quoted, 97                          quoted,         115,       118,        126
 Hall, G. S., HOn
 Hanslick, Eduard, 184n, 184, 190,                        Kalevala,         170-172              passim
   191,       207n; quoted, 201, 202
            192,                                         Kamala,        98,       109
 Harrison, Jane, 142n, 145, 146, 151;                     Kant, Immanuel, 90n, 179
   quoted, 148, 169n                                      Keller, Helen, 34, 71, 107,                                      112;
 Hartmann, E. von, 188                                      quoted,         62
 Hauptmann, Moritz, 202, 203                              Kellogg, W. N., 109n
 Hausegger, F. von, 183                                   Kellogg, W. N. & L. A., quoted, 96,
 Haydn, Joseph, 187                                          100,     101,       102,           104
 Head, Henry, 34, 244                                     Kepler, Johannes, 227
 Heinrich, F., 199, 201n; quoted,                         Kierkegaard, Soren, 183
   197-198                                                Kingsley, Mary, quoted, 94n-95n
 Helmholtz, H. von, 179                                   Kipling, Rudyard, 105
 Helwig, Paul, 30n                                        Koffka, Kurt, 34, 84, 193n
 Herder, J. G. von, 115, 179                              Kohler,   Wolfgang, 34, 100, 113,
 hero, 151, 152, 154, 155, 156, 157,                         114n, 193; quoted, 84n, 101-102,
    158, 159, 160, 166, 168, 170, 174                       103, 104, 192
    culture-, 156, 157, 159, 166, 170                     Krappe, A. H., 168; quoted, 169-170
 Herodotus, 147                                           Kretschmar, Hermann, 188
 Hevner, Kate, 181n                                       Kurth, Ernst, 181n, 200; quoted,
 Hiawatha, see Manabozho                                    209-210
 Hina,     160,     163, 165 164,
   stories, of, 160-163 passim                           La Fontaine,                  J.       de,     150n
 Hindemith, Paul, 223                                     lalling,    see     babble
 Hitchcock, H. R.,                  160n                 Landquist, J., 176n
 Hobbes, Th., 23                                         Lang, Andrew, quoted,                              50,    166,     192
                                                                    INDEX                                                       253
language, 19, 34, 41, 54, 71, 73, 74,                                       psychological
  76-78, 81, 82, 88, 89, 93, Chapter                                        — relation, 56,aspect
                                                                                              63, 74
                                                                                                     55, 57      of,


  5 passim, 127, 128, 129, 131, 173,                                        standard of, 78
  184, 185, 198,     203, 204, 206, 236                                     types of, 56, 64, 224, 237
   —  and thought, 63, 106n                                              medium,        68, 218, 219
                                                                                                   178,
  beginnings of, 39, 62, 96-99, 107,                                     melody, 193, 208n, 212, 217
  113-120 passim, 126, 157                                               Mersmann, Hans, quoted, 206, 222
  characteristics of, 87, 89, 197, 198                                   metaphor, 118, 121, 123, 124, 125,
  gesture       —
                40, 94n, 95n
                      ,                                                    126, 130, 131, 144, 145, 150, 155,
  growth of, 36, 121-127 passim, 172                                       164, 173, 237
  limits of, 80f, 82, 92, 204, 224                                          dream-, 133
  logical, 83                                                               "faded," 124f,                237
   —  of feelings, 185, 188, 200                                         Meyer, Kathi, quoted, 215n
   —  of music, 87, 186, 187, 188, 191,                                  Mill, J. S., 25, 26
                                                                         Miller, Hugh, 226n;
   — 194 of    religion,          52                                     Milton, John, 168
                                                                                                                  quoted,       234

   —     of    sense,           87                                       mind, 21, 33, 37, 38, 41, 46, 53, 84,
Latif,        Israel,            94; quoted,           llOn                91, 92, 100, 130, 156, 173
Learned,             B.,        quoted, 101,           107n                 function of, 42, 43, 45, 46, 110,
legend,153n, 156, 160,                         166,        168,   180              127, 245
                                                                                114,
Lessmann, H., quoted,                          167                         growth of, 33, 38, 228
Lewis, C. I., 226                                                          well-balanced, 243
life,    20,    26, 27,               34, 43, 54, 82, 90,                mistake, 36, 38, 39, 41, 43, 49, 50,
   130,       132, 133,               134, 137, 143, 148,                  60, 64, 65, 133, 138
   149,       152, 162,               164, 165, 172, 192,                model, 209, 212, 213, 215
   243                                                                     natural, 211, 214, 217
   eternal, 163                                                          Moffat, Robert, 50
   inner, 27, 192,                     193,    206,        208           mood, 111, 180, 188, 204
   mental, 83,                  93,    240                               moon, 155, 156, 157, 158,                       159, 163,
   moral, 241                                                               164,   165,           166,    167,    169,    171, 235
  social, 51, 114, 171                                                   Moore, G. E., 225n
Liszt, Franz, 183, 188;                              quoted,      200    Moos, Paul, 199; quoted, 197
t.ocke, John, 23, 109                                                    morale,       138,       242
  gic,  25, 26, 30, 31, 83,                          93,    150          More, K. C, llOn
   Aristotelian, 67                                                      Morris, Ch. W., 30n
   —  of language, 79, 172                                               Mosonyi, D., 176n
   —  of symbolism, 186                                                  Mudrak, E., 151n
   —  of terms, 65                                                       Muller, Max, 158n
Longfellow, H. W., 157n                                                  Murray, Gilbert, quoted,                        145,    146,
Lorimer, Frank, 34, 11 On;                                  quoted,        147
   38-39                                                                 music, 93, 94, Chapter 8 passim                         m
Lovejoy, A. O., 238                                                        somatic effects of, 180, 194
                                                                           program       —
                                                                                         187f, 204ff
                                                                                              ,


magic, 42, 43, 49, 51, 52, 113, i35,                                     myth, 17, 51, 93, 127, 138,                             147,
  136, 139f, 161, 162, 169, 170, 171                                       Chapter 7 passim
Manabozho, 157f, 159                                                       and fairytale, 151ff, 154
Markey, J. F., quoted, 117n                                                and legend, 166
Marpurg, F. W., 182, 183, 187n, 200
"material mode," 82, 85                                                  Nadel, Siegfried                 F.,    197n
mathematics, 27, 28, 33, 85, 194, 198,                                   name, 61, 66, 71,                74f,   75, 76, 84, 96,
  203                                                                       107,   112,       120,        121, 124,      126,    156,
Mattheson, J., 182                                                          159,   163,       169,        192, 207
Matthews, W., 135n                                                          call—, 62
Maui,         159,      167
                          160,    166,                                     proper, 61, 62f, 65, 88, 142, 152,
  stories of, 160-163 passim                                                  160, 171
McAlpin, Colin, 187n                                                     nature, 155, 159, 164, 235f
meaning, 40, 48, 54, 66, 80, 84, 87,                                        —  myth, 156, 166, 167
  89, 90, 100, 105, 110, 140, 194, 195                                      —  symbol, 164,  169, 172
  artistic, 178                                                          need, 35, 41, 43}f, 47, 48, 49, 52,
  complexity of, 236-241 passim                                             130, 131, 176
  figurative, 124, 237                                                   Newell, W. W., 135n
   literal,      66,        78,       124,    168,     190,       197,   Nicholls,        F.,       quoted,       206n
        210, 217                                                         night,  155, 159, 167, 170
   logic       of,        54,    56                                      Noack, H., 30n
   musical,           184,        186,        189,     200,       201,   novel predication, 121, 122, 123,                       124
        202                                                              novelty, see novel predication
   —  of signs, 60, 23 6f
   —  of symbols, 61, 236f                                               Ogden, C. K., 30n, 56n
   problem of, 29, 55, 93                                                Ohmann, 196n
254                                                        INDEX
orientation, IS, 22,                   138,   153,        218,     rejection         of,    15
   233, 242, 244
Otto, Irmgard, 180n                                              Ramsey,        F.   P.,    225n
                                                                 Rank, Otto,             151n,       153n
Paget, Sir         Richard, 94n                                  realism, 228,         232f
painting,    69,    176,         178,     179                    reason, 19, 21, 33, 49, 91, 93, 126,
Parmenides, 230                                                     127, 173, 199, 213, 224
Pater, Walter, quoted, 217                                       Reid, Louis A., 86; quoted, 134n,
pattern, 56, 57, 64, 69, 74, 115, 116,                              174, 222
   122, 134, 137, 164, 172, 191, 192,                            relations, 71, 72, 76, 77, 120, 153,
   193, 194, 198, 215, 217, 237                                     180, 198
Peirce, Charles S., 55, 74, 231                                    —among     facts, 229, 233
personification, 156,  163,  165, 166,                              artistic,180n, 190
   167, 169                                                         human, 154, 157
Peter the Wild Boy, 98, 109, 112,                                religion, 41,   50,  51, 132,133, 136,
  136                                                              138, 139, 141, 143, 144, 145, 146
philosophy, 177, 186, 228, 246                                     147, 148, 167, 168, 173, 227, 245
  epochs of, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 31                          repetition, 134, 137, 141, 165
  Greek, 17, 18, 180                                             Respighi, O., 187n
  history of, 15, 17, 227                                        response, 32, 35, 39, 40, 54, 84, 103,
  of art, 224                                                       109, 121, 122, 134, 205, 206, 226,
  of language, 77                                                   227
Piaget, Jean, 34, 48                                                emotional, 180, 193, 200
picture,     67,        68,      69,     70ff,      87,    89,      — to signs, 236
  127       128                                                  rhythm, 116, 135, 141, 180, 192, 194,
  logical,  74, 75, 77, 188, 203,                          204      196,    197,       208,      209, 214j,       220, 221
   physiological, 193n                                           Ribot, Th., 34,              70n
Pirro, Andre, 188, 196, 197                                      Richards, I. A., 30n, 56n
pitch, 116, 214, 215                                             Richet, Ch., 40
Pitkin, W. B., 39                                                Riemann, Hugo,                  183,    186,    200,    207;
Plato, 18, 20, 51, 180, 227                                         quoted,207n
play,   115, 136, 138                                            Rignano, Eugenio, 35n
  festal,  117, 118                                              Rimsky-Korsakoff, N. A., 223
  — theory         of    art, 42                                 Ritchie, A. D., quoted, 34, 45
  — theory         of    sacrament,           137                ritual,  42, 43, 49, 50, 51, 52, 93,                           ,



  verbal, 47                                                        114,  125, 127, 134, 137, 138, 139,
pleasure, 175                                                             144, 147, 148, 172
  —  theory of            art,    179
                                                                    142,
                                                                    gods of, 146, 147, 167
Plotinus, 145
poetry, 126, 178, 179, 199, 199n, 214,
                                                                    —  in modern society, 242ff, 244, 245
                                                                    mimetic, 135
  221
  epic,      170-172 passim,
            168,                                    174
                                                                                       —
                                                                 Rousseau, J. J., 115, 182
                                                                 Russell, Bertrand, 34, 67,                        72,    73,
Poincare, Henri, 231
                                                                    76, 78, 81, 222,                233;       quoted,    72,
Pratt, C. C, quoted, 207
                                                                    77, 79, 82, 231
prayer, 44, 51, 139, 215
predication,       novel predication
                   see
                                                                 Sachs, Hanns,              176n
Preyer, W.     H., HOn
                                                                 sacra,    132,       133, 134,          150
                                                                                                        135,
primitive people, see savages
                                                                 sacrament,          139, 140,           148
                                                                                                        144,
problems, see questions
                                                                 Sapir, Edward,               quoted, 95n, 99,            113
projection, 75f, 77n, 77, 86, 127, 189,
                                                                 savage,  34,  50,  52, 94, 95n,   113f,
   192
                                                                    116f, 118, 123, 131, 133, 138, 139,
proposition,  66,   67,  76ff, 78f,  82,
                                                                    140, 141, 142, 145, 151, 156, 164,
  225, 236
  —   and fact, 226, 231                                            165, 166, 170, 213, 225
                                                                 Schenker, Heinrich, 196n
  expression of, 72
Prunieres, Henri, quoted, 183, 205n                              Schmidt, Karl, 23 In
"psychical distance," 178n, 189, 190                             Schoen, Max, 181n, 194
psychoanalysis, 132, 150, 151, 176, 177                          Schoolcraft, H. R., 157n
psychology, 25, 30, 31, 33, 81, 99,                              Schopenhauer, Arthur, 179,                             186
   156, 184                                                      Schumann, Robert,                      183,     188,    204,
  Freudian, 31, 43, 177                                             223
  genetic, 33, 34, 38, 42, 44                                    Schweitzer, Albert, 188, 196, 197
purpose, 18, 19, 175, 179, 243, 245                              science, 18, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 90,
                                                                    94, 127, 174, 229n, 231, 232, 239
questions,    15,       18,     19, 31, 79                         —   and history, 233
  formulation           of,    16, 17, 22                          — and metaphysics,     224           80,
  importance of,              15, 16, 19                           — and         173, 229
                                                                                religion,
  new, 18, 19                                                    Seashore,           Carl,        quoted,       183n
  pseudo,     20,       79                                       self,   the,   111,       152,     155
                                                      INDEX                                                       255
  self-expression,see expression                             sun, 156, 157, 159, 161, 162, 164,
 semantic, 40, 43, 55, 62, 73, 81     87                        165, 166, 167, 168, 171, 235
    89, 100, 130, 136, 172, 176, 198
    —  of art, 217
                                                             supernatural, the, 156
                                                               —
    —  of music, 93, 185, 187, 188, 191,
                                                                    being, 152, 157, 160
                                                             superstition, 47, 100, 114, 142     145
    196, 197, 200, 201                                          154, 155, 169, 227
 sense, 192                                                  symbol, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34
    —  data, 22, 24, 29, 33, 49, 70, 83f,
                                                                35, 37, 67ff, 90, 119, 131, 175, 191

   —87, 111                                                    —   and object, 63, 72, 73, 87
   — knowledge, 227 224, 225
         experience,
                          24f,
                                                                "charged," 239f, 242
   — messages, 46       37,
                                                                cosmic, 156, 164, 235
                                                               discursive, 66, 77f, 82, 88, 89, 90
    musical, 214
 sentence, 71, 72, 74, 122
                                                                dream     —
                                                                          ,  42, 130, 131
                                                               kinds of, 46, 47, 49, 54, 87, 126.
   one-word, 122, 123, 128                                        186, 191, 220, 237
 Shaw, George Bernard, 66                                      logic of, 61, 68
 Shortland, E., 159n, 160n                                     misuse of, 40, 41
 sign,  34, 35, 36ff, 47, 72, 100,                  108,       natural, 128, 132, 140, 164, 238, 239
    186, 210, 235, 236, 238, 240                               non-discursive, 86, 87, 88, 172
   artificial,    59,    60                                    presentational,    89,   90, 123, 128,
   — language, 12136
   diacritical,
                                                                  164, 185, 197, 220, 237
                                                              —    situations, 55, 74
   natural, 58, 59, 60
signs and symbols, 37, 42, 46, 47, 58,
                                                               transparency of         73—    ,


                                                            symbolic mode, 174, 176
   60, 61, 62, 63, 66, 93, 172, 189,                        symbolic transformation, 47, 48, 49
   225, 235, 236                                               52, 91,      100, 104, 111, 113, 127!
significance, 28, 29, 53, 91, 93, 94,
                                                               192, 247
   100, 102, 103, 107, 118, 131, 143,                       symbolism, mathematical, 27, 28, 198.
   150, 154, 173, 176, 177, 185, 201,                         203
   210, 212, 246                                            symbolization,         31,    32, 34, 46,
   lack of, 78, 104                                           law of, 141
   musical, 174, Chapter 8 passim, 224                        need of, 45, 49
   non-li'eral,    148                                      symbols and signs, see signs
   personal,     155                                        sympathy, 182, 188, 189
signification,     55,    58,    59,   63,   64,    104,    symptom,   37, 58,                79,    80,    96,    103,
   237, 239                                                   113, 186, 189
slang, 125,      237                                       synaesthesia, 110
Socrates, 18, 19, 20
song, 93, 115, 116, 117n, 171, 208,                        taste,   180
   209, 215, 216                                           telephone exchange,  simile of, 37, 39.
Sorantin, E., 197n                                            40, 41, 43, 46f, 60
sound, 105, 107, 109. 110, 112, 114,
                                                                                             *
                                                                                               m
                                                           terms, in meaning-relation, 56-59, 63.
   116, 117, 119, im, 173, 208, 209,                          198
   210, 214                                                Thales,
  —   painting, 187, 188
                                                                          17,
                                                           Thimme, A., 153n
                                                                                 18,    19,    145
Spaier, A., 30n                                            Thorburn, J. M.,               quoted,          177n
speech, 33, 48, 49, 67, 72, 86, 93, 95,                    Tolstoi,   Leo, quoted, 68n
  98, 99,    104, 107, 109, 113, 115,                      Tomb, J. W., 110
   118, 126, 127, 207, 215                                 totem, 159, 172
Spencer, H., 26, 158n
Spinoza, B. de, 79, 219
                                                              —  animal, 158
                                                           totemism, 143f, 145, 148
Squires, P. C, 109n                                        transformer, 46, 47
Stebbing, L. S., 225n                                      Tregear, E., 160n
Stekel, Wilhelm, quoted,                 172,      177n    truth,    19,    20,    22,     25,      90,    219,   224,'
Stern, Gustav, 30n, HOn                                      230, 232
story,128, 135, 147, 148, 149ff,                   154,      and falsity,         60, 74, 222
  155, 156, 157, 163, 168                                    artistic,     85,    221,    222
Stout, G. F., 94                                             literal,     173
Strauss, Richard,             187n,    188, 205n           Tylor, E.       B., quoted, 51,            165
structure, logical,       54,    63,   67, 74, 93,
   185, 186                                                understanding, 33, 83, 90, 91      92
          178
  artistic,                                                  127, 202, 226, 237, 241, 246                     '


  grammatical,       66, 121, 122                            "implicit," 219
  musical,       178, 192, 196, 201,               202,      musical, 93, 189, 192, 205, 207
  206                                                      Urban, Wilbur M., 30n, 81n, HOn,
  propositional,        67,   226                            221, 222; quoted, 198, 199   199n
  sensory, 225                                             value,   18,    19,    73,    116,       118, 132, 133,
Stcmpf,       Karl,      179,    181n                        173
256                                                INDEX
  artistic,    174,       175,   203, 210             Whitehead, George, 176n
  human, 232, 235                                     Wierling, Gustav, 201n
   practical, 229                                     Wilson, Henry, 98n
verb, 66, 73, 74, 236                                  WlNCKELMANN,         J.       J.,   179
verse, 171, 209, 211                                  Wisdom, John, 225n
Victor, the Savage of                Aveyron,   98,   Wittgenstein, Ludwig,     30, 81, 227;
   107-109, 112, 136                                       quoted,75, 77, 79, 230
Vierkandt, Alfred, quoted,                  139n       woman,  160, 164, 165, 166, 169
Vischer, Theodor, 200                                 word, 40, 48, 61, 62, 72, 73, 74, 77,
vocable,      73,   96,    100, 112, 127, 194              84, 89, 94, 95, 96, 106, 107, 108,
Wagner, Richard,               190, 223; quoted,           109, 112, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122,
  188,     199                                             123, 127, 193, 194, 197, 206, 210,
Wallace, William, 213; quoted, 214                                   238
Wallaschek, R., 215n                                       —237,
                                                              order,
                                                                   71, 72, 74, 76, 77
washing, 140, 141                                          —       115
                                                              tones,
Wegener, Philip, 7 In, 121-125                        words, and music, 214, 215, 216
Wernaer, R. M., quoted, 17Sn                            disconnected       —
                                                                          66, 87, 95n, 238
                                                                            ,


Wertheimer, Max, 84                                     portraiture of      —
                                                                           88    ,


Westervelt, W. D., 159n, 160n, 167n;                  Wundt, Wilhelm, 179
  quoted, 161-162                                     Yerkes, A. W., quoted, 96
Whitehead, A. N., 22, 23, 30n, 34,                    Yerkes, R. M., 100; quoted, 95, 101,
  59n, 81, 131n; quoted, 16, 229n,                           107n
  243-244, 247
jTSP




        'Kf.t tr,s         iini Jime we have a
             .ry which accounts satis-
         ctorr!!y fer all forms of art
         **>i «?t sirt-forms.  One of     .   .   .



       'r;&sd synoptic works which,
       %.   bringing together separate
        .r'VUii of        knowledge, suddenly
            /c wis the pattern of reality,
                 csivesa new meaning to all
                 j        piecemeal explorn-
                     //
       issn*.                             —Herbert Read



                             SUSANNE K. LANGER was
                             born in New York City, of Ger-
                             man-born parents. She studied
                             for her A.B., A.M., and Ph.D.
                             degrees at RadclifFe College,
                             with one semester's study at
                             the University of Vienna. She
                             has taught at a number of ma-
                             jor universities aid is the au-
                             thor of The Practice of Philoso-
phy, Introduction to Symbolic Logic, and Feeling and
Form. Philosophy in a New Key was originally pub-
 ish«d by The Harvard University Press.




  •PuS/itAeti /sy //te tAew <fimetic«it                  y i£t€iiif
                                                           >
