Comment on Part II


Since World War II, it has been fashionable to engage in “interdisciplinary” research, and this usually means, for example, that an ecologist will need a geologist to tell him about the rocks and soils of the particular terrain which he is investigating. But there is another sense in which scientific work may claim to be interdisciplinary.



The man who studies the arrangement of leaves and branches in the growth of a flowering plant may note an analogy between the formal relations between stems, leaves, and buds, and the formal relations that obtain between different sorts of words in a sentence. He will think of a “leaf” not as something flat and green but as something related in a particular way to the stem from which it grows and to the secondary stem (or bud) which is formed in the angle between leaf and primary stem. Similarly the modern linguist thinks of a “noun” not as the “name of a person, place, or thing,” but as a member of a class of words defined by their relationship in sentence structure to “verbs” and other parts.

Those who think first of the “things” which are related (the “relata”) will dismiss any analogy between grammar and the anatomy of plants as far-fetched. After all, a leaf and a noun do not at all resemble each other in outward appearance. But if we think first of the relationships and consider the relata as defined solely by their relationships, then we begin to wonder. Is there a profound analogy between grammar and anatomy? Is there an interdisciplinary science which should concern itself with such analogies? What would such a science claim as its subject matter? And why should we expect such far-flung analogies to have significance?

In dealing with any analogy, it is important to define exactly what is claimed when we say that the analogy is meaningful. In the present example, it is not claimed that a noun should look like a leaf. It is not even claimed that the relation between leaf and stem is the same as the relation between noun and verb. What is claimed is, first, that in both anatomy and grammar the parts are to be classified according to the relations between them. In both fields, the relations are to be thought of as somehow primary, the relata as secondary. Beyond this, it is claimed that the relations are of the sort generated by processes of information exchange.

In other words, the mysterious and polymorphic relation between context and content obtains in both anatomy and linguistics; and evolutionists of the nineteenth century, preoccupied with what were called “homologies,” were, in fact, studying precisely the contextual structures of biological development.

All of this speculation becomes almost platitude when we realize that both grammar and biological structure are products of communicational and organizational process. The anatomy of the plant is a complex transform of genotypic instructions, and the “language” of the genes, like any other language, must of necessity have contextual structure. Moreover, in all communication, there must be a relevance between the contextual structure of the message and some structuring of the recipient. The tissues of the plant could not “read” the genotypic instructions carried in the chromosomes of every cell unless cell and tissue exist, at that given moment, in a contextual structure.

What has been said above will serve as sufficient definition of what is here meant by “form and pattern.” The focus of discussion was upon form rather than content, upon context rather than upon what occurs “in” the given context, upon relationship rather than upon the related persons or phenomena.

The essays included range from a discussion of “schismogenesis” (1935) to two essays written after the birth of cybernetics.

In 1935, I certainly had not clearly grasped the central importance of “context.” I thought that the processes of schismogenesis were important and nontrivial because in them I seemed to see evolution at work: if interaction between persons could undergo progressive qualitative change as intensity increased, then surely this could be the very stuff of cultural evolution. It followed that all directional change, even in biological evolution and phylogeny, might—or must—be due to progressive interaction between organisms, Under natural selection, such change in relationships would favor progressive change in anatomy and physiology.

The progressive increase in size and armament of the dinosaurs was, as I saw it, simply an interactive armaments race—a schismogenic process. But I could not then see that the evolution of the horse from Eohippus was not a one-sided adjustment to life on grassy plains. Surely the grassy plains themselves were evolved pari passu with the evolution of the teeth and hooves of the horses and other ungulates. Turf was the evolving response of the vegetation to the evolution of the horse. It is the context which evolves.

The classification of schismogenic process into “symmetrical” and “complementary” was already a classification of contexts of behavior; and, already in this essay, there is a proposal to examine the possible combinations of themes in complementary behavior. By 1942, I had completely forgotten this old proposal, but I attempted to do precisely what I had proposed seven years previously. In 1942 many of us were interested in “national character” and the contrast between England and America fortunately brought into focus the fact that “spectatorship” is in England a filial characteristic, linked with dependency and submission, while in America spectatorship is a parental characteristic linked with dominance and succoring.

This hypothesis which I called “end-linkage,” marked a turning point in my thinking. From that time on, I have consciously focused upon the qualitative structure of contexts rather than upon intensity of interaction. Above all, the phenomena of end-linkage showed that contextual structures could themselves be messages—an important point which is not made in the 1942 article. An Englishman when he is applauding another is indicating or signaling potential submission and/or dependency; when he shows off or demands spectatorship, he is signaling dominance or superiority; and so on. Every Englishman who writes a book must be guilty of this. For the American, the converse must hold. His boasting is but a bid for quasiparental approval.

The notion of context reappears in the essay “Style, Grace, and Information in Primitive Art,” but here the idea of context has evolved to meet the related ideas of “redundancy,” “pattern,” and “meaning.”




* * *



1. In any case it is clear that in a scientific study of processes and natural laws this invocation of free will can have no place.

2. Cf. Malinowski, Sexual Life and Crime and Custom; A. I. Richards, Hunger and Work. This question of the subdivision of a culture into “institutions” is not quite as simple as I have indicated; and, in spite of their own works, I believe that the London School still adheres to a theory that some such division is practicable. It is likely that confusion arises from the fact that certain native peoples—perhaps all, but in any case those of Western Europe—actually think that their culture is so subdivided. Various cultural phenomena also contribute something toward such a subdivision, e.g., (a) the division of labor and differentiation of norms of behavior between different groups of individuals in the same community, and (b) an emphasis, present in certain cultures, upon the subdivisions of place and time upon which behavior is ordered. These phenomena lead to the possibility, in such cultures, of dubbing all behavior which, for example, takes place in church between 11.30 and 12.30 on Sundays as “religious.” But even in the study of such cultures the anthropologist must look with some suspicion upon his classification of traits into institutions and must expect to find a great deal of overlapping between various institutions.

An analogous fallacy occurs in psychology, and consists in regarding behavior as classifiable according to the impulses which inspire it, e.g., into such categories as self-protective, assertive, sexual, acquisitive, etc. Here, too, confusion results from the fact that not only the psychologist, but also the individual studied, is prone to think in terms of these categories. The psychologists would do well to accept the probability that every bit of behavior is—at least in a well-integrated individual—simultaneously relevant to all these abstractions.

3. The present scheme is oriented toward the study of social rather than psychological processes, but a closely analogous scheme might be constructed for the study of psychopathology. Here the idea of “contact” would be studied, especially in the contexts of the molding of the individual, and the processes of schismogenesis would be seen to play an important part not only in accentuating the maladjustments of the deviant, but also in assimilating the normal individual to his group.

4. Cf. Margaret Mead, Sex and Temperament, 1935, Of the communities described in this book, the Arapesh and the Mundugumor have a preponderantly symmetrical relationship between the sexes, while the Chambuli have a complementary relationship. Among the Iatmul, a tribe in the same area, which I have studied, the relationship between the sexes is complementary, but on rather different lines from that of the Chambuli. I hope shortly to publish a book on the Iatmul with sketches of their culture from the points of view a, b, and e outlined in paragraph 10. (See Bibliography, items 1936 and 1958 B.)

5. In this, as in the other examples given, no attempt is made to consider the schismogenesis from all the points of view outlined in paragraph 10. Thus, inasmuch as the economic aspect of the matter is not here being considered, the effects of the slump upon the schismogenesis are ignored. A complete study would be subdivided into separate sections, each treating one of the aspects of the phenomena.

6. For details of this and other similar incidents cf. Naven, pp. 98–107, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1936.

7. Loc. cit., p. 261.

8. Cf. M. Mead (Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies, New York, Morrow, 1935), especially Part III, for an analysis of sex differentiation among the Chambuli; also G. Bateson (Naven, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1936) for an analysis of sex differentiation among adults in Iatmul, New Guinea.

9. We are considering here only those cases in which ethological differentiation follows the sex dichotomy. It is also probable that, where the ethos of the two sexes is not sharply differentiated, it would still be correct to say that the ethos of each promotes that of the other, e.g., through such mechanisms as competition and mutual imitation. Cf. M. Mead (op. cit.).

10. For a discussion of the role played by “change” and “heterogeneity” in melting-pot communities, cf. M. Mead (“Educative effects of social environment as disclosed by studies of primitive societies.” Paper read at the Symposium on Environment and Education, University of Chicago, September 22, 1941). Also F. Alexander (“Educative influence of personality factors in the environment.” Paper read at the Symposium on Environment and Education, University of Chicago, September 22, 1941).

11. In the South Seas, those special modes of behavior which Europeans adopt toward native peoples, and those other modes of behavior which the native adopts toward Europeans, are very obvious. Apart from analyses of “pidgin” languages, we have, however, no psychological data on these patterns. For a description of the analogous patterns in Negro-white relationships, cf. J. Dollard (Caste and Class in a Southern Town, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1937), especially Chapter XII, Accommodation Attitudes of Negroes.

12. Cf. G. Bateson, “Culture Contact and Schismogenesis,” Man, 1935, 8: 199. (Reprinted in this volume.)

13. The Balinese social system in the mountain communities is almost entirely devoid of such dualisms. The ethological differentiation of the sexes is rather slight; political factions are completely absent. In the plains, there is a dualism which has resulted from the intrusive Hindoo caste system, those with caste being discriminated from those without caste. At the symbolic level (partly as a result of Hindoo influence) dualisms are much more frequent, however, than they are in the social structure (e.g., Northeast vs. Southwest, Gods vs. demons, symbolic Left vs. Right, symbolic Male vs. Female, etc.).

14. A fourth instance of this threefold pattern occurs in some great public schools (as in Charterhouse), where the authority is divided between the quieter, more polished, intellectual leaders (“monitors”) and the rougher, louder, athletic leaders (captain of football, head of long room, etc.), who have the duty of seeing to it that the “fags” run when the monitor calls.

15. For a general discussion of cultural variants of the Oedipus situation and the related systems of cultural sanctions, cf. M. Mead (“Social change and cultural surrogates,” Journal of Educ. Sociol., 1940, 14: 92–128); also G. Roheim (The Riddle of the Sphinx, London, Hogarth Press, 1934).

16. The term “cooperation,” which is sometimes used as the opposite of “competition,” covers a very wide variety of patterns, some of them symmetrical and others complementary, some bipolar and others in which the cooperating individuals are chiefly oriented to some personal or impersonal goal. We may expect that some careful analysis of these patterns will give us vocabulary for describing other sorts of national characteristics. Such an analysis cannot be attempted in this paper.

17. It is, however, possible that in certain sections of these nations, complementary patterns occur with some frequency—particularly among groups who have suffered from prolonged insecurity and uncertainty, e.g., racial minorities, depressed areas, the stock exchange, political circles, etc.

18. G. Bateson, unpublished research for the Council on Human Relations.

19. For a fuller study, we ought to consider such other motifs as aggression-passivity, possessive-possessed, agent-tool, etc. And all of these motifs will require somewhat more critical definition than can be attempted in this paper.

20. G. Bateson, Naven, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1936.

21. Naven, p. 118.

22. The terms “regenerative” and “degenerative” are borrowed from communications engineering. A regenerative or “vicious” circle is a chain of variables of the general type: increase in A causes increase in B; increase in B causes increase in C; … increase in N causes increase in A. Such a system, if provided with the necessary energy sources and if external factors permit, will clearly operate at a greater and greater rate or intensity. A “degenerative” or “self-corrective” circle differs from a regenerative circle in containing at least one link of the type: “increase in N causes decrease in M.” The house thermostat or the steam engine with a governor are examples of such self-correcting systems. It will be noted that in many instances the same material circuit may be either regenerative or degenerative according to the amount of loading, frequency of impulses transmitted around the path, and time characteristics of the total path.

23. L. F. Richardson, “Generalized Foreign Politics,” British Journal of Psychology, Monograph Supplement xxiii, 1939.

24. Naven, p. 173.

25. E. H. Homburger, “Configurations in Play: Psychological Notes,” Psychoanalytical Quarterly, 1937, vi: 138–214. This paper, one of the most important in the literature seeking to state psychoanalytic hypotheses in more rigorous terms, deals with the “modes” appropriate to the various erogenous zones—intrusion, incorporation, retention, and the like—and shows how these modes may be transferred from one zone to another. This leads the writer to a chart of the possible permutations and combinations of such transferred modalities. This chart provides precise means of describing the course of the development of a large variety of different types of character structure (e.g., as met with in different cultures).

26. Naven, p. 197.

27. Op. cit., 1939.

28. See especially G. Bateson and M. Mead, Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis. Since this photographic record is available, no photographs are included in the present paper.

29. Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis, pl. 47, and pp. 32–6.

30. Ibid., pls. 49, 52, 53, and 69–72.

31. See Colin McPhee, “The Absolute Music of Bali,” Modern Music, 1935; and A House in Bali, London, Gollancz, 1947.

32. See G. Bateson, “An Old Temple and a New Myth,” Djawa, xvii, Batavia, 1937.

33. See M. Mead, “Public Opinion Mechanisms among Primitive Peoples,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 1937, i: 5–16.

34. As is usual in anthropology, the data are not sufficiently precise to give us any clue as to the nature of the learning processes involved. Anthropology, at best, is only able to raise problems of this order. The next step must be left for laboratory experimentation.

35. Bateson and Mead, op. cit., pl. 5.

36. Cf. Naven, pp. 250 ff., where it was suggested that we must expect to find that some peoples of the world would relate their actions to the sociological frame.

37. The word dadi is also used as a copula referring to changes in social status. I Anoe dadi Koebajan means “So-and-so has become a village official.”

38. Mead, “Public Opinion Mechanisms among Primitive Peoples,” loc. cit., 1937.

39. Bateson and Mead, op. cit., pls. 17, 67, and 79.

40. Ibid., pls. 10–14.

41. Ibid., pl. 45.

42. Ibid., pl. 10, fig. 3.

43. At present it is not possible to make such a statement in sharply defined quantitative terms, the available judgments being subjective and Occidental.

44. Alternatively, we might handle the analogy in another way. A social system is, as Von Neumann and Morgenstern point out, comparable to a non-zero sum game in which one or more coalitions of people play against each other and against nature. The non-zero sum characteristic is based on the fact that value is continually extracted from the natural environment, Inasmuch as Balinese society exploits nature, the total entity, including both environment and people, is clearly comparable to a game requiring coalition between people. It is possible, however, that that subdivision of the total game comprising the people only might be such that the formation of coalitions within it would not be essential—that is, Balinese society may differ from most other societies in that the “rules” of the relationship between people define a “game” of the type Von Neumann would call “nonessential.” This possibility is not here examined. (See Von Neumann and Morgenstern, op. cit.)

45. L. K. Frank, “The Cost of Competition,” Plan Age, 1940, vi: 314–24.

46. W. R. Ashby, “Effect of Controls on Stability,” Nature, clv, no. 3930, February 24, 1945, 242–43.

47. Consider the impossibility of constructing a television set which would report upon its screen all the workings of its component parts, including especially those parts concerned in this reporting.





