Comment on Part III


In the essays collected in Part III, I speak of an action or utterance as occurring “in” a context, and this conventional way of talking suggests that the particular action is a “dependent” variable, while the context is the “independent” or determining variable. But this view of how an action is related to its context is likely to distract the reader—as it has distracted me—from perceiving the ecology of the ideas which together constitute the small subsystem which I call “context.”



This heuristic error—copied like so many others from the ways of thought of the physicist and chemist—requires correction.

It is important to see the particular utterance or action as part of the ecological subsystem called context and not as the product or effect of what remains of the context after the piece which we want to explain has been cut out from it.

The mistake in question is the same formal error as that mentioned in the comment on Part II where I discuss the evolution of the horse. We should not think of this process just as a set of changes in the animal’s adaptation to life on the grassy plains but as a constancy in the relationship between animals and environment. It is the ecology which survives and slowly evolves. In this evolution, the relata—the animals and the grass—undergo changes which are indeed adaptive from moment to moment. But if the process of adaptation were the whole story, there could be no systemic pathology. Trouble arises precisely because the “logic” of adaptation is a different “logic” from that of the survival and evolution of the ecological system.

In Warren Brodey’s phrase, the “time-grain” of the adaptation is different from that of the ecology.

“Survival” means that certain descriptive statements about some living system continue to be true through some period of time; and, conversely, “evolution” refers to changes in the truth of certain descriptive statements about some living system. The trick is to define which statements about which systems remain true or undergo change.

The paradoxes (and the pathologies) of systemic process arise precisely because the constancy and survival of some larger system is maintained by changes in the constituent subsystems.

The relative constancy—the survival—of the relationship between animals and grass is maintained by changes in both relata. But any adaptive change in either of the relata, if uncorrected by some change in the other, will always jeopardize the relationship between them. These arguments propose a new conceptual frame for the “double bind” hypothesis, a new conceptual frame for thinking about “schizophrenia,” and a new way of looking at context and levels of learning.

In a word, schizophrenia, deutero-learning, and the double bind cease to be matters of individual psychology and become part of the ecology of ideas in systems or “minds” whose boundaries no longer coincide with the skins of the participant individuals.




* * *



1. Dr. Mead writes: “… those students who have devoted themselves to studying cultures as wholes, as systems of dynamic equilibrium, can make the following contributions: …

“4. Implement plans for altering our present culture by recognizing the importance of including the social scientist within his experimental material, and by recognizing that by working toward defined ends we commit ourselves to the manipulation of persons, and therefore to the negation of democracy. Only by working in terms of values which are limited to defining a direction is it possible for us to use scientific methods in the control of the process without the negation of the moral autonomy of the human spirit.” (Italics hers.)





2. Psychological papers bearing upon this problem of the relationship between gestalt and simple learning are very numerous, if we include all who have worked on the concepts of transfer of learning, generalization, irradiation, reaction threshold (Hull), insight, and the like. Historically, one of the first to pose these questions was Mr. Frank (L. K. Frank, “The Problems of Learning,” Psych. Review, 1926, 33: 329–51; and Professor Maier has recently introduced a concept of “direction” which is closely related to the notion of “deutero-learning.” He says: “direction … is the force which integrates memories in a particular manner without being a memory itself.” (N. R. F. Maier, “The Behavior Mechanisms Concerned with Problem Solving,” Psych. Review, 1940, 47: 43–58.) If for “force” we substitute “habit,” and for “memory” we substitute “experience of the stream of events,” the concept of deutero-learning can be seen as almost synonymous with Professor Maier’s concept of “direction.”

3. It will be noted that the operational definition of deutero-learning is necessarily somewhat easier than that of proto-learning. Actually, no simple learning curve represents proto-learning alone. Even within the duration of the single learning experiment we must suppose that some deutero-learning will occur, and this will make the gradient at any point somewhat steeper than the hypothetical gradient of “pure” proto-learning.

4. C. Hull, Mathematico-Deductive Theory of Rote Learning, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1940.

5. Various classifications have been devised for purposes of exposition. Here I follow that of Hilgard and Marquis (E. R. Hilgard and D. G. Marquis, Conditioning and Learning, New York, Appleton Century Co., 1940). These authors subject their own classification to a brilliant critical analysis, and to this analysis I am indebted for one of the formative ideas upon which this paper is based. They insist that any learning context can be described in terms of any theory of learning, if we are willing to stretch and overemphasize certain aspects of the context to fit onto the Procrustean bed of the theory. I have taken this notion as a cornerstone of my thinking, substituting “apperceptive habits” for “theories of learning,” and arguing that almost any sequence of events can be stretched and warped and punctuated to fit in with any type of apperceptive habit. (We may suppose that experimental neurosis is what happens when the subject fails to achieve this assimilation.)

I am also indebted to Lewin’s topological analysis of the contexts of reward and punishment. (K. Lewin, A Dynamic Theory of Personality, New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1936.)

6. Many people feel that the contexts of experimental learning are so oversimplified as to have no bearing upon the phenomena of the real world. Actually, expansion of this classification will give means of defining systematically many hundreds of possible contexts of learning with their associated apperceptive habits. The scheme may be expanded in the following ways:

Inclusion of contexts of negative learning (inhibition).



Inclusion of mixed types (e.g., cases in which salivation, with its physiological relevance to meat powder, is also instrumental in obtaining the meat powder).



Inclusion of the cases in which the subject is able to deduce some sort of relevance (other than the physiological) between some two or more elements in the sequence. For this to be true, the subject must have experience of contexts differing systematically one from another, e.g., contexts in which some type of change in one element is constantly accompanied by a constant type of change in another element. These cases can be spread out on a lattice of possibilities, according to which pair of elements the subject sees as interrelated. There are only five elements (conditioned stimulus, conditioned response, reward or punishment, and two time intervals), but any pair of these may be interrelated, and of the interrelated pair, either may be seen by the subject as determining the other. These possibilities, multiplied for our four basic contexts, give forty-eight types.



The list of basic types may be extended by including those cases (not as yet investigated in learning experiments but common in interpersonal relationships) in which the roles of subject and experimenter are reversed. In these, the learning partner provides the initial and final elements, while some other person (or circumstance) provides the middle term. In these types, we see the buzzer and the meat powder as the behavior of a person and ask: “What does this person learn?” A great part of the gamut of apperceptive habits associated with authority and parenthood is based on contexts of this general type.





7. Dorothy Lee, “A Primitive System of Values,” Journal Philos. of Science, 1940, 7: 355–78.

8. It is possible that semi-Pavlovian phrasings of the stream of events tend, like the experiments which are their prototypes, to hinge particularly upon autonomic reactions—that those who see events in these terms tend to see these reactions, which are only partially subject to voluntary control, as peculiarly effective and powerful causes of outside events. There may be some ironical logic in Pavlovian fatalism which predisposes us to believe that we can alter the course of events only by means of those behaviors which we are least able to control.

9. The Balinese material collected by Dr. Mead and myself has not yet been published in extenso, but a brief outline of the theory here suggested is available—cf. G. Bateson, “The Frustration-Aggression Hypothesis and Culture,” Psychological Review, 1941, 48: 350–55.

10. A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia Mathematica, 3 vols., 2nd ed., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1910–13.

11. L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, London, Harcourt Brace, 1922.

12. R. Carnap, The Logical Syntax of Language, New York, Harcourt Brace, 1937.

13. B. L. Whorf, “Science and Linguistics,” Technology Review, 1940, 44: 229–48.

14. J. Ruesch and G. Bateson, Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry, New York, Norton, 1951.

15. A. Korzybski, Science and Sanity, New York, Science Press, 1941.

16. The verbalization of these metalinguistic rules is a much later achievement which can only occur after the evolution of a nonverbalized meta-metalinguistics.

17. N. Tinbergen, Social Behavior in Animals with Special Reference to Vertebrates, London, Methuen, 1953.

18. K. Z. Lorenz, King Solomon’s Ring, New York, Crowell, 1952.

19. Ibid.

20. C. R. Carpenter, “A Field Study of the Behavior and Social Relations of Howling Monkeys,” Comp. Psychol. Monogr., 1934, 10: 1–168.

21. A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, The Andaman Islanders, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1922.

22. W. S. McCulloch, “A Heterarchy of Values, etc.,” Bulletin of Math. Biophys., 1945, 7: 89–93.

23. Whitehead and Russell, op. cit.

24. This paper derives from hypotheses first developed in a research project financed by the Rockefeller Foundation from 1952–54, administered by the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Stanford University and directed by Gregory Bateson. Since 1954 the project has continued, financed by the Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation. To Jay Haley is due credit for recognizing that the symptoms of schizophrenia are suggestive of an inability to discriminate the Logical Types, and this was amplified by Bateson, who added the notion that the symptoms and etiology could be formally described in terms of a double bind hypothesis. The hypothesis was communicated to D. D. Jackson and found to fit closely with his ideas of family homeostasis. Since then Dr. Jackson has worked closely with the project. The study of the formal analogies between hypnosis and schizophrenia has been the work of John H. Weakland and Jay Haley.

25. A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia Mathematica, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1910.

26. G. Bateson, “A Theory of Play and Fantasy,” Psychiatric Research Reports, 1955, 2: 39–51.

27. A film prepared by this project, “The Nature of Play; Part I, River Otters,” is available.

28. C. R. Carpenter, “A Field Study of the Behavior and Social Relations of Howling Monkeys,” Comp. Psychol. Monogr., 1934, 10: 1–168; also K. Z. Lorenz, King Solomon’s Ring, New York, Crowell, 1952.

29. G. Bateson, “Social Planning and the Concept of Deutero-Learning,” Conference on Science, Philosophy and Religion, Second Symposium, New York, Harper, 1942. (See above, p. 159); also H. F. Harlow, “The Formation of Learning Sets,” Psychol. Review, 1949, 56: 51–65; also C. L. Hull, et al., Mathematico-deductive Theory of Rote Learning, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1940.

30. E. von Domarus, “The Specific Laws of Logic in Schizophrenia,” Language and Thought in Schizophrenia, J. S. Kasanin, ed., Berkeley, University of California Press, 1944.

31. Our concept of punishment is being refined at present. It appears to us to involve perceptual experience in a way that cannot be encompassed by the notion of “trauma.”

32. J. Perceval, A Narrative of the Treatment Experienced by a Gentleman During a State of Mental Derangement, Designed to Explain the Causes and Nature of Insanity, etc., London, Effingham Wilson, 1836 and 1840. (See bibliographic item, 1961 a.)

33. J. R. Hilgard, “Anniversary Reactions in Parents Precipitated by Children,” Psychiatry, 1953, 16: 73–80.

34. G. Bateson, “…Play and Fantasy,” op. cit.

35. D. D. Jackson, “The Question of Family Homeostasis,” presented at the American Psychiatric Association Meeting, St. Louis, May 7, 1954; also Jackson, “Some Factors Influencing the Oedipus Complex,” Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 1954, 23: 566–81.

36. D. D. Jackson, “An Episode of Sleepwalking,” Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 1954, 2: 503–508; also Jackson, “Some Factors…,” Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 1954, 23: 566–581.

37. Bateson, “A Theory of Play…” op. cit.

38. M. H. Erickson, Personal communication, 1955.

39. F. Fromm-Reichmann, Personal communication, 1956.

40. R. L. Stevenson, “The Poor Thing,” Novels and Tales of Robert Louis Stevenson, Vol. 20, New York, Scribners, 1918, pp. 496–502.

41. D. W. Thompson, On Growth and Form, Vol. 2, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1952.

42. Beatrice C. Bateson, William Bateson, Naturalist, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1928.

43. G. Bateson, D. D. Jackson, J. Haley, and J. H. Weakland, “Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia,” Behavioral Science, 1956, 1: 251–64; also G. Bateson, “Language and Psychotherapy, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann’s Last Project,” Psychiatry, 1958, 21: 96–100; also G. Bateson (moderator), “Schizophrenic Distortions of Communication,” Psychotherapy of Chronic Schizophrenic Patients, C. A. Whitacker, ed., Boston and Toronto, Little, Brown and Co., 1958, pp. 31–56; also G. Bateson, “Analysis of Group Therapy in an Admission Ward, United States Naval Hospital, Oakland, California,” Social Psychiatry in Action, H. A. Wilmer, Springfield, Ill., Charles C. Thomas, 1958, pp. 334–49; also J. Haley, “The Art of Psychoanalysis,” etc., 1958, 15: 190–200; also J. Haley, “An Interactional Explanation of Hypnosis,” American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 1958, 1: 41–57; also J. H. Weakland and D. D. Jackson, “Patient and Therapist Observations on the Circumstances of a Schizophrenic Episode,” AMA Archives of Neurological Psychiatry, 1958, 79: 554–74.

44. H. F. Jones, Samuel Butler: A Memoir, Vol. 1, London, Macmillan, 1919.

45. J. Von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1944.

46. 1971. In my final version of this hierarchy of orders of learning, published in this volume as “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication,” (see p. 283) I have used a different system of numbering. The receipt of a signal is there called “Zero Learning”; changes in Zero Learning are called Learning I; “deutero-learning” is called Learning II, etc.

47. C. L. Hull, et al., Mathematico-deductive Theory of Rote Learning: A Study in Scientific Methodology, (Yale University Institute of Human Relations), New Haven, Yale University Press, 1940; also H. F. Harlow, “The Formation of Learning Sets,” Psychol. Review, 1949, 56: 51–65.

48. In this sense, of course, all the theories of change assume that the next change is in some degree prefigured in the system which is to undergo that change.

49. These considerations alter somewhat the old problem of the evolutionary effect of use and disuse. Orthodox theory could only suggest that a mutation reducing the (potential) size of a disused organ had survival value in terms of the resulting economy of tissue. The present theory would suggest that atrophy of an organ, occurring at the somatic level, may constitute a drain upon the total available adaptability of the organism, and that this waste of adaptability might be saved if reduction of the organ could be achieved more directly by genetic determinants.

50. The name of Newton certainly belongs in this list. But the man himself was of a different kidney. His mystical preoccupation with alchemy and apocalyptic writings, and his secret theological monism indicate that he was not the first objective scientist but, rather, the “last of the magicians” (see J. M. Keynes, “Newton, the Man,” Tercentenary Celebrations, London, Cambridge University Press, 1947, pp. 27–34). Newton and Blake were alike in devoting much time and thought to the mystical works of Jacob Boehme.

51. What is important, however, is that the proposition be constantly true, rather than that it be abstract. It just so happens—coincidentally—that abstractions, if well chosen, have a constancy of truth. For human beings it is rather constantly true that air is present around the nose; the reflexes which control respiration can therefore be hard-programmed in the medulla. For the porpoise, the proposition “air around the blowhole” is only intermittently true, and therefore respiration must be controlled in a more flexible manner from some higher center.

52. Formally correct because morphogenesis, like behavior, is surely a matter of messages in contexts. (See G. Bateson, “A Re-examination of ‘Bateson’s Rule,’” Journal of Genetics, in press.)

53. K. Pryor, R. Haag, and J. O’Reilly, “Deutero-Learning in a Roughtooth Porpoise (Steno bredanensis),” U. S. Naval Ordinance Test Station, China Lake, NOTS TP 4270.

54. A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia Mathematica, 3 vols., 2nd ed., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1910–13.

55. It is conceivable that the same words might be used in describing both a class and its members and be true in both cases. The word “wave” is the name of a class of movements of particles, We can also say that the wave itself “moves,” but we shall be referring to a movement of a class of movements. Under friction, this metamovement will not lose velocity as would the movement of a particle.

56. The Newtonian equations which describe the motions of a “particle” stop at the level of ’“acceleration.” Change of acceleration can only happen with progressive deformation of the moving body, but the Newtonian “particle” was not made up of “parts” and was therefore (logically) incapable of deformation or any other internal change. It was therefore not subject to rate of change of acceleration.

57. G. Bateson, “Social Planning and the Concept of Deutero-Learning,” Conference on Science, Philosophy and Religion, Second Symposium, New York, Harper, 1942.

58. H. E. Harlow, “The Formation of Learning Sets,” Psychol. Review, 1949, 56: 51–65.

59. E. L. Hull, et al., Mathematico-deductive Theory of Rote Learning, New Haven, Yale University, Institute of Human Relations, 1940.

60. H. S. Liddell, “Reflex Method and Experimental Neurosis,” Personality and Behavior Disorders, New York, Ronald Press, 1944,

61. G. Bateson, et al., “Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia,” Behavioral Science, 1956, 1: 251–64.

62. J. Ruesch and G. Bateson, Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry, New York, Norton, 1951.

63. [Alcoholics Anonymous], Alcoholics Anonymous Comes of Age, New York, Harper, 1957, p. 279. (Italics added.)

64. This phrase is used by AA in derision of the alcoholic who tries to use will power against the bottle. The quotation, along with the line, “My head is bloody but unbowed,” comes from the poem “Invictus” by William Ernest Henley, who was a cripple but not an alcoholic. The use of the will to conquer pain and physical disability is probably not comparable to the alcoholic’s use of will.

65. [Alcoholics Anonymous], Alcoholics Anonymous, New York, Works Publishing, 1939.

66. J. Ruesch and G. Bateson, Communications: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry, New York, Norton, 1951.

67. R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of Nature, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1945.

68. G. Bateson, “A Social Scientist Views the Emotions,” Expression of the Emotions in Man, P. Knapp, ed., International University Press, 1963.

69. This use of formal contextual structure as a descriptive device does not necessarily assume that the principle discussed is wholly or in part actually learned in contexts having the appropriate formal structure. The principle could have been genetically determined, and it might still follow that the principle is best described by the formal delineation of the contexts in which it is exemplified. It is precisely this fitting of behavior to context that makes it difficult or impossible to determine whether a principle of behavior was genetically determined or learned in that context; see G. Bateson, “Social Planning and the Concept of Deutero-Learning,” Conference on Science, Philosophy and Religion, Second Symposium, New York, Harper, 1942.

70. See Bill’s Story, Alcoholics Anonymous, op. cit.

71. G. Bateson, Naven, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1936.

72. Ibid.

73. G. Bateson, “The Pattern of an Armaments Race—Part I: An Anthropological Approach,” Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, 1946, 2(5): 10–11: also L. F. Richardson, “Generalized Foreign Politics,” British Journal of Psychology, Monograph Supplements, 1939.

74. E. H. Erikson, “Configurations in Play—Clinical Notes,” Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 1937, 6: 139–214.

75. K. Z. Lorenz, On Aggression, New York, Harcourt, Brace & World, 1966.

76. G. Bateson, “Metalogue: What Is an Instinct?,” Approaches to Animal Communication, T, Sebeok, ed., The Hague, Mouton, 1969.

77. B. O’Brien, Operators and Things: The Inner Life of a Schizophrenic, Cambridge, Mass., Arlington Books, 1958.

78. G. Bateson, ed., Perceval’s Narrative, Stanford, Calif., Stanford University Press, 1961, Introduction.

79. Personal communication from a member.

80. Alcoholics Anonymous, op. cit., p. 43.

81. G, Bateson, et al., “Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia,” Behavioral Science, 1956, 1: 251–64.

82. AA Comes of Age, op. cit., p. vii.

83. Ibid., p. 13. (Italics in the original)

84. This diversity in styles of integration could account for the fact that some persons become alcoholic while others do not.

85. AA Comes of Age, op. cit.

86. Ibid., p. 288.

87. Ibid., pp. 286–94.

88. Ibid.

89. M. C. Bateson, ed., Our Own Metaphor, Wenner-Gren Foundation, Conference on the Effects of Conscious Purpose on Human Adaptation, 1968; New York, Knopf, in press.

90. This was not originally an AA document and its authorship is unknown. Small variations in the text occur. I have quoted the form which I personally prefer from AA Comes of Age, op. cit., p. 196.

91. Bateson, Perceval…, op. cit.





