A Re-examination of “Bateson’s Rule”


This essay has been accepted for publication in the Journal of Genetics, and is here reproduced with the permission of that journal.





Introduction


Nearly eighty years ago, my father, William Bateson, became fascinated by the phenomena of symmetry and metameric regularity as exhibited in the morphology of animals and plants. It is difficult today to define precisely what he was after, but, broadly, it is clear that he believed that an entirely new concept of the nature of living things would develop from the study of such phenomena. He held, no doubt correctly, that natural selection could not be the only determinant of the direction of evolutionary change and that the genesis of variation could not be a random matter. He therefore set out to demonstrate regularity and “lawfulness” among the phenomena of variability.



In his attempt to demonstrate a sort of order which the biologists of his day had largely ignored, he was guided by the notion, never clearly formulated, that the place to look for regularity in variation would be precisely where variation had its impact upon what was already regular and repetitive. The phenomena of symmetry and metamerism, themselves strikingly regular, must surely have been brought about by regularities or “laws” within the evolutionary process and, therefore, the variations of symmetry and metamerism should precisely exemplify these laws at work.

In the language of today, we might say that he was groping for those orderly characteristics of living things which illustrate the fact that organisms evolve and develop within cybernetic, organizational, and other communicational limitations.

It was for this study that he coined the word “genetics.”14

He set out to examine the material in the world’s museums, private collections, and journals bearing upon the teratology of animal symmetry and metamerism. The details of this survey were published in a large book15 which is still of considerable interest.

To demonstrate regularity within the field of teratological variation, he attempted a classification of the various sorts of modification that he encountered. With this classification I am not here concerned, except that in the survey he happened upon a generalization which can be called a “discovery.” This discovery came to be called “Bateson’s Rule” and remains one of the unexplained mysteries of biology.

The purpose of the present note is to place Bateson’s Rule in a new theoretical perspective determined by cybernetics, information theory, and the like.

Briefly, Bateson’s Rule asserts in its simplest form that when an asymmetrical lateral appendage (e.g., a right hand) is reduplicated, the resulting reduplicated limb will be bilaterally symmetrical, consisting of two parts each a mirror image of the other and so placed that a plane of symmetry could be imagined between them.

He himself was, however, very doubtful whether such simple reduplication ever occurs. He believed and accumulated evidence to show that, in a very large proportion of such cases, one component of the reduplicated system was itself double. He asserted that in such systems the three components are normally in one plane; that the two components of the doublet are mirror images of each other; and that that component of the doublet which is the nearer to the primary appendage is a mirror image of the primary.

This generalization was shown by my father to hold for a very large number of examples of reduplication in the vertebrates and in arthropods, and for a few cases in other phyla where the museum material was, of course, more scarce.

Ross Harrison16 believed that Bateson underestimated the importance of simple reduplication.

Whether or not simple reduplication is a real and common phenomenon, I shall begin this essay with a discussion of the logical problems which it would present.



The Problem Redefined


In 1894, it appeared that the problem centered around the question: What causes the development of bilateral symmetry in a context where it does not belong?



But modern theory has turned all such questions upside down. Information, in the technical sense, is that which excludes certain alternatives. The machine with a governor does not elect the steady state; it prevents itself from staying in any alternative state; and in all such cybernetic systems, corrective action is brought about by difference. In the jargon of the engineers, the system is “error activated.” The difference between some present state and some “preferred” state activates the corrective response.

The technical term “information” may be succinctly defined as any difference which makes a difference in some later event. This definition is fundamental for all analysis of cybernetic systems and organization. The definition links such analysis to the rest of science, where the causes of events are commonly not differences but forces, impacts, and the like. The link is classically exemplified by the heat engine, where available energy (i.e., negative entropy) is a function of a difference between two temperatures. In this classical instance, “information” and “negative entropy” overlap.

Moreover, the energy relations of such cybernetic systems are commonly inverted. Because organisms are able to store energy, it is usual that the energy expenditure is, for limited periods of time, an inverse function of energy input. The amoeba is more active when it lacks food, and the stem of a green plant grows faster on that side which is turned away from the light.

Let us therefore invert the question about the symmetry of the total reduplicated appendage: Why is this double appendage not asymmetrical like the corresponding appendages of normal organisms?

To this question a formal and general (but not particular) answer can be constructed on the following lines:

(1) An unfertilized frog’s egg is radially symmetrical, with animal and vegetal poles but no differentiation of its equatorial radii. Such an egg develops into a bilaterally symmetrical embryo, but how does it select one meridian to be the plane of bilateral symmetry of that embryo? The answer is known—that, in fact, the frog’s egg receives information from the outside. The point of entry of the spermatozoon (or the prick of a fine fiber) marks one meridian as different from all others, and that meridian is the future plane of bilateral symmetry.

Converse cases can also be cited. Plants of many families bear bilaterally symmetrical flowers. Such flowers are all clearly derived from triadic radial symmetry (as in orchids) or from pentadic symmetry (as in Labiatae, Leguminosae, etc.); and the bilateral symmetry is achieved by the differentiation of one axis (e.g., the “standard” of the familiar sweet pea) of this radial symmetry. We again ask how it is possible to select one of the similar three (or five) axes. And again we find that each flower receives information from the outside. Such bilaterally symmetrical flowers can only be produced on branch stems, and the differentiation of the flower is always oriented to the manner in which the flower-bearing branch stem comes off from the main stem. Very occasionally a plant which normally bears bilaterally symmetrical flowers will form a flower at the terminus of a main stem. Such a flower is necessarily only radial in its symmetry—a cup-shaped monstrosity. (The problem of bilaterally asymmetrical flowers, e.g., in the Catasetum group of orchids, is interesting. Presumably these must be borne, like the lateral appendages of animals, upon branches from main stems which are themselves already bilaterally symmetrical, e.g., dorso-ventrally flattened.)

(2) We note then that, in biological systems, the step from radial symmetry to bilateral symmetry commonly requires a piece of information from the outside. It is, however, conceivable that some divergent process might be touched off by minute and randomly distributed differences, e.g., among the radii of the frog’s egg. In this case, of course, the selection of a particular meridian for special development would itself be random and could not be oriented to other parts of the organism as is the plane of bilateral symmetry in sweet peas and labiate flowers.

(3) Similar considerations apply to the step from bilateral symmetry to asymmetry. Again either the asymmetry (the differentiation of one half from the other) must be achieved by a random process or it must be achieved by information received from the outside, i.e., from neighboring tissues and organs. Every lateral appendage of a vertebrate or arthropod is more or less asymmetrical17 and the asymmetry is never set randomly in relation to the rest of the animal. Right limbs are not borne upon the left side of the body, except under experimental circumstances. Therefore the asymmetry must depend upon the outside information, presumably derived from the neighboring tissues.

(4) But if the step from bilateral symmetry to asymmetry requires additional information, then it follows that in absence of this additional information, the appendage which should have been asymmetrical can only be bilaterally symmetrical.

The problem of the bilateral symmetry of reduplicated limbs thus becomes simply a problem of the loss of a piece of information. This follows from the general logical rule that every reduction in symmetry (from radial to bilateral or from bilateral to asymmetrical) requires additional information.

It is not claimed that the above argument is an explanation of all the phenomena which illustrate Bateson’s Rule. Indeed, the argument is offered only to show that there are simple ways of thinking about these phenomena which have scarcely been explored. What is proposed is a family of hypotheses rather than a single one. A critical examination of what has been said above as if it were a single hypothesis will, however, provide a further illustration of the method.

In any given case of reduplication, it will be necessary to decide what particular piece of information has been lost, and the argument so far given should make this decision easy. A natural first guess would be that the developing appendage needs three sorts of orienting information to enable it to achieve asymmetry: proximo-distal information; dorso-ventral information; and antero-posterior information. The simplest hypothesis suggests that these might be separately received and therefore that one of these sorts of information will be lost or absent in any given case of reduplication. It should then be easy to classify cases of reduplication according to which piece of orienting information is missing. There should be at most three such types of reduplication, and these should be clearly distinct.



Supernumerary Double Legs in Coleoptera


But in the only set of cases where this deduction can be tested, facts clearly do not fit the hypothesis. The cases are those of supernumerary pairs of appendages in beetles. About a hundred such cases were known in 1894, and of these Bateson18 describes about half and figures thirteen.



The formal relations are remarkably uniform and leave no doubt that a single type of explanation should apply to the symmetry in all cases.



Fig. 1 Carabus scheidleri, No. 736. The normal right fore leg, R, bearing an extra pair of legs, SL and SR’, arising from the ventral surface of the coxa, C. Seen from in front. (The property of Dr. Kraatz.) From Bateson, W., Materials for the Study of Variation, London: Macmillan, 1894, p 483.

Fig. 2 Pterostichus mühlfeldii, No. 742. Semidiagrammatic representation of the left middle tibia bearing the extra tarsi upon the antero-ventral border of the apex. L, the normal tarsus; R, the extra right; L’ the extra left tarsus. (The property of Dr. Kraatz.) From Bateson, W., Materials for the Study of Variation, London: Macmillan, 1894, p 485.

Fig. 3 & 4. Symmetry of a doublet occurring in the dorsal region (Left). Symmetry of a doublet occurring in the dorso-anterior region (Right).

Fig. 5 A mechanical device for showing the relations that extra legs in Secondary Symmetry bear to each other and to the normal leg from which they arise. The model R represents a normal right leg. SL and SR represent respectively the extra right and extra left legs of the supernumerary pair. A and P, the anterior and posterior spurs of the tibia. In each leg the morphologically anterior surface is shaded, the posterior being white. R is seen from the ventral aspect and SL and SR are in Position VP. From Bateson, W., Materials for the Study of Variation, London: Macmillan, 1894, p. 480. Typically19 one leg (rarely more than one) of a beetle is abnormal in bearing a branch at some point in its length, This branch is regularly a doublet, consisting of two parts which may be fused at the point of branching off from the primary leg but which are commonly separate at their distal ends.



Distally from the point of branching there are thus three components—a primary leg and two supernumerary legs. These three lie in one plane and have the following symmetry: the two components of the supernumerary doublet are a complementary pair—one being a left and the other a right—as Bateson’s Rule would suggest. Of these two, the leg nearest to the primary leg is complementary to it.

These relations are represented in Figure 3. Each component is shown in diagrammatic cross section, and their dorsal, ventral, anterior, and posterior faces are indicated by the letters D, V, A, and P, respectively.

What is surprising about these abnormalities—in that it conflicts with the hypothesis offered above—is that there is no clear discontinuity by which the cases can be classified according to which sort of orienting information has been lost. The supernumerary doublet may be borne on any part of the circumference of the primary leg.

Figure 3 illustrates the symmetry of a doublet occurring in the dorsal region. Figure 4 illustrates the symmetry of a doublet in the dorso-anterior region.

It appears, then, that the planes of symmetry are parallel to a tangent of the circumference of the primary leg at the point of branching but, since the points of branching may be anywhere on the circumference, a continuous series of possible bilateral symmetries is generated.

Figure 5 is a machine invented by W. Bateson to demonstrate this continuous series of possible bilateral symmetries.

If the bilateral symmetry of the doublet is due to a loss of orienting information, we should expect the plane of that bilateral symmetry to be at right angles to the direction of the lost information; i.e., if dorso-ventral information were lost, the resulting limbs or doublet should contain a plane of symmetry which would be at right angles to the dorso-ventral line.

(The argument for this expectation may be spelled out as follows: a gradient in a lineal sequence creates a difference between the two ends of the sequence. If this gradient is not present, then the ends of the sequence will be similar, i.e., the sequence will be symmetrical about a plane of symmetry transverse to itself. Or, consider the case of the frog’s egg. The two poles and the point of entry of the spermatozoon determine a plane of bilateral symmetry. To achieve asymmetry, the egg requires information at right angles to this plane, i.e., something which will make the right half different from the left. If this something is lost, then the egg will revert to the original bilateral symmetry, with the original plane of symmetry transverse to the direction of the lost information.)

As noted above, the supernumerary doublets may originate from any face of the primary leg, and therefore all intermediates occur between the expectedly discontinuous types of loss of information. It follows that if bilateral symmetry in these doublets is due to loss of information, then the information lost cannot be classified as antero-posterior, dorso-ventral, or proximo-distal.

The hypothesis must therefore be corrected.

Let us retain the general notion of lost information, and the corollary of this that the plane of bilateral symmetry must be at right angles to the direction of the information that was lost.

The next simplest hypothesis suggests that the lost information must have been centro-peripheral. (I here retain this bipolar term rather than use the simpler “radial.”)

Let us imagine, then, some centro-peripheral difference—possibly a chemical or electrical gradient—within the cross section of the primary leg; and suppose that the loss or blurring of this difference at some point along the length of the primary leg determines that any branch limb produced at this point shall fail to achieve asymmetry.

It will follow, naturally, that such a branch limb (if produced) will be bilaterally symmetrical and that its plane of bilateral symmetry will be at right angles to the direction of the lost gradient or difference.

But, clearly, a centro-peripheral difference or gradient is not a primary component of that information system which determined the asymmetry of the primary leg. Such a gradient might, however, inhibit branching, so that its loss or blurring would result in production of a supernumerary branch at the point of loss.

The matter becomes superficially paradoxical: the loss of a gradient which might inhibit branching results in branch formation, such that the branch cannot achieve asymmetry. It appears, then, that the hypothetical centro-peripheral gradient or difference may have two sorts of command functions: (a) to inhibit branching; and (b) to determine an asymmetry in that branch which can only come into existence at all if the centro-peripheral gradient is absent. If these two sorts of message functions can be shown to overlap or be in some sense synonymous, we shall have generated an economical hypothetical description of the phenomena.

We therefore address ourselves to the question: Is there an a priori case for expecting that the absence of a gradient which would prohibit branching in the primary leg will permit the formation of a branch which will lack the information necessary to determine asymmetry across a plane at right angles to the missing gradient?

The question must be inverted to fit the upside-downness of all cybernetic explanation. The concept “information necessary to determine asymmetry” then becomes “information necessary to prohibit bilateral symmetry.”

But anything which “prohibits bilateral symmetry” will also “prohibit branching,” since the two components of a branching structure constitute a symmetrical pair (even though the components may be radially symmetrical).

It therefore becomes reasonable to expect that loss or blurring of a centro-peripheral gradient which prohibits branch formation will permit the formation of a branch which will, however, itself be bilaterally symmetrical about a plane parallel to the circumference of the primary limb.

Meanwhile, within the primary limb, it is possible that a centro-peripheral gradient, by preventing branch formation, could have a function in preserving a previously determined asymmetry.

The above hypotheses provide a possible framework of explanation of the formation of the supernumerary doublet and the bilateral symmetry within it. It remains to consider the orientation of the components of that doublet. According to Bateson’s Rule, the component nearest to the primary leg is in bilateral symmetry with it. In other words, that face of the supernumerary which is toward the primary is the morphological counterpart of that face of the periphery of the primary from which the branch sprang.

The simplest, and perhaps obvious, explanation of this regularity is that in the process of branching there was a sharing of morphologically differentiated structures between branch and primary and that these shared structures are, in fact, the carriers of the necessary information. However, since information carried this way will clearly have properties very different from those of information carried by gradients, it is appropriate to spell the matter out in some detail.

Consider a radially symmetrical cone with circular base. Such a figure is differentiated in the axial dimension, as between apex and base. All that is necessary to make the cone fully asymmetrical is to differentiate on the circumference of the base two points which shall be different from each other and shall not be in diametrically opposite positions, i.e., the base must contain such differentiation that to name its parts in clockwise order gives a result different from the result of naming the parts in anticlockwise order.

Assume now that the supernumerary branch, by its very origin as a unit growing out from a matrix, has proximo-distal differentiation, and that this differentiation is analogous to the differentiation in the axial dimension of the cone. To achieve complete asymmetry, it is then only necessary that the developing limb receive directional information in some arc of its circumference. Such information is clearly immediately available from the circumstance that, at the point of branching, the secondary limb must share some circumference with the primary. But the shared points which are in clockwise order on the periphery of the primary will be in anticlockwise order on the periphery of the branch. The information from the shared arc will therefore be such as to determine both that the resulting limb will be a mirror image of the primary and that the branch will face appropriately toward the primary.

It is now possible to construct a hypothetical sequence of events for the reduplications in the legs of beetles:

(1) A primary leg develops asymmetry, deriving the necessary information from surrounding tissues.

(2) This information, after it has had its effect, continues to exist, transformed into morphological differentiation.

(3) The asymmetry of the normal primary leg is henceforth maintained by a centro-peripheral gradient which normally prevents branching.

(4) In the abnormal specimens, this centro-peripheral gradient is lost or blurred—possibly at some point of lesion or trauma.

(5) Following the loss of the centro-peripheral gradient, branching occurs.

(6) The resulting branch is a doublet; lacking the gradient information which would have determined asymmetry, it must therefore be bilaterally symmetrical.

(7) That component of the doublet which is next to the primary is oriented to be a mirror image of the primary by the sharing of differentiated peripheral structures.

(8) Similarly each component of the doublet is itself asymmetrical, deriving the necessary information from the morphology of shared peripheries in the plane of the doublet.

The above speculations are intended to illustrate how the explanatory principle of loss of information might be applied to some of the regularities subsumed under Bateson’s Rule. But it will be noted that the data on symmetry in the legs of beetles have, in fact, been overexplained.

Two distinct—but not mutually exclusive—types of explanation have been invoked: (a) the loss of information which should have been derived from a centro-peripheral gradient, and (b) information derived from shared peripheral morphology.

Neither of these types of explanation is sufficient by itself to explain the phenomena, but when combined the two principles overlap so that some details of the total picture can be referred simultaneously to both principles.

Such redundancy is, no doubt, the rule rather than the exception in biological systems, as it is in all other systems of organization, differentiation, and communication. In all such systems, redundancy is a major and necessary source of stability, predictability, and integration.

Redundancy within the system will inevitably appear as overlapping between our explanations of the system. Indeed, without overlapping, our explanations will commonly be insufficient, failing to explain the facts of biological integration.

We know little about how the pathways of evolutionary change are influenced by such morphogenetic and physiological redundancies. But certainly such internal redundancies must impose nonrandom characteristics upon the phenomena of variation.20



Reduplicated Limbs in Amphibia


At this point it is interesting to turn from analysis of reduplication in beetles’ legs to another body of data in which reduplication commonly occurs and has been referred to Bateson’s Rule.21 These are the data on reduplication in the experimentally transplanted limbs of larval newts.



(1) There are some cases, mostly of heterotopic transplants in which the grafted limb bud develops into a simple and apparently equal binary system, in which the two components are in mirror image symmetry. I was shown about three years ago a very striking preparation by Dr. Emerson Hibbard of the California Institute of Technology. In this specimen the limb bud had been rotated through 180°, so that the anterior edge of the bud faced toward the posterior end of the host, and had been implanted in a median dorsal position on the posterior region of the head of the host. This transplant had developed into two remarkably complete legs in mirror image relationship. This binary system was connected to the head of the host only by a slender bridge of tissue.

Such preparations, where the product is binary and the parts equal, certainly look like what would be expected from a simple loss of one dimension of orienting information. (It was Dr. Hibbard’s specimen that suggested to me that the hypothesis of lost information might be applicable to the amphibian material.)

(2) However, apart from these instances of equal binary reduplication, the amphibian material does not at all fit with any hypothesis that would explain the reduplication as due to a simple loss of information. Indeed, if Bateson’s Rule were restricted to cases where the explanation is formally analogous to that which fits the reduplication in the beetles’ legs, then the amphibian cases would probably not fall under this rubric.

The limitations of a hypothesis are, however, as important as its applications, and I shall therefore summarize here the very complex data on orthotopic transplants.

One schematic paradigm will suffice: if the right anterior limb bud is excised, turned through 180° and replaced in the wound, it will grow to be a left limb. But this primary limb may subsequently form secondary limb buds at its base, usually either immediately anterior or posterior to the point of insertion. The secondary will be a mirror image of the primary, and may even later develop a tertiary which will typically be formed outside the secondary, i.e., on that side of the secondary which is farthest from the primary.

The formation of the left primary on the right side of the body is explained22 by assuming that antero-posterior orientation is received by the limb bud earlier than dorso-ventral information, and that, once received, this antero-posterior information is irreversible. It is supposed that the graft is already antero-posteriorly determined at the time of grafting but later receives dorso-ventral information from the tissues with which it is now in contact. The result is a limb whose dorso-ventral orientation is correct for its new setting but whose antero-posterior orientation is reversed. It is tacitly assumed that the proximo-distal orientation of the bud is undisturbed. The result is a limb which is reversed in regard to one of its three sorts of asymmetry. Such a limb must logically be a left.

This explanation I accept and proceed to consider the reduplications.

These differ in four important respects from the reduplications in beetles’ legs discussed above:

(a) In the beetles, the reduplication is usually equal. The two halves of the supernumerary doublet are equal in size, and are usually approximately equal in size to the corresponding parts of the primary leg. Such differences as do appear among the three components are such as might expectably result from trophic differences. But in the larval newts, great differences in size occur between the components of the reduplicated system, and it appears that these differences are determined by time. The secondaries are smaller than the primaries because they are produced later and, similarly, the rare tertiaries are later and smaller than the secondaries. This spacing of events in time indicates clearly that the primary limb received all the information necessary to determine its own asymmetry. It received, indeed, “wrong” information and grew to be a left leg on the right side of the body but it did not suffer from such a deficiency of information as would make it immediately fail to achieve asymmetry. The reduplication cannot simply be ascribed to loss of orienting information in the primary.

(b) The reduplications in beetles’ legs may occur at any point along the length of the leg. But those of amphibian larvae usually arise from the region of attachment of the limb to the body. It is not even sure that the secondary always shares tissue with the primary.

(c) In the case of the beetles, the supernumerary doublets form a continuous series, being given off from any portion of the periphery of the primary. In contrast, the reduplication of limbs in amphibian larvae is localized either anterior or posterior to the primary.

(d) In the beetles it is clear that the two supernumerary components form together a single unit. In many cases there is actual compounding of the two components (as in Figure 1). In no case23 is that component of the doublet which is nearer to the primary compounded with it rather than with the other supernumerary. In the amphibian preparations, on the other hand, it is not clear that secondary and tertiary form a subunit. The relation between tertiary and secondary seems no closer than between secondary and primary. Above all, the relation is asymmetric in the time dimension.

These profound formal differences between the two bodies of data indicate that the explanations for the amphibian data must be of a different order. It would seem that the processes are located not in the shaft of the limb but in its base and the tissues surrounding the base. Tentatively we may guess that the primary in some way proposes the later formation of a secondary by a reversal of gradient information, and that the secondary similarly proposes a reversed tertiary. Models for such systems are available in cybernetic theory in those circuit structures which propose Russellian paradoxes.24 To attempt to construct any such model at the present time would be premature.



Summary


This essay on the symmetry of reduplicated lateral appendages starts from an explanatory principle, viz., that any step of ontogenetic differentiation which reduces the symmetry of an organ (e.g., from radial to bilateral symmetry, or from bilateral symmetry to asymmetry) requires additional orienting information. From this principle it is argued that a normally asymmetrical lateral appendage, lacking some necessary piece of orienting information, will only be able to achieve bilateral symmetry, i.e., instead of a normal asymmetrical appendage, the result will be a bilaterally symmetrical doublet.



To examine this explanatory principle, the writer has attempted to construct a hypothesis to explain Bateson’s Rule as this regularity is exemplified in the rare supernumerary double legs of Coleoptera. In the construction of this hypothesis, it was assumed that morphogenetic orienting information may undergo transformation from one type of coding to another, and that each transform or code is subject to characteristic limitations:

(a) The information may be embodied in gradients (perhaps biochemical). In this coding, the information can be diffused from neighboring tissues and provide the first determinants of asymmetry in the developing appendage. It is suggested that information coded in this way is only briefly available, and that once the asymmetry of the limb is established, the information continues to exist, but transformed into morphology.

(b) It is suggested that information coded as morphological difference is essentially static. It cannot be diffused to neighboring tissues and it cannot inhibit branching. It can, however, be used by a branch which at its inception shares tissue with the primary limb from which it branches off. In this case, the information passed on by the method of shared periphery will be necessarily inverted: if the primary be a right, the branch will be a left.

(c) The information in morphological form being (by hypothesis) unable to inhibit branching, the asymmetry of a growing primary must be preserved by a centro-peripheral gradient—not itself a determinant of that asymmetry.

(d) It is suggested that the loss of such a centro-peripheral gradient might have two effects: that of permitting branching and that of depriving the resulting branch of one dimension of necessary orienting information; so that the branch can only be a bilaterally symmetrical unit with a plane of symmetry at right angles to the lost centro-peripheral gradient.

The data on reduplication in the experimentally transplanted limb buds of amphibia are also examined. It is argued that these data are not to be explained by simple loss of orienting information. Simple loss, it is suggested, will expectably result in equal and synchronous bilateral symmetry. The amphibian reduplicates are, in general, unequal and successive. In a few cases, synchronous and equal reduplication occurs in the amphibian experiments, especially in heterotopic implants. Such cases could perhaps be regarded as due to simple loss of orienting information.



Postscript, 1971


Compare the bilateral symmetry in the supernumerary doublet of the beetle’s leg with the bilateral symmetry in the sweet pea or orchid flower. Both in the plant and in the animal, the bilaterally symmetrical unit comes off from a point of branching.



In the plant, the morphology of the fork provides information enabling the flower to be not radially but bilaterally symmetrical, i.e., information which will differentiate the “dorsal” standard from the ventral lip of the flower.

In the doublet on the beetle’s leg, the plane of bilateral symmetry is orthogonal to that in the flower.

We might say that the information which the beetle’s leg has lost is precisely that information which the plant creates by the act of branching.





