Comment on Part IV


The papers placed together in this part are diverse in that while each paper is a branch from the main stem of the argument of the book, these branches come off from very different locations. “The Role of Somatic Change in Evolution” is an expansion of the thought behind “Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia,” while “Problems in Cetacean and Other Mammalian Communication” is an application of “The Logical Categories of Learning and Communication” to a particular type of animal.



“A Re-examination of Bateson’s Rule” may seem to break new ground, but is related to the remainder of the book in that it extends the notion of informational control to include the field of morphogenesis and, by discussing what happens in absence of needed information, brings out the importance of the context into which information is received.

Samuel Butler, with uncanny insight, once commented upon the analogy between dreams and parthenogenesis. We may say that the monstrous double legs of the beetles share in this analogy: they are the projection of the receptive context deprived of information which should have come from an external source.

Message material, or information, comes out of a context into a context, and in other parts of the book the focus has been on the context out of which information came. Here the focus is rather upon the internal state of the organism as a context into which the information must be received.

Of course, neither focus is sufficient by itself for our understanding of either animals or men. But it is perhaps not an accident that in these papers dealing with non-human organisms the “context” which is discussed is the obverse or complement of the “context” upon which I have focused attention in other parts of the book.

Consider the case of the unfertilized frog’s egg for which the entry point of the spermatozoon defines the plane of bilateral symmetry of the future embryo.

The prick of a hair from a camel’s hair brush can be substituted and still carry the same message. From this it seems that the external context out of which the message comes is relatively undefined. From the entry point alone, the egg learns but little about the external world. But the internal context into which the message comes must be exceedingly complex.

The unfertilized egg, then, embodies an immanent question to which the entry point of spermatozoon provides an answer; and this way of stating the matter is the contrary or obverse of the conventional view, which would see the external context of learning as a “question” to which the “right” behavior of the organism is an answer.

We can even begin to list some of the components of the immanent question. First there are the already existing poles of the egg and, necessarily, some polarization of the intervening protoplasm towards these poles. Without some such structural conditions for the receipt of the prick of the spermatozoon, this message could have no meaning. The message must come into an appropriate structure.

But structure alone is not enough. It seems probable that any meridian of the frog’s egg can potentially become the plane of bilateral symmetry and that, in this, all meridians are alike. It follows that there is, to this extent, no structural difference between them. But every meridian must be ready for the activating message, its “readiness” being given direction but otherwise unrestricted by structure. Readiness, in fact, is precisely not-structure. If and when the spermatozoon delivers its message, new structure is generated.

In terms of the economics of flexibility, discussed in “The Role of Somatic Change in Evolution” and later in “Ecology and Flexibility in Urban Civilization” (Part VI), this “readiness” is uncommitted potentiality for change, and we note here that this uncommitted potentiality is not only always finite in quantity but must be appropriately located in a structural matrix, which also must be quantitatively finite at any given time.

These considerations lead naturally into Part V, which I have titled “Epistemology and Ecology.” Perhaps “epistemology” is only another word for the study of the ecology of mind.




* * *



1. See “California’s Anti-Evolution Ruling,” BioScience, March 1, 1970.

2. The problems of bacterial genetics are here deliberately excluded.

3. G. Bateson, “Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia,” A.M.A. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1960, 2: 447.

4. W. R. Ashby, “The Effect of Controls on Stability,” Nature, 1945, 155: 242; also Ashby, Design for a Brain, New York, John Wiley & Co., 1952.

5. J. M. Baldwin, “Organic Selection,” Science, 1897, 5: 634.

6. N. W. Simmonds, “Variability in Crop Plants, Its Use and Conservation,” Biol. Review, 1962, 37: 422–62.

7. I. M. Lerner, Genetic Homeostasis, Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd, 1954.

8. C. H. Waddington, “Genetic Assimilation of an Acquired Character,” Evolution, 1953, 7: 118; also Waddington, The Strategy of Genes, London, Allen and Unwin, 1957.

9. C. L. Prosser, “Physiological Variation in Animals,” Biol. Review, 1955, 30: 22–262.

10. J. Ruesch and G. Bateson, Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry, New York, Norton, 1951.

11. A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia Mathematica, London, Cambridge University Press, 1910.

12. The difference between digital and analogic modes of communication may perhaps be made clear by thinking of an English-speaking mathematician confronted with a paper by a Japanese colleague. He gazes uncomprehendingly at the Japanese ideographs, but he is able partly to understand the Cartesian graphs in the Japanese publication. The ideographs, though they may originally have been analogic pictures, are now purely digital; the Cartesian graphs are analogic.

13. Whitehead and Russell, op. cit.

14. W. Bateson, “The Progress of Genetic Research,” Inaugural Address, Royal Horticultural Society Report, 1906.

15. W. Bateson, Materials for the Study of Variation, London, Macmillan and Co., 1894,

16. R. G. Harrison, “On Relations of Symmetry in Transplanted Limbs,” Journal of Experimental Zoology, 1921, 32: 1–118.

17. In this connection, scales and feathers and hairs are of special interest. A feather would seem to have a very clear bilateral symmetry in which the plane of symmetry is related to the antero-posterior differentiation of the bird. Superposed on this is an asymmetry like that of the individual bilateral limbs. As in the case of lateral limbs, corresponding feathers on opposite sides of the body are mirror images of each other. Every feather is, as it were, a flag whose shape and coloring denote the values of determining variables at the point and time of its growth.

18. W. Bateson, Materials…, op. cit., pp. 477–503.

19. See Figures 1 and 2.

20. G. Bateson, “The Role of Somatic Change in Evolution,” Evolution, 1962, 17: 529–39.

21. Harrison, op. cit.; also F. H. Swett, “On The Production of Double Limbs in Amphibians,” Journal of Experimental Zoology, 1926, 44: 419–72.

22. Swett, op. cit.; also Harrison, op. cit.

23. Bateson (Materials…, op. cit, p. 507) describes and figures one doubtful exception to this statement. This is a reduplication in the left hind tarsus of Platycerus caraboides.

24. G, Bateson, “Minimal Requirements for a Theory of Schizophrenia,” A.M.A. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1960, 2: 477–91.





