Comment on Part V


In the final essay of this part, “Form, Substance and Difference,” much of what has been said in earlier parts of the book falls into place. In sum, what has been said amounts to this: that in addition to (and always in conformity with) the familiar physical determinism which characterises our universe, there is a mental determinism. This mental determinism is in no sense supernatural. Rather it is of the very nature of the macroscopic10 world that it exhibit mental characteristics. The mental determinism is not transcendent but immanent and is especially complex and evident in those sections of the universe which are alive or which include living things.



But so much of occidental thinking is shaped on the premise of transcendent deity that it is difficult for many people to rethink their theories in terms of immanence. Even Darwin from time to time wrote about Natural Selection in phrases which almost ascribed to this process the characteristics of transcendence and purpose.

It may be worthwhile, therefore, to give an extreme sketch of the difference between the belief in transcendence and that in immanence.

Transcendent mind or deity is imagined to be personal and omniscient, and as receiving information by channels separate from the earthly. He sees a species acting in ways which must disrupt its ecology and, either in sorrow or in anger, He sends the wars, the plagues, the pollution, and the fallout.

Immanent mind would achieve the same final result but without either sorrow or anger. Immanent mind has no separate and unearthly channels by which to know or act and, therefore, can have no separate emotion or evaluative comment. The immanent will differ from the transcendent in greater determinism.

St. Paul (Galatians VI) said that “God is not mocked,” and immanent mind similarly is neither vengeful nor forgiving. It is of no use to make excuses; the immanent mind is not “mocked.”

But since our minds—and this includes our tools and actions—are only parts of the larger mind, its computations can be confused by our contradictions and confusions. Since it contains our insanity, the immanent mind is inevitably subject to possible insanity. It is in our power, with our technology, to create insanity in the larger system of which we are parts.

In the final section of the book, I shall consider some of these mentally pathogenic processes.




* * *



1. F. Attneave, Applications of Information Theory to Psychology, New York, Henry Holt and Co., 1959.

2. J. E. Randall and H. S. Randall, “Examples of Mimicry and Protective Resemblance in Tropical Marine Fishes,” Bulletin of Marine Science of the Gulf and Caribbean, 1960, 10: 444–80.

3. G. Bateson, “The Role of Somatic Change in Evolution,” Evolution, 1963, 17: 529–39.

4. O. Fenichel, Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis, New York, Norton, 1945.

5. R. G. Collingwood has given a clear account of the Pythagorean position in The Idea of Nature, Oxford, 1945.

6. It is interesting to note that digital computers depend upon transmission of energy “from behind” to send “news” along wire from one relay to the next. But each relay has its own energy source. Analogic computers, e.g., tide machines and the like, are commonly entirely driven by energy “from behind.” Either type of energization can be used for computational purposes.

7. Or we may spell the matter out and say that at every step, as a difference is transformed and propagated along its pathway, the embodiment of the difference before the step is a “territory” of which the embodiment after the step is a “map.” The map-territory relation obtains at every step.

8. Written in 1916, translated by H. G. Baynes and privately circulated in 1925. Republished by Stuart & Watkins, London, and by Random House, 1961. In later work, Jung seems to have lost the clarity of the Seven Sermons. In his “Answer to Job,” the archetypes are said to be “pleromatic.” It is surely true, however, that constellations of ideas may seem subjectively to resemble “forces” when their ideational character is unrecognized.

9. For the phrase “ecology of ideas,” I am indebted to Sir Geoffrey Vickers’ essay “The Ecology of Ideas” in Value Systems and Social Process, Basic Books, 1968. For a more formal discussion of the survival of ideas, see Gordon Pasks’ remarks in Wenner-Gren Conference on “Effects of Conscious Purpose on Human Adaptation,” 1968.

10. I do not agree with Samuel Butler, Whitehead, or Teilhard de Chardin that it follows from this mental character of the macroscopic world that the single atomies must have mental character or potentiality. I see the mental as a function only of complex relationship.





