6. On a New Class of Observations, suggested by the principles of Logic (1877)

[pdf page 150]
[page 106]

On a New Class of Observations, Suggested by the Principles of Logic

MS 1104. [First published, as MS 311, in W3:235-37.] Written in the summer of 1877, apparently for presentation, this brief paper recommends the observational study of sensations (as Peirce recommended for all sciences, even mathematics). Opposed to the "ordinary" view that "there are ultimate sensations without any general relations between them," Peirce argues that, although we can never completely capture in general descriptions the differences between different sensations, we can "make an indefinite progress toward such a result." But if that is unconvincing, Peirce goes on to say, perhaps we should try a phenomenological approach. Whether there are pure and completely determinate individual sensations is a question that can be dealt with by observational science; "here then," he concludes, "is a whole world of observation, to which we have been systematically blind, simply because of a wrong metaphysical prejudice."

It is usually admitted that there are two classes of mental representations, Immediate Representations or Sensations and Mediate Representations or Conceptions. The former are completely determinate or individual objects of thought; the latter are partially indeterminate or general objects. Granting that both these classes of objects exist, the question of the principle of Individuation or of the respect in which the individual differs from the general becomes one of extreme difficulty. Duns Scotus after a masterly criticism of all the attempts at answering it, puts forward the theory that the distinction is a peculiar one without any general character, and therefore itself presenting this peculiar aspect of individuality. Occam denies that any general objects of thought exist, which implies that no objects of thought have any resemblances, differences, or relations of any kind.1 I on the other hand have undertaken to show that just the reverse of this is the case. That

[pdf page 151]
[page 107]

no object is individual but that the things the most concrete have still a certain amount of indeterminacy. Take, Phillip of Macedon for example. This object is logically divisible into Phillip drunk and Phillip sober; and so on; and you do not get down to anything completely determinate till you specify an indivisible instant of time, which is an ideal limit not attained in thought or in re.

It follows from this doctrine that we have no pure sensations, but only sensational elements of thought. Thus, the difference between blue and red, since it contains a sensational element, cannot be fully represented by any general description. As the sensational element is in this case very large, the failure of any attempt to describe the difference between blue & red in general terms is very striking. But, according to my theory of logic, since no pure sensations or individual objects exist, it follows that there must be some relation between blue & red & some general respect in which they differ, & therefore a step can be made towards a general description of their difference and if that general description is unsatisfactory, as it must be, then another relation must exist between the two colors, & an addition based on it may be made to the general description, & so on ad infinitum.

Here, then, are two metaphysical theories; the ordinary one and mine. According to the former, there are ultimate sensations without any general relations between them; according to the latter, although the differences between different sensations can never be completely covered by a general description, yet we may make an indefinite progress toward such a result. Which is true? I have no need to make any special observations to determine that, any more than I would in a question of a Perpetual Motion. I rest upon general principles which are deduced by irrefragable reasoning, from facts so general as to be admitted by all the world. But, for those who cannot understand this reasoning, I point to some facts which are not far to seek.

Different sensations resemble one another. That is sufficiently patent, & there is already a relation between sensations which at once totally & irretrievably overthrows the ordinary theory. Different sensations also differ in intensity. There is another class of relations between them, irreconcileable with their individual character. But it is commonly said that of relations of kind between different elementary sensations there are none. What none? When our ordinary language classifies them according to their kinds into colors, sounds, tastes, smells, feelings? This is not commonly noticed, but it is commonly said (I mean by physicists) that there is no meaning in the comparison of the intensity of a red and green light. Here I have 74 pieces of different coloured ribbons each one numbered upon which I have made frequent photometric experiments extending over a period of 12 months.2 Now I say that a red and green can be compared in intensity with a considerable degree of accuracy. On another occasion, when the figures

[pdf page 152]
[page 108]

are relevant, I will give them. They are not so now, because you can all see that that red is darker than that blue & that that blue is darker than that red. There is an uncertainty in the judgment, a probable error. But that probable error is only another fact, another numerically determinate relation between the two sensations. So with a light & a sound. They can also be compared in intensity. Consider with equal attention the sound of a cannon or the appearance of a sixth magnitude star. Which is most intense? Can there be any doubt. Consider the light of the sun, & the sound of a falling pin. In the laws of these relations of intensity between different sensations there is an immense research, a branch of science. These are not the only relations between sensations but they are the most tangible and the natural starting point.

Here then is a whole world of observation, to which we have been systematically blind, simply because of a wrong metaphysical prejudice. One of the most accomplished men of science in the country went so far as to say to me the other day, that there was no reason to suppose that the sensations of color of one person had any resemblance to those of another! Violently as this flies in the face of the principles of inductive reasoning, I was not surprized to hear it said, because as Aristotle says εἴτε φιλοσοφητέον φιλοσοφητέον εἴτε μὴ φιλοσοφητέον φιλοσοφητέον, πάντως δὲ φιλοσοφητέον.3 Whether we have an antimetaphysical metaphysics or a pro-metaphysical metaphysics, a metaphysics we are sure to have. And the less pains we take with it the more crudely metaphysical it will be.
