20. Trichotomie (1888)

[pdf page 324]
[page 280]

Trichotomic MS 1600. [Previously unpublished.] Written (probably for oral presentation) in early i888yshortly after the completion of item 19, this three-page typescript (found in one of the thirteen boxes of MS 1600) is a sort of summary of some of the main points of “A Guess at the Riddle.” In addition, it includes a discussion of Peirce's categories applied to signs (a topic that had beenprojectedfor the unwritten second chapter of the “Guess”) and a comparison of his views, on the subject of dramatic expression and theprinciples of being, with those of the New York playwright and theater manager Steele MacKaye. The title of the paper is one of the alternatives Peirce had considered for his projected “One, Two, Three,” which then became “A Guess at the Riddle.” T R IC H O T O M IC is the art of making three-fold divisions. Such division depends on the conceptions of 1st, 2nd, 3rd. First is the begin ning, that which is fresh, original, spontaneous, free. Second is that which is determined, terminated, ended, correlative, object, neces sitated, reacting. Third is the medium, becoming, developing, bring ing about. A thing considered in itself is a unit. A thing considered as a correlate or dependent, or as an effect, is second to something else. A thing which in any way brings one thing into relation with another is a third or medium between the two. Firstness or freshness may have manifold varieties, or rather arbi trariness and variety is its essence, but it is absolute and unsusceptible of differences of degree. It may be present more or less, but it has no different orders of complication in itself. Secondness, on the other hand, may be genuine or degenerate. Degenerate secondness has two varieties, for a single object considered as second to itself is a degener ate second, and an object considered as second to another with which it has no real connection, so that were that other taken away it would still have those same characters which are implied in the relation, is also a degenerate second. Genuine secondness is dynamical connec tion; degenerate secondness is a relation of reason, as a mere resem

[pdf page 325]
[page 281]

blance. Thirdness has two different orders of degeneracy. Genuine thirdness is where of the three terms A, B, C, each is related to each of the others, but by a relation which only subsists by virtue of the third term, and each has a character which belongs to it only so long as the others really influence it. It would not be enough to say that the connection between the terms is dynamical, for forces only subsist between pairs of objects; we had better use the word “vital” to express the mode of connection, for wherever there is life, generation, growth, development, there and there alone is such genuine thirdness. Third ness of the first order of degeneracy is where two of the three terms are identical, so that the other only mediates between two aspects of the same object or where in some other way there is no vital connec tion between A, B, and C, but only a dynamical connection between A and B, and another between B and C, thus bringing about a dynami cal connection between A and C. The second order of degeneracy is where there is not even any dynamical connection between the terms, or at least where the thirdness does not consist in that [although it may be necessary for the establishment of the thirdness] but where all three terms are virtually identical or are connected by mere relations of reason. Expression is a kind of representation or signification. Asign is a third mediating between the mind addressed and the object repre sented. If the thirdness is undegenerate, the relation of the sign to the thing signified is one which only subsists by virtue of the relation of the sign to the mind addressed; that is to say, the sign is related to its object by virtue of a mental association. Conventional modes of expres sion, and other modes dependent on the force of association, enter largely into every art. They make up the bulk of language. If the thirdness is degenerate in the first degree, the sign mediates between the object and the mind by virtue of dynamical connections with the object on the one hand and with the mind on the other. This is the only kind of sign which can demonstrate the reality of things, or distinguish between things exactly alike. As I am walking alone on a dark night, a man suddenly jumps out of a corner with a “Boh!” and thus brings his presence home to me in a particularly forcible manner. It would be impossible tofollow a geometrical proof without the letters which are attached to the different parts of the figure and thus forcibly direct the attention to the right object. So a desired frame of mind on the part of the audience is often brought about by the dramatist in a forcible way by directly affecting the nervous system, without appealing to association; or the attention of the audience may be awakened, as a clergyman shouts out the commencement of a new head to his sermon, or may be directed to a particular part of the stage, as the jugglers do. If the thirdness is degenerate in the second1 degree, the idea in the mind addressed, the object represented, and the representation of it,

[pdf page 326]
[page 282]

are only connected by a mutual resemblance. The sign is a likeness; and this is the main mode of representation in all art. Here there is no sharp discrimination between the sign and the thing signified, the mind floats in an ideal world and does not ask or care whether it be real or not. This character makes a striking point of difference between this kind of representation and the second; and that is why the use of the second mode of representation is so unartistic. Again, the third mode of representation is unanalytic, it presents the total object as it exists in the concrete, and not merely abstract relations and points in that object; and this constitutes a marked contrast from the first mode of representation; and this is what makes the first mode of representa tion unartistic. Mr. Mackaye divides dramatic expression into panto mime, voice, and language.2 A person would at first glance make the division into speech and gesture, and this would doubtless answer some purposes better. But with reference to the value of the different instruments at our command it is important to make a division which shall correspond as nearly as may be with the different kinds of repre sentation. Now language is in the main representation by the force of association; it involves the analysis of whatever is to be conveyed [on the part of the hearer as well as on the part of the author] and the separate expression of abstract points. Voice, on the other hand, awakes attention, directs it to particular channels, calls up feelings, and modifies consciousness generally, in a physiological way in the main; and is therefore a mode of expression of the second kind. Panto mime alone is mainly representation of the purely artistic kind, to be contemplated without analysis and without discrimination of the sign from the thing signified. Pantomime may itself be divided, on the same principle, into three varieties; artistic pantomime which merely exhib its the man, his general disposition and what there is uppermost in him at the moment, and is to be contemplated without analysis; dynamical pantomime, as where one points with finger or shakes or holds up the finger to impress what one is saying, or when one shakes the fist, or knocks the interlocutor down; and sign-language, mostly (owing to the peculiar nature of pantomime) of an imitative kind but yet involving analysis and being really rather language than pantomime proper. C O N SC IO U SN E SS has three elements, Single, Dual, and Plural consciousness. Single or simple consciousness is consciousness as it can exist in a single instant, the consciousness of all that is immediately present, for which all that is not immediately present is an absolute blank. This is the pure Feeling which forms the warp and woof of consciousness, or in Kant’s phrase its matter.3 In this kind of consciousness subject and object are nowise discriminated, in fact there is no discrimination, no parts, no analysis, there is no considering a thing for anything else, no relation, no representation, but just a pure inde scribable quale which is gone in the twinkling of an eye and which

[pdf page 327]
[page 283]

bears no resemblance to any memory of it. It is just the quality of the immediately present, which is continually pouring through us, always here but never stopping to be examined. It is always fresh, always new, sporting in unbounded manifoldness. Dual consciousness is a sense of another, not present, a sense of hitting and of getting hit, of action and reciprocal reaction, of energy. This is the most wide-awake kind of consciousness; it strenuously sets object over against subject, in place of the dreamy failure to recognize the situation which belongs to Feeling. Dual consciousness includes Will, but the consciousness of hitting and /that/ of being hit have been shown by conclusive experi ments not to differ, and Sense in its direct reference to an object is likewise consciousness of action and reaction. It is the energetic and real character of the dual consciousness that principally distinguishes it. It consists of a sense of “can” which is at the same time a sense of “cannot.” Force implies resistance, and power limitation. There is always an opposite, always a but, always a second, in the dual consciousness. It has nothing to do with may-be’s; it is always right there. Plural or synthetic consciousness, is not the mere feeling of what is immediately present, nor yet the mere sense of something without, but is the being aware of the bridge which unites the present and the absent, of a Process as such. Zeno showed how motion is impossible if you refuse to open the eyes of the synthetic consciousness. It is the perception of motion and change. I am soundly asleep and my bed clothes take fire. At first, the warmth merely tinges my consciousness, so to speak; that is pure Feeling; then I become energetically conscious of something and start up without knowing what it is; that is Dual consciousness, Sense with Will; last I begin to collect myself, I am aware of a process of learning, I put things together; that is Perception and Synthetic consciousness, which collects present and absent into a whole. Dual consciousness, because it is consciousness of a second, has two degrees, the dynamical and the statical or degenerate form. Dynamical dual consciousness consists of outward action and reaction, External Sense and Volition; statical dual consciousness consists of inward ac tion and reaction, Self-consciousness and Self-control. Plural consciousness because it is consciousness of a third, has two degrees of degeneracy. The genuine synthetic consciousness, the consciousness of that which has its being in its thirdness, is Reason. The dynamical variety is a consciousness of a coordination between acts of sense and will, it is the looking upon the phenomena of sense and will as rational, which we may call Desire, though that does not precisely define it. The statical variety is the comparison of feelings, and may be called esthetic understanding. Mr. Mackaye’s division of the principles of being has considerable resemblance with this. What he calls the vital or passional principle,

[pdf page 328]
[page 284]

which sustains life, seems to be nearly what I call the simple conscious ness of Feeling; what he calls the affectional or impulsive principle is my dual consciousness plus Desire and minus Sense; what he calls Reflection is probably Reason with the esthetic understanding.4 The functions of the Nervous System are three, corresponding to the three kinds of consciousness. They are, first, Irritability, for the capacity of a nerve-cell to be thrown into an excited condition is undoubtedly the physiological ground of feeling; second, the power of conveying nervous disturbance over the nerve-fibres, for it is by this property of the nerves that we are placed in relation with the outward world; and third, power of acquiring habits, which is the ground of our faculty of learning. The properties of protoplasm in general are three, first, its capacity of being thrown into a state in which it is more liquid and at the same time has a stronger cohesion and surface-tension; second, the tendency of this condition to spread throughout the entire mass; and third, its power, when passing into or out of this condition, of assimilating new material, provided this is presented so as to be subject to the same forces as that which is deranged,— in other words the power of growth with all that that implies.
