The Quantum of Explanation


The Quantum of Explanation advances a bold new theory of how explanation ought to be understood in philosophical and cosmological inquiries. Using a complete interpretation of Alfred North Whitehead’s philosophical and mathematical writings and an interpretive structure that is essentially new, Auxier and Herstein argue that Whitehead has never been properly understood, nor has the depth and breadth of his contribution to the human search for knowledge been assimilated by his successors. This important book effectively applies Whitehead’s philosophy to problems in the interpretation of science, empirical knowledge, and nature. It develops a new account of philosophical naturalism that will contribute to the current naturalism debate in both Analytic and Continental philosophy. Auxier and Herstein also draw attention to some of the most important differences between the process theology tradition and Whitehead’s thought, arguing in favor of a Whiteheadian naturalism that is more or less independent of theological concerns. This book offers a clear and comprehensive introduction to Whitehead’s philosophy and is an essential resource for students and scholars interested in American philosophy, the philosophy of mathematics and physics, and issues associated with naturalism, explanation and radical empiricism.

Randall E. Auxier is Professor of Philosophy at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale. He is the author of Time, Will and Purpose: Living Ideas from the Philosophy of Josiah Royce.

Gary L. Herstein is an independent scholar with research interests in the philosophy of science, logic, and American philosophy. He is the author of Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology.





Routledge Studies in American Philosophy


Edited by Willem deVries, University of New Hampshire, USA and Henry Jackman, York University, Canada


1 Intentionality and the Myths of the Given

Between Pragmatism and Phenomenology

Carl B. Sachs

2 Richard Rorty, Liberalism and Cosmopolitanism

David E. McClean

3 Pragmatic Encounters

Richard J. Bernstein

4 Toward a Metaphysics of Culture

Joseph Margolis

5 Gewirthian Perspectives on Human Rights

Edited by Per Bauhn

6 Toward a Pragmatist Metaethics

Diana B. Heney

7 Sellars and Contemporary Philosophy

Edited by David Pereplyotchik and Deborah R. Barnbaum

8 Pragmatism and Objectivity

Essays Sparked by the Work of Nicolas Rescher

Edited by Sami Pihlström

9 The Quantum of Explanation

Whitehead’s Radical Empiricism

Randall E. Auxier and Gary L. Herstein





The Quantum of Explanation


Whitehead’s Radical Empiricism


Randall E. Auxier and Gary L. Herstein





First published 2017

by Routledge

711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017

and by Routledge

2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2017 Taylor & Francis

The right of Randall E. Auxier and Gary L. Herstein to be identified as authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Auxier, Randall E., 1961– author.

Title: The quantum of explanation : Whitehead’s radical empiricism / by Randall E. Auxier and Gary L. Herstein.

Description: 1 [edition]. | New York : Routledge, 2017. | Series: Routledge studies in American philosophy ; 9 | Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2016048943 | ISBN 9781138700161 (hardback : alk. paper)

Subjects: LCSH: Whitehead, Alfred North, 1861–1947. | Empiricism.

Classification: LCC B1674.W354 A99 2017 | DDC 192—dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016048943

ISBN: 978-1-138-70016-1 (hbk)

ISBN: 978-1-315-20492-5 (ebk)

Typeset in Sabon

by Apex CoVantage, LLC





Contents


Preface

Acknowledgements

 Introduction

 1 Reading Whitehead

 2 Whitehead’s Radical Empiricism

 3 The Logic in Metaphysics

 4 The Quantum of Explanation

 5 Extensive Connectedness (The Metaphysics in Logic)

 6 The Principle of Relativity

 7 Genetic and Coordinate Division and Divisibility

 8 The Problem of Possibility

 9 The Algebra of Negative Prehension

10 The Nature of Naturalism

11 Synoptic Pluralism and the Problem of Whiteheadian “Theology”

12 Possibility and God

13 God’s Mortal Soul

Notes

Index
