Preface


This book has a long history, more than a quarter century. There is no way to bring something quite so ambitious to fruition without incurring countless debts. We will do our best to discharge some of these debts in the narrative that follows, and others will be mentioned among the notes. This book has the peculiar added feature of having two primary authors. Yet, large parts of this book existed in draft material and even highly developed studies before it dawned on the two authors that they were working on the same book. The story of how it came to look as it does, and which of us bears primary blame for its inevitable flaws, may be of at least some transient interest. We both endorse everything the book says, and without reserve. But that is not the story. In fact, we both wrote this book, together, and there are many parts regarding which we can no longer recall who produced the initial draft.

We have very different backgrounds and life experience, and we know different things (with large overlaps). Still the book is genuinely ours, not just a collaboration but a single view of all the subjects treated here, shared by both of us, without need for exceptions. We had no disagreements to negotiate, although we had to teach one another many things. One could say that Herstein is the “teacher” in the history and philosophy of mathematics and science, while Auxier is the “teacher” in the history of religious and theological thought. Both of us are historians of philosophy and serious in our studies of metaphysics, epistemology, and logic. We both formalize our thought systematically and situate it historically. Our complete lack of disagreement seems improbable, but, as we like to say, everything that is actual is thereby also possible.

The thinking herein and the Whitehead interpretation we offer reach back to our first (independent) readings of Whitehead in the early 1980s, Herstein at Occidental College and Auxier at (what is now called) the University of Memphis. We each had to teach ourselves Whitehead, receiving encouragement, sometimes, from our philosophy instructors, but neither of us had the advantage, or the burden, of a specialist in Whitehead or process philosophy among our instructors. We both had the benefit of outstanding teachers in systematic and historical philosophy, teachers who emphasized intellectual honesty and scholarly rigor, and who enabled us to recognize our strengths and limitations. Both of us were convinced from our independent reading that if anyone had come close to answering the questions that we couldn’t leave alone—time, possibility, order—it was Whitehead.

We both knew that it would take a long time to understand and digest his views, and we went immediately to work on the project of truly understanding Whitehead. We consulted secondary literature, for help, and we found some. This was especially true of Donald Sherburne’s Key and, for Auxier, also the first edition Elizabeth Kraus’s guide called The Metaphysics of Experience. Herstein stayed mainly with primary texts during these years as he pursued a career in computer technologies, even taking only one book, Process and Reality, on a vacation to Tahiti. Perhaps this is the best beach reading for some tribe of truth-seekers, but the tribe would be small. Although we were too inexperienced to put our fingers on the causes, our intuition was the same: much of the commentary failed to reflect the richness and full intellectual depth and connectedness of Whitehead’s ideas. For many years we were thus obliged, independently, to wrestle with the primary texts, and that is what we did.

Although Herstein is the senior in years on earth by about five, Auxier’s circumstances enabled him to pursue the standard academic path and hence to arrive somewhat earlier at the threshold of a writing project on these ideas. The earliest portions of what became this book were drafted in 1989 while Auxier was still in graduate school. An essay called “Concentric Circles: An Exploration of Three Concepts in Process Metaphysics” was drafted as part of the “take away” from a seminar on the philosophy of time with Charles Sherover, and it was published in 1991 in the Southwest Philosophy Review. It contains the earliest version of the argument about possibility, potentiality, and actuality that constitutes an important part of this book. An examination of that (now ancient) essay will reveal that it is the work of someone unseasoned and too ambitious, but the core view, now both chastened and (one hopes) deepened by experience, reflection, and study, is given here, in chapters 8 and 9.

The argument has grown in prospect since we began working together on these issues in 2000. But we know we are not finished with these ideas. We have begun writing on a project we are calling The Continuum of Possibility: Models and Modality in Process Metaphysics. Perhaps we are too ambitious still, but if the reaper spares us, we will offer at some time (when it is ripe) a fuller formalization and working out of the formal sketch in chapter 9 of this book. We intend to make good on the suggestion that algebraic thinking can handle time in relation to possibility just as Whitehead so boldly asserted, and we are audacious enough to believe we can make some progress in developing these ideas in new ways, and to do so by re-reading the history of algebraic thinking.

At Emory, Auxier found professors who allowed him to pursue these topics in a dissertation on process metaphysics. Jude Jones, a student of Elizabeth Kraus, was slightly ahead of Auxier at Emory, providing a context for exchange and creating conditions for later collaboration on Whitehead. But the topics that interested Jones and Auxier, although both were motivated to investigate metaphysics and value, turned out to be almost without overlap in emphasis at that time. Jones’s book Intensity: An Essay in Whiteheadian Ontology, based on her dissertation, remains (in our view, although we do not assume Jones would automatically agree) mainly a treatment of the higher phases of experience (and how they come into being) that we can endorse with practically no modification. It is, in our terms, a book on concrescence. The higher phases of experience, exemplified in the human kind of consciousness and self-reflection, is exceedingly rare in the universe and, from the standpoint of cosmology, is of almost no importance, apart from providing evidence for how actuality can achieve astonishing intensity. Yet, intensity and concrescence are everything to us, as human beings.

We do not pursue these questions in this book, partly because we think Jones has done an admirable job, and partly because we think philosophers are bad about exaggerating the importance of human experience in the grand scheme of things. One thing we both admire about Whitehead is his unflinching vision of the cosmos as a place that allows for experience of our kind, but doesn’t necessitate it or do very much to support or perpetuate it. Jones has said what needs saying about this kind of experience and we don’t have anything to add, at this point. Still, the project we are working on to follow this volume is a treatment of concrescence that supplements our focus on transition and the “fact of the world,” in the study before you now.

Auxier wrote the first draft of chapter 12 in 1992. Both Don Emler and Leo Werneke read versions of chapter 12 and affirmed the direction of the research. However, early exploration into the process community, as it existed then, alerted Auxier that his views went against the grain of the prevailing lines of interpretation. After some correspondence with several opinion leaders in the area, it became clear that it would not be possible to work out these ideas in the existing journals, controlled as they were by people who would demand greater conformity to the current conventions. There was solace in conversation with other young scholars, especially Bill Myers, of Birmingham Southern, and the occasional supportive senior colleague, especially Bill Garland from the University of the South and Pete Gunter from the University of North Texas. It would be necessary to approach the Whitehead community indirectly and by slow degrees. The community of process philosophers was, at that time, small enough to enforce an orthodoxy.

Auxier decided to focus on Hartshorne’s thought as an alternative to disputing with powerful people over Whitehead. This turned out to be a fortunate turn. Hartshorne was still alive and vigorous and happily accepted Auxier’s invitation to travel to Oklahoma and to speak and teach. Following that adventure in the spring of 1993, Auxier was able to travel to Austin numerous times and carry out his arguments with Hartshorne himself about how to interpret Whitehead. Hartshorne not only did not demand agreement from younger scholars, he insisted upon vigorous dissent wherever it could be supported by serious argumentation. One result of these exchanges was the essay that became chapter 13 of this book, first written in 1995.

Philosophers who spent serious time on Hartshorne’s thought were not numerous, but were welcoming and open-minded. In particular, Auxier found valuable feedback from Don Viney, Barry Whitney, and Dan Dombrowski. Mark Y.A. Davies, whom Auxier had known at Emory, joined Auxier in a collaboration on Hartshorne’s thought in 1994, and came to Oklahoma City University in 1996, providing real discussion. These exchanges resulted in a number of articles and the publication of Hartshorne’s correspondence with Edgar Sheffield Brightman. In addition, through Davies’s connection to Robert C. Neville, Auxier came under the influence and eventually the tutelage of one of the finest critics of process thought and original thinkers of that older generation. Neville generously read and responded to Auxier’s correspondence during those years and continues to provide valuable resistance and corrective critique to these ideas.

Herstein’s academic career has been what is euphemistically called “non-traditional.” Starting at the University of Southern California, Herstein put himself through school by working full time at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Space Flight Operations Facility. Herstein’s interest in science and mathematics had always been exceptional, and this job was in many ways the perfect opportunity for him. He was privileged to watch the very first images slowly scroll across the monitors in the Mission Control Center during the Voyager 2 encounter at Jupiter, and the Voyager 1 and 2 encounters at Saturn. Because his technical skills liberated him from the common vocational justification for higher education and, in many ways as importantly, confronted him with fundamental and patently concrete issues in the problem of knowledge, Herstein changed his original major from computer science to philosophy. During this time, Herstein had the good fortune to take Bas Van Fraassen’s graduate seminar in modal logic, which was Herstein’s first encounter with formal reasoning beyond the binary systems he’d worked with in computers. For various personal reasons, Herstein later switched schools from USC to Occidental College.

Herstein’s first encounter with Whitehead occurred in the early 1980’s, when he was an undergraduate at Occidental College. Herstein’s philosophy professor at the time, William Neblett (who taught at Occidental College from 1965 until his retirement in 2004), wrote his Master’s thesis on Whitehead. He knew Whitehead’s process thought. By luck, a copy of the Corrected Edition of Process and Reality appeared in the Occidental bookstore. Herstein purchased it on the spot. Over the next two decades, Herstein carefully studied that volume many times. But because of his life outside of formal academics, he never encountered the secondary literature, and was thus able to form his own thoughts and ideas about Whitehead’s metaphysics.

Herstein formally entered the scene in 2000, to work toward his Ph.D. in philosophy. That was the same year that Auxier moved to Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, where Herstein was now enrolled. They met several months earlier at the 2000 meeting of the Society for the Advancement of American Philosophy in Indianapolis. Auxier gave a plenary talk in which he did two things that determined Herstein to meet him: Auxier spoke of knowing what his cats were thinking, and then highlighted Herstein’s three favorite philosophers in a single sentence: Dewey, Cassirer, and Whitehead.

Herstein’s numerous classes and conversations with Auxier created a focus on Whitehead and his natural philosophy, especially as articulated in the sorely neglected triptych of works on the subject that Whitehead published between 1919 and 1922. Herstein defended his dissertation, with Auxier as the chair of his dissertation committee, in May of 2005. The dissertation, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, was published a year later by Ontos Verlag (later acquired by De Gruyter) as a book by the same title. Herstein left Illinois to pursue an itinerant life as a visiting professor around the country.

While Herstein was at SIU Carbondale, he and Auxier spoke many times about the possibility of a collaborative book addressing some very significant shortcomings in the secondary literature on Whitehead. Ideas were bounced back and forth, which led to papers written and presented at conferences by each of them (providing draft material for a book only vaguely conceived). Finally, with a number of such studies accomplished, structures were proposed and modified by e-mail. But the project never achieved the status of a real outline, and remained little more than a shadow. Difficulties arose due to the size and complexity of the project, not to mention its ambitiousness. Distance was not the issue it would have been in previous decades, but hindsight informs us that we never could have finished this project while living in different places.

Herstein returned to Southern Illinois in 2011, where he could reinvent himself as an initiate in the new mendicant order known as the independent “modern” scholar (that is, homeless except for the patronage of others.) But with the problems of time and space no longer obstructing them, Herstein and Auxier directed their efforts upon the current project. After some struggle, a real plan for the book began to emerge. That initial outline, hammering the completed drafts into an order that made narrative sense, and recognizing what parts remained to be written, survives in large measure into the final book. From the fall of 2011 until the early winter of 2013, Auxier and Herstein met at least once weekly for a full afternoon, with specific assignments in between—they took turns carrying the weight of writing between meetings depending upon whether the subject matter was closer to Herstein’s or Auxier’s expertise. The first full draft was finished in time for a sizable weekly reading group consisting mainly of SIU graduate students, but also a few who had graduated and other interested parties, who read and reviewed the manuscript along with a reading Process and Reality. This was very helpful in testing the narrative.

Following this experience we were able to work our way back through the completed manuscript during the fall of 2013. We made every effort to digest every article that had a bearing on what we are saying, and we made many adjustments as we read new secondary works. There were several important discoveries for us during this period. Neither of us had read F. Bradford Wallack’s book on Whitehead prior to this time, and it turned out to be a tremendous find in the literature. This work had, we believe, been effectively buried by the narrowness of the approaches dominant in the last 35 years, a perception we found confirmed when we contacted Wallack herself. Also added to our reading during this time was Catherine Keller’s fine work in process theology, which reminded us of the vitality and relevance of these ideas when taken in a theological light. If we seem dubious about process theology in this book, we want to assure everyone that this impression is due to our own misgivings and not a reflection on the fine work done by so many people in the train of John Cobb, Jr.

Some readers will be curious as to which of us wrote which parts of this book, and indeed, one kind and anonymous reviewer insisted upon such information. We realize that co-authored books in our discipline raise eyebrows: “Surely one or the other is responsible for this,” (Russell but not Whitehead, Dewey and not Tufts or Bentley, and so forth). It is a question that simply makes us smile, since there are so many parts regarding which we couldn’t tell you ourselves who ought to be thought of as the author. This is particularly true of chapter 9, which is perhaps alternating sentences as one or the other of us worked our way through the difficult formalisms. If an accounting is required, Auxier drafted the Introduction, and chapters 1, 2, 7, 8, 11, 12, and 13; Herstein drafted chapters 3, 4, 5, 6, and 10. We truly wrote 9 together, alternating weeks with one or the other being responsible for a section, and it wasn’t written in the order it now appears. We did all the editing and revising together, across a table, and no changes were made without the consent of both. We admit that it is peculiar that two such different people should find themselves so much and so easily in agreement on such wide-ranging issues. We have no explanation and we find it remarkable ourselves. Our writing styles (and senses of humor, and penchant for polemical expression) are also similar, almost indistinguishable, which is no less curious to us, since our backgrounds really are quite different. But it is worth repeating that whatever is actual is possible, and this is actual. The mystery lies in over-thinking it, not in the occurrence of it.
