Acknowledgements


Herstein: Anyone who has even contemplated a work of this scope and size knows what an almost impossible task it is to acknowledge all of those persons who contributed to it. High on this list are all the members of my dissertation committee: Randy Auxier, Janice Staab, Larry Hickman, Pat Manfredi, Jurek Kocik. They all shared my conviction that the line of inquiry I was pursuing was worthy of the effort. Among the general groups that need mentioning, the Whitehead reading group that helped us out with an early draft of our manuscript in 2013 at SIU Carbondale, and the Society for the Study of Process Philosophy, for their interest and encouragement for papers that later became sections of chapters. Individuals include Michel Weber, Johanna Seibt, Jude Jones, Tim Eastman, Michael Epperson, Ronny Desmet, George Shields, John Cobb, Hank Keeton, among many others.

Finally, very special thanks must be given to Patrick and Antoinette Mulholland, without whose constant support I would never have been able to participate in this project. I dedicate my portion of this work to Patrick, who did not quite get to see it finished.

Auxier: In addition to those listed by Herstein, most of whose names would be repeated on my list, a number of people have read full or partial drafts of this manuscript and have contributed helpful comments that led to its improvement. First and foremost there are the students in the seminars I have run over the last 16 years at Southern Illinois University Carbondale. A number of these persons have gone on to carry out substantial research in process philosophy. Some of the work was completed during a sabbatical supported by SIUC in the spring of 2014. A number of colleagues also read the manuscript, at one stage or another, in whole or in part, and these include Robert C. Neville, David Connor, Bogdan Ogrodnik, Lukas Lamza, Dennis Soelch, Aljosche Berve, Jan Olof Bengtsson, Helmut Maassen, various members of the Institute of American Religious and Philosophical Thought, including Donald Crosby, Wesley Wildman, Charley Hardwick, Nancy Frankenberry and the late Creighton Peden; various members of the Society for the Study of Process Philosophy, including (again) Jude Jones. Also of help were Ted Calhoun, Keith Robinson, Duston Moore, James McLachlan, Gary Dorrien, and Gregory Budzban. The community of scholars associated with the American Institute of Philosophical and Cultural Thought (especially John Shook and Larry Hickman) and the International Forum on Persons (especially Richard C. Prust, Tom Buford, Richard Beauchamp, and James Beauregard) have been an ongoing source of conversation and encouragement in this work. At different times the Philosophy Departments of Indian-Purdue University Fort Wayne, Luther College, and also the Society for the Study of Process Philosophies have invited our work for presentation and have responded to versions of this work. The Society for the Philosophy of Creativity heard two early chapters and I must thank Pete A. Y. Gunter particularly for responses there and at meetings of the Southwestern Philosophical Society. Many ideas were worked through in conversations with Ralph D. Ellis and Bill Myers (and his former students) over the course of three decades. The Center for Process Studies at Claremont has never failed to provide support and response, especially John Sweeney; Roger Mark Dibben of the Whitehead Research Project in particular has been a valuable conversation partner. And of course, thanks are due to Routledge and Andrew Weckenmann and to the series editors, Henry Jackman and Willem de Vries.

Finally, since in this book I have personally come full circle in the studies that genuinely began when, as child, I listened to my mother, Eileen Gunter Auxier, explaining “creative motion” in music, I dedicate my portion of this work to her memory, and to my father Charles David Auxier, and the beautiful music they made together
