Introduction


The central aim of this book is to make an argument, as persuasively as possible, for the concept of explanation—in all domains that human beings study—defended by Alfred North Whitehead. The authors believe, and passionately so, that the central insight of Whitehead’s philosophy has been passed over, misinterpreted, and forgotten even by his most sympathetic followers. The idea is both very simple and hard to keep in mind because it runs contrary both to our native habits of thinking and to our long-established ideas about what constitutes a satisfying explanation. Because its implications are far-reaching, subtle, disturbing, and complex, this approach to explanation has not taken hold, even among process philosophers. That must change.

In this Introduction and the first two chapters of this book, we will be offering an overview of Whitehead’s thought and our path through it. The detailed arguments await later chapters, so we encourage readers to be patient in forming conclusions about the assertions we make early on. Our aim is to bring readers (including advanced ones) into the context and language of process philosophy and only then to offer the rigorous case that serious readers expect. Included is a thorough discussion of issues associated with the theological reading of Whitehead that has played so prominent a role in process philosophy in the last half century. We are neither anti-theological nor anti-religious, and we do not share the views of those who would remove either “God” or “eternal objects” from Whitehead’s ontology. Yet, we are confident that most readers of Whitehead who have applied his ontology to theological problems will find what we have to say here unwelcome. This discussion must be deferred until the more straightforwardly philosophical business has been accomplished, but we do not think of this part of the book as an add-on. Getting Whitehead’s ideas about God right is just as important as getting his ideas right about actual entities and possibilities. Part of “getting God right” involves getting nature, as Whitehead understands it, right, and thus, the discussion of God is deferred until late in the book, since nature is our main focus.

Among the techniques we employ throughout the book is to present various illustrative examples of a qualitative type. Our intentions with these often somewhat “homey” stories are both to cultivate our readers’ intuitions around subject-matters that are often extraordinarily abstract and to do so by situating those ideas in more tangibly concrete examples. In this regard, we note at least three different modalities of “making sense” that humans deploy against any puzzle, only two of which are typically called upon in contemporary philosophy: There is what might be called “empirical adequacy”—does observation and experience support what is being claimed in the relevant situation? There is “logical coherence”—do the various claims being asserted hang together logically? But there is also what we will refer to here as “narrative intelligibility”—does the story, qua story, make sense? Narrative intelligibility is not what one would normally acknowledge as an “argument,” in the logical or philosophical sense. Rather, it is an illustration that brings the argument to life, concretizes it.

There seems to be an aversion, bordering on anaphylaxis, amongst philosophers (even and especially Whiteheadian philosophers) to turn to this third form of making sense.1 This strikes us as ironic, since narrative intelligibility was one of the primary modes of philosophical discourse used by Plato. We are here recalling Whitehead’s famous epigram about footnotes to Plato. Yet even Whitehead was generally reluctant to use stories and illustrative examples in his philosophy even though, as his beautiful biographical essays illustrate, he was a lovely storyteller.

We do not pretend for a moment that we are comparable to such storytellers as Plato and Whitehead. We do, however, insist that stories—even our stories—are an essential part of making sense of the world, and that includes Whitehead’s philosophy. We appeal here to the authority of Iris Murdoch, and her carefully presented argument that some ideas (especially in metaphysics and morals) are so complicated that the only way to approach them is indirectly, via metaphor and narrative.2 One might note here that Murdoch was herself one of the better storytellers of at least the last 100 years.3





Start Me Up


Our central idea is that concrete existence explains the abstract aspects of experience and not vice-versa. The unexpected characteristic of our experience is that it abstracts from the flux, not that it flows concretely, which we expect. This sense of the term “abstract” means something like, “creates a stable space,” but spaces are created by the variability in the flux itself. No space is wholly stable, as far we know. Where the pulses of the unfolding creative advance approach light speed, we trade one kind of stability for another, the stability of relatively constant acceleration for the stability of repeated vibrations at various rates. But wherever there is variability, something like a space is created in the communication of what pulses with greater zest and frequent repetition as compared with what “moves” more slowly.4

To illustrate: we can observe the difference between light and sound, taking as a case study the way these two varieties of energistic order are differently propagated through typical earth conditions. Obviously, for all their differences as organizations of energy, sound and light are experienced together by us, through a synesthesia that our bodies accomplish. Yet, as a general fact about the universe, sonic waves vibrate at a level that is more difficult to propagate, compared with light. Sound is “heavy,” entropic, requires a dense medium for its propagation, and dissipates into the background radiation after a short endurance. Light, by contrast, is economical, lively, relatively easy to propagate, does not require a dense medium for its propagation, and can maintain its physical structure for very long epochs of duration.5

When either sound or light interacts with the complex electromagnetic gravitational macrosystem we call “earth,” under the right circumstances, locations arise that reveal structures even more fleeting, even less stable than sound itself. The likelihood, in the grand scheme of the universe, of the occurrence of a laser light, multimedia show with the music of the Rolling Stones, interacting on some beach in South America, well, let’s just say that arrangement of light and sound energy is cosmically improbable.6 No, it is not merely improbable. An infinity of infinities of infinities, raised to the power of the infinite, in terms of possibilities, is needed to bring together just this confluence of variable temporalities and their complementary spaces.7





A Bigger Bang


We choose this example because some people claim that the February 18, 2006 concert by the Rolling Stones in Rio de Janeiro, was the largest rock concert in history, attended by some 1.5 million people. All shows in “The Bigger Bang” tour began with a huge multimedia screenshow, and lights and pyrotechnics, depicting the Big Bang and tracing all of time and the creation of every actual space from the beginning down to the improbable moment when the first chord of the song “Start Me Up” is struck on Keith Richards’ Telecaster, in the dark, and what follows is a silence, a pulse, a repetition, a count, a drum roll, and, well, a Bigger Bang, as the lights explode in a blinding flash and Mick Jagger is illuminated in the midst of a leap as the masses erupt into an ecstatic presence that really defies description. As they say, “you had to be there” (not that we were).

This is an “event” in the best Whiteheadian sense. It is complex, but it is also a unity, an enjoyment, and a satisfaction of all sorts of variable pulses of light, sound, gravitational influence, electromagnetic pattern, inertial eddies in the flux that gather in the actual world to which they belong, evaluate that world, and add to it a unique synthesis. In this case, the “event” involves over a million human beings, some very loud sounds and very bright lights, a beach, the edge of a continent, a city, and a durational epoch, ragged at the edges but definitely describing a span.8 But the point is that one does not, and indeed, never could explain all that was absorbed and released, in all of its temporal, spatial, physical, and conceptual modes, at that time and place by appealing to some collection of abstract ideas.

The Big Bang, as a concept, is explained by the Bigger Bang, the event on the beach, and not the other way around. Notwithstanding our habitual appeals to the abstractions of science for the meaning of the word “explanation,” the true explanation of any physical reality is the concrete event that it surrounds. The reason to adopt this path of explanation is very simple: whatever is actual is possible. That is the reason that explanation really has to proceed from the actual to the possible, at least to the extent we can expect to explain things beyond our ken, such as the character of possibility as such.

One does not need an “event” so complex as the Rolling Stones’ Bigger Bang to make the point about explanation. Something as simple as dropping the pencil from one’s hand to the ground is equally (and uniquely) an “event.” While we are in the habit of appealing to, for example, the “laws of gravity” to “explain” what happened, the real story goes the other way around. The unique event is the reason for our appeals to abstract and general ideas, such as “laws,” insofar as those general ideas have an explanation—and it is they, not the falling of the pencil, that need an explanation. It is hard to get used to this “appeal to the concrete” as the explanation, and one might complain that subsuming concrete events under general categories just is what “explanation” means. But this view is empirically indefensible. There is no denying the importance of the uniqueness and unrepeatability of any concrete event. Simply to set aside, in advance, everything that makes an event unique, singular, and hence universal, is to treat as concrete that which is abstract and vice-versa. It is not explanation.





The Poverty of Philosophy


It is true that we don’t ever understand concrete actuality in its fullness, but we can get at what is actual with greater confidence than we can expect to gain access to some sort of universal necessities that make a unique event come to pass just as it has. That latter quest is a fool’s game. Universality, so far as we have immediate access to it, has to do with the logical meaning of what is singular, unrepeatable, unique. The problem of finding the universal and necessary is tricky, as every philosopher in the West since Plato has known (and those in the East have known it still longer). Given the limits of understanding with which we begin, it is wiser to generalize with the greatest care than to leap on a floating universal and proclaim it the ground of all existence. That kind of God, or principle, or law, or force is no ground at all. It is a fiction, a puff of human desire adrift in a cosmos indifferent to human depth, need, and yearning. It is, as Socrates reports in the speech of Diotima, a vagrant at the doorstep of Being. It is not an explanation.

No one has ever been as careful to avoid bad generalization and floating universals as Whitehead was. Existence, in its uniqueness and full concreteness, is what it is, and no matter how simple the event is (and the Stones’ Bigger Bang is pretty complex, for an event, with nests and nests of temporal eddies and ephemeral tensions), the simplicity or complexity wouldn’t change the main issue. The “event” could be the shedding of an electron by a radioactive element, or something simpler still. “Events,” in Whitehead’s sense of the word, are not of any particular size, complexity, simplicity, or duration. In all cases of the event, its uniqueness places it beyond the reach of the abstractions to which it gives a ground, just as such uniqueness places it beyond the full comprehension of any other event. As far as we can tell, empirically, the cosmos seems to be made up of events. They can be explained in as many ways as we can devise to generalize from them and across them, but those generalizations are more likely to lead us astray than to lead us toward the best kinds of conclusions, unless explanation moves from the concrete to the abstract. The best explanations are those that invigorate and add intensity to our experience, and that sort moves thus.

We think that our main point bears repeating. What is actual is possible. This is the first law of metaphysics. And the actual is our best guide to the possible, but it is still a poor and unreliable guide, because generalizing from the “event” in February of 2006 to explain the Big Bang is easy compared to answering the question about what else was genuinely possible that did not happen on that day or any other day (or eon, or cosmic epoch). Our access to the structure of possibility is usually mediated by our powers of abstracting from the concrete in ways that respect the limitations imposed upon us, and our desire for explanations, by the actual. We face a trilemma: either (1) deny the reality or existence of possibility, or (2) reduce possibility to the likely or the inevitable, and then try to get our most general concepts to serve as explanations, or (3) treat the mode of existence of the possible as essentially abstract. All of these ways of handling the problem of possibility have been tried in the history of metaphysics. None has succeeded.





A Fourth Conception of Being


Whitehead suggested a fourth way, a way that leaves the relation of the possible and the actual fruitful, creative, dynamic, interesting, and open: the actual, in its full concrete uniqueness, is the explanation of anything and everything that can be explained. The actual offers us a glimpse of the possible, its structure and its meaning, if not all of its determinations. The Bigger Bang, or any other “event,” rightly understood, rightly situated in its own actual world, is the reason for that world, insofar as that world has a reason. In explanatory power, the event we have called “the Bigger Bang” beggars the concept of the Big Bang. The Big Bang is just an idea to guide how we may think about what happened in the unimaginably remote past. The Bigger Bang actually happened in February of 2006.

But how do we get at The Bigger Bang, or any other “event,” and use it to explain its “world”? The limitations are, unhappily, more numerous than the opportunities, but the most important limitation is self-limitation. Favoring just one type of generalization, such as counting or measuring, or formalizing in some sort of natural or devised language, and insisting that this or that method is right for answering every kind of question, is a great failure of self-limitation. If such a perfect method of generalization exists as will answer to every variety of our desire for explanation, it has not been discovered, and it is not likely to be discovered by claiming we already possess it when clearly we do not. Such exaggeration is intemperate and unwise. But Whitehead found a way to secure our norm of self-limitation, while yet asking the profoundest question: given that there is no single method of generalizing from the unique event to its world, is there not, accessible to our imaginations and reasonings, a basic unit of explanation? Is there not something irreducibly common to every desire for every sort of knowledge? Whitehead answers in the affirmative. That unit is the actual entity. This is what we mean by calling it “the quantum of explanation.”





Explanation and Its Discontents


This has been a hard pill for philosophers after Whitehead to swallow. They insist upon thinking of measurement, and “laws of nature,” and other numerical devices as “explanations,” when in fact it is simple common sense to recognize that what is unique, as every fully concrete actuality is, cannot be explained, and that means that if it is explanation we seek, then the explanans must be the unique event, and the explanandum the world to which the event belongs. We do not have to give up scientific and traditional “explanations,” but these explanations are not fully concrete—they are general, abstract. They are not universal. The universal, insofar as it plays a role in genuine explanation, is the singular event that concretizes its entire world from one perspective, exhibiting in a definite way one genuinely possible example of order in our cosmic epoch.

Thus, what stands in need of explanation is not the way existences and the flux pass, it is why anything in the flux is sufficiently stable for a difference to arise in its “passage” between its “transition” from one condition to another, on one side, and its “concrescence,” its internal “valuation” of the “factors” it takes in from its “actual world,” and then “grades for relevance,” judges, in many modalities, and finally “expresses” in its “achievement.” The quantum of explanation, i.e., the actual entity, does the main part of the work in helping us analyze and evaluate all this.

We draw on a vocabulary here that Whitehead developed in the course of numerous writings over 40 years. This vocabulary has confused, daunted, and deterred readers, and it has otherwise prevented his ideas from settling into the culture at large. These important ideas haven’t even entered the more rarified discussions of physicists and mathematicians and philosophers, except in pockets and nooks. The words are more like the ornaments on a Christmas tree of prose than ideas we can pin down. What, after all, is this chap on about? There are good reasons for the specialized vocabulary Whitehead chose and refined. It is not easy to understand, still harder to learn and use, and once mastered, sadly effective at cloistering the exchange of ideas and keeping serious discussion limited to the initiates. We cannot, in this book, wholly reverse 80-plus years of scholastic specializing. But we aim to provide a guide that will enable reasonably devoted readers to follow our discussion as it moves increasingly into the world of Whitehead’s curious language.





A Linguistic (Re)Turn


The language is not the only challenge. Whitehead’s ideas are themselves both novel and difficult, conceptually speaking. A good grasp of the history of science, mathematics, and logic is needed for a thorough understanding of Whitehead. We cannot wholly remove this barrier, but we have supplemented our arguments with extensive examples and illustrations of the most difficult points. Yet, we really must stress that Whitehead’s concept of the “actual entity” is not a bit of physical existence. It is a conceptual tool that helps the inquirer arrest temporal passage and the flux of the physical universe.

The concept of the actual entity is the most important in a collection of logical tools doing this work of holding the object of inquiry in stasis while it is analyzed. That “holding” cannot be achieved without some distortion entering the picture, but nothing will yield to analysis without some means of rendering it an object of study. How the inquirer achieves this condition of “arresting the object” has a great influence upon the success or failure of an inquiry. Whitehead’s approach to the problem is original and worth understanding. The logical and analytical tools he develops have certain virtues not possessed by those of his predecessors in natural philosophy and cosmology. His tool kit is also adaptable to problems further removed from the areas with which he was best acquainted, and he brought them to bear on questions of religion, civilizational development, the history of science, education, and a few other areas in scattered essays. But his abiding concern was the study of the physical universe and the development of analytical tools for that kind of study.





Clouds of Mystery Pouring


Unfortunately, the majority of Whitehead’s interpreters have been confused about what Whitehead was doing and how he was doing it. Most insist that the “actual entity” is a part of the physical universe, the universe of events. They usually do not grasp that the “actual entity” is a philosophical concept set out, along with others (“eternal objects,” “prehensions,” and “God” being other principal concepts, but one might add nexus, and the ontological principle) for the sake of analyzing the physical universe, and especially analyzing events. The actual entity is not a unit of change. The event is.9 The event is impossible to study without some kind of abstraction because it is unique, and yet, in its uniqueness is a logical singularity, and singulars function as universals in logic. Every event has an explanatory power, and in analysis, the “actual entity” conceptualizes, irreducibly, that explanatory power. Every event is more (indeed, infinitely more) than the actual entity that is used to analyze it, but properly limited, the actual entity introduces a minimal and non-vicious kind of distortion into the event. With proper self-limitation, the event will be recoverable from the analysis, intact, recognizable, meaningful, and now seen in some of its modes of generality, implication, promise.

Some interpreters have gone so far as to claim that Whitehead’s ontology of events was abandoned and replaced by an ontology of actual entities. This is unsupportable on the basis of the text. Many ad hoc hypotheses, speculations, and assertions must be maintained in order to argue that Whitehead has two different ontologies, while massive amounts of clear evidence must be ignored and distorted to read Whitehead this way. The simple truth is that those who assert such a view haven’t understood what Whitehead was doing and how. That is a forgivable mistake. Whitehead is hard to understand. But the relation between an event and the actual entity isn’t that difficult to understand, if taken alone; still the logical tools Whitehead develops for his analysis are organically related, and in fact there is far more to the event than any set of logical tools can hope to describe. And even with Whitehead’s best tools, we get at only a limited collection of characteristics of an event. Fortunately, since some problems are more pressing than others, we don’t need the event in its concrete fullness for most of our purposes. So long as we can come by results that answer to our most immediate needs for knowledge, the philosophy of organism has served its purpose.

Thus, with the inquiry into cosmology that is entitled Process and Reality, Whitehead takes on his biggest project. His analytical tools have been developed over nearly 40 years. They are brought together in a way that leaves intact the aspects of the event that are most salient for metaphysical description, and secondly for the study of physical nature as a system of order. The outcome is a description of the cosmos as a “creative advance.” These analytical tools, most importantly the actual entity, the actual world, the eternal objects, prehensions, God, propositions, generic contrasts, and the principles by which they are related, are chosen by the inquirer, not necessitated by the physical universe.





Confusion on the Ground


Assessing the event suggests (rather than demands) a tool kit and a path of inquiry. The norms of excellent inquiry vary according to the kind of knowledge the inquiry is expected to produce and its purposes. All successful inquiries intensify our experience and are “adventures,” but no inquiry, for Whitehead is measured by the achievement of some kind of certainty or closure. We want the event because the event is experienced. We are wise when we grasp, in advance, that the event explains the world, not the other way around. Thus, in a metaphysical description of cosmological order, the actual entity explains its actual world, not vice-versa. The actual entity is not, however, the whole explanation of the event, considered as a part of the cosmic order. Indeed, we strive, as a norm in inquiry, for parsimony, and we find that our desire for explanation requires not only the actual entity, but those other entities listed above, along with a number of principles and limitations. If we should develop and employ a single unneeded tool for the inquiry, the inquiry would fail in parsimony and elegance, and might also introduce undesirable complexities into our descriptions. So we do our best to develop and employ the optimal tools, which means the fewest and the best adapted to the demands of the event, considered as a part of, and an explanation of the physical universe as a cosmos, a system of order.

None of the tools of analysis Whitehead uses in Process and Reality is entirely new for him. Most of his analytical tools were developed in the course of his career. Some he adapted from other inquirers. Many interpreters have not paid close enough attention to the genesis of these tools, while others have not understood how the tools change when adapted to new inquiries and other purposes. Similar names for these tools of analysis across inquiries lead philosophical interpreters to look for a development and deepening of Whitehead’s understanding of his own philosophical concepts through the decades. It does not occur to most readers that Whitehead’s level of “commitment” to his analytical tools is limited to their usefulness in a given inquiry.10 He was a mathematician. For such people, concepts can be defined and redefined as context and purposes require. Philosophers simply don’t understand: “First, let the actual entity be the event in its actual world; now, we adopt a rule that only one actual entity is fully concrete, and the rest are occasions; now, let there be a limit to the actual world in two modes, God as the limit of its actuality and eternal objects in the mode of possibility….” Such is mathematical reasoning. We are now in a position to ask “what is the event?” by asking “what is the actual entity and how is it the reason for its actual world?” That is math.

It is useless to ask: “Are there really actual entities?” Clearly, in one sense yes and in another sense, no. They exist as analytical tools, and that is a real existence. But they aren’t little temporal atoms or puffs of energy that make up the physical universe. That is a silly way to think about the universe and it confuses the order of analysis with the order of existence. Both are real, but one is the thing to be explained and the other is the tool of explanation—and the world explains the tool. Yet, the choice of tools is not arbitrary. The success of inquiry, the norms of inquiry, the choice of analytical tools, and the aptitude of the inquirers are all tied to a real universe that will not yield to just any old hypothesis or assertion. This is not child’s play. The universe is patient of analysis and indeed the discovery of tools for that analysis thrives on errors and on the discovery of error, as indeed all development does, but our logical tools, especially, are refined only with great effort and care. We attend to the finest shades of relevance, applicability, adequacy, rigor; and with effort, insight, and good fortune, we do better rather than worse in achieving our purposes. Humility before the enormity of the task is de rigueur.

Over the course of many inquiries, we begin to learn something about the relations between our analytical tools and the universes of meaning that explains them. There is something that ties our processes of thinking, inquiring, and learning to the whole we are trying to grasp, in fits and starts. We don’t achieve much, but we wouldn’t get anywhere at all if the connection between our efforts to know and the objects of our knowledge were not linked in a sympathy not of our making. Knowledge, for all its fallibility and pluralities, is both real and of the real. This dawning awareness is not an occasion for beating our chests in triumph. But it is a nice reason to say that “every atom belonging to me, as good belongs to you,” so let us sound our barbaric yawps and then “loafe” and invite our souls. That is success in inquiry. The connection of our thinking to what is real, including us, is our song of ourselves, and it is enough. We don’t have to be gods. Let us see whether we can even succeed in being decent animals, shall we?





A Different Look


There are a number of features of our book that distinguish it from all predecessors. The first is the central idea that gives the book its title, and which we have just rehearsed in preliminary form: the actual entity is the quantum of explanation, and not just in Process and Reality or in Whitehead’s other inquiries, but in all inquiries that are essentially logical or mathematical; wherever we seek order, there will be a quantum of explanation, and it will be some version of the actual entity uniquely situated in its actual world. This is a very great discovery Whitehead (with a few others) made, a permanent advance in science and philosophy, and a way to overcome 2500 years of confusion that has haunted natural philosophy and most other sorts of explanatory thought. We now know how to avoid taking our abstractions for concrete events, but even Whitehead’s followers have mostly failed to understand this most important discovery. Because his interpreters have failed, the wider world has not learned of Whitehead’s achievement. It is a matter of indifference to us whether Whitehead gets credit for this, and we think he wouldn’t have cared either. What is important to us is that the world of explainers should wake up to the fundamental requirements of successful explanation, so far as the human race has yet discovered those requirements. The work has been started, both by Whitehead and a number of other inquirers, all of whom could easily carry the title of “radical empiricists.”

The second distinguishing feature of our book, and hence the subtitle, is both an interpretation of Whitehead as a radical empiricist and a defense of radical empiricism itself. Along with William James, Dewey, Bergson, and to a great extent Cassirer, Peirce, and Royce, we situate Whitehead with a group of thinkers all of whom could easily accommodate Whitehead’s results without introducing any great alteration of their own inquiries. In the cases of Bergson, Cassirer, Peirce and Royce, the (mathematico-logical) habits of inquiry are even similar, if less formalized. We offer no extended discussion of any of these radical empiricists and quasi-radical empiricists here, but we have discussed and defended them elsewhere and will continue to develop these historical theses as time and life permit. Within these pages we have attempted to document exhaustively both what radical empiricism is and how Whitehead is committed to it. We are far from the first to notice Whitehead’s radical empiricism, or his kinship to the list of thinkers above in philosophical orientation. But this book is by far the most extensive treatment of the thesis and seeks to settle the question.

The third distinguishing trait of this analysis is its defense of what we are calling Whitehead’s “radical realism,” especially as connected with the method of extensive abstraction and his lifelong concern with the problem of space. Whitehead’s objections to Kant’s reduction of the problem of space to the transcendental conditions of presentation in cognition have not been well understood or widely discussed. Part of the reason is that one has to spend a good deal of time with Kant first, and the secondary literature is of little help, since Whitehead didn’t know that literature and read Kant on his own. His readings of Locke and Descartes and Leibniz and Plato and Aristotle are similarly untutored and thus unencumbered with the categories and schools of interpretation that filter the educations of nearly every philosopher these days. But Whitehead’s objection to Kant is especially important because Kant initiates a style of thinking about space that has placed it under artificial restrictions relative to the genuine reach of our analytical tools. A wide reading of Kant, beyond the first Critique, shows that the limitations of scientific knowledge are not as severe as the Kantians have generally argued, but that doesn’t matter, since Whitehead really is concerned with the scientific and philosophical act of knowing, and that act of cognition is, according to Kant, limited by the a priori conditions of space as the empirical form of outer sense intuition and also by the formal constraints of space as a pure intuition in the analysis of sense. This view is what Whitehead criticizes.

Whitehead has the criticism right, in terms of understanding Kant, and he objects that Kant’s constraints are too severe. Yet, to see where the problem lies with Kant and his dubious gift to his successors, one must make a clear distinction between extension and space, granting “space” more or less to Kant (although there is more to the form of space than Kant expected), and looking for something prior to the scientifically mediated processes of counting and measuring, but also for something still thoroughly intelligible to the finite mind. As with the quantum of explanation, the discovery of the irreducibility of “extension” in every inquiry contributes something permanent to our adventures in knowing. But there is a difference. Where the actual entity is an analytical tool, extension is the real and existing continuum that gets analyzed by any and every tool. If there is any old-style ontological claim in Whitehead’s philosophy, it is that the extensive continuum exists, but even here he circumscribes the claim by “our cosmic epoch,” which is the hypothetical whole, characterized as the “undivided divisible” (another name for extension), which is the presupposition of our cosmic epoch. Whitehead’s concern to theorize extension as a strategy for handling “the problem of space” was a permanent feature of all of his theoretical work (not just his philosophical writings).

The final version of the theory of extension ends up as Part IV of Process and Reality, after having been drafted, using various tools of analysis, several times over Whitehead’s career. It was first projected as Volume Two of his Universal Algebra, then as Volume Four of Principia Mathematica, but Whitehead was never satisfied with his analysis. He ended up expressing it as a fairly simple axiomatic system in Part IV of Process and Reality, but there were still problems with it (which we will discuss in some detail). But even with those problems solved, as they have been, the true importance of Whitehead’s theory of extension hasn’t been understood at all by philosophers (although some computer scientists and mathematicians have seen promise in it). But philosophers have treated this theory as a sort of incomprehensible “add-on” to Process and Reality and have failed to grasp that the first three parts of that book exist for the purpose of situating the theory of extension as a piece of natural knowledge. Combined with the natural philosophy in Whitehead’s three books between 1919 and 1922, the theory of extension is asserted as a real piece of natural knowledge. Although Jorge Nobo has preceded us in understanding how the theory of extension belongs with and to Whitehead’s cosmology, his account is limited to the condition that the world be a solidarity, which is one of the analytical constraints of Process and Reality, but with importance for all of Whitehead’s inquiries into the natural world. Thus, we defend a version of Whiteheadian realism that stands alone both in the field of Whitehead interpretation and also in the philosophy of science itself. We make bold to suggest it may supplant the mainly verbal debate between those who call themselves realists and those who call themselves anti-realists in the present.

A fourth feature of our interpretation that is new is our way of distinguishing the levels of generality in Whitehead’s major philosophical works. We believe that many readers have not noticed that the theory of prehension, the theory of perception, the theory of transition and concrescence, and the theory of cosmic epochs are different layers of theory, with different rules and results and constraints, and operating at different levels of abstraction. The organic character of Whitehead’s philosophical inquiry can disguise the real differences in his complementary and mutually inter-dependent lines of reasoning. And his habit, as a writer, of reminding and digressing and hopping around to point out an implication in his current line of reasoning for something he has said earlier, will say later, or has discovered during a different inquiry, adds to the confusion. Yet, Whitehead’s use of terms is quite precise. There are reasons, as we will explain, for his habits. They frustrate not just the casual reader but also the seasoned and devoted ones. We will provide the needed guide in our early chapters for recognizing the different roles played in the philosophy of organism, as in Whitehead’s other inquiries, by this kind of multi-layered approach to generalization.

The explanation of these relatively simple differences in levels of generality yields a clearer understanding of Whitehead’s genuinely difficult philosophical method of genetic and coordinate analysis. A fifth feature of our book not found in others is a thorough explanation of how this kind of algebra actually works in Process and Reality. It works similarly in Whitehead’s other inquiries, but our presentation here assumes that if this method can be understood in the most challenging instance, which is Process and Reality, then seeing how it operates in Whitehead’s other books will not be as difficult. We do not have space here to carry out a full exposition of the method of genetic and coordinate analysis in all of Whitehead’s books, but we hope other researchers will find occasion and energy to do so, and indeed we may also do some of this work in our own future efforts.

Finally, there are numerous suggestions, assertions, surmises, conjectures, and opinions contained in this book that are ours rather than Whitehead’s. We have not been shy about commenting on the philosophy and science of our own time, and indeed, the reason we read and write on Whitehead at all is for the sake of adding something to the adventure of knowing for our time and for the future. Hence, there is (for example) contained here a thorough, and we hope devastating, critique of contemporary model-centric thinking in the interpretation of science. We believe Whitehead would agree with all of our assertions, but of course they have to be considered on the weight of our lesser authority. Still, we think that we are making an addition of some merit to our own context. The same may be said for the original parts of the account of possibility both in cosmology and in theology contained here. We have tried to be explicit when we speak for ourselves and not as interpreters of Whitehead.





About Whitehead Scholarship


This brings us to the aspect of the book that some readers may find least appealing, which is the situating of our work within the context of Whitehead scholarship. In an earlier draft of this book, we had far more extensive (and critical) engagement with that literature. However, we think that the summary treatment that survives in our final edit should suffice for scholarly purposes. Following the references in our notes, a motivated reader can glean how we depart from the main lines of interpretation, and from some more than others. We have here contented ourselves with a summary of what we once had pounded out in great detail. Such are the realities of publishing in the twenty-first century.

We conclude this Introduction with a summary of how our efforts stand with regard to the major works of Whitehead scholarship. Readers who are not concerned with this part of the chore should skip to chapter 1.





The Contemporary Revival


Whitehead’s thought has been enjoying a widespread revival. A sizable group of specialists in Continental philosophy has been engaged in studying and writing on Whitehead’s connections with Bergson and Gilles Deleuze11 in ontology, Bruno Latour in the philosophy of technology and critique of culture, and Isabelle Stengers, whose unusual combination of concerns and talents has made her the soul of the revival within these circles.

Also there have been independent rumblings by such writers as Steven Shaviro, who imaginatively reconstruct a world in which Whitehead, who deserved the role (in Shaviro’s view) that was accorded to Heidegger instead.12 Also from this domain comes the “object-oriented” philosophy and “speculative realism” of Graham Harman. Whitehead has successfully entered the blogosphere and the world of new media.13 Shaviro and Harman also press the relation between Whitehead and contemporary Continental thought. There are numerous young scholars operating within and at the edges of the traditional academic institutions who are doing exciting and novel work.14

Finally, we mention Roland Faber’s appointment as Executive Co-Director of the Center for Process Studies at Claremont and his various projects (the Whitehead Research Project, especially), and the emergence of Catherine Keller as a major voice in feminist theology and in social ethics.15 They have influenced and reinforced the initial (Continental) direction of the Whitehead revival. Also, Whitehead Societies have appeared in Germany, France, and several Central and Eastern European nations, and interest has always been lively in Belgium, supplementing the strong interest that has existed for over 3 decades in China, India and Japan. In short, Whitehead is on many lips at many meetings and is being widely studied, referenced and re-introduced into teaching and discussion. We are encouraged by all this activity.





From a Logical Point of View


Isabelle Stengers rightly argues (but does not always remember) that Whitehead’s general approach to philosophy is more closely akin to the methods of philosophers before Kant than after Kant, but he has the added advantage of access to more updated science and a greater number of mathematical and logical tools (some invented by Whitehead himself) than the Moderns possessed. The idea that philosophy ought to be approached by creative formalization of its problems is an old-fashioned idea, these days, and philosophers are rarely trained in dealing with questions of the foundations of mathematics and logic that animated not only Whitehead’s time, but the two centuries between Descartes and Kant.

Unhappily, several generations of Whitehead’s interpreters have been trained in a narrow logic and a version of the history of philosophy according to norms that would fall significantly below those common in Whitehead’s day, tempting interpreters to concentrate on the parts of the text that interest them, while leaving the parts they do not understand to different specialists. There is no harm in this, in the retail sense, it being like the ancient Indian fable of the blind men and the elephant, except that if no one can see the whole elephant at all, this leaves no one to tell the story.16 Similarly, then, Whitehead’s philosophical methods are also poorly understood, especially the relation between the tools of genetic and coordinate analysis, on one side, extensive abstraction on the other, and the role played in both of these methods by creative formalization, in the quest for philosophical knowledge (which is quite distinct from other kinds of knowledge, for Whitehead).





Developmental Challenges


Whitehead’s development as a philosopher is also a matter of confusion due to much semi-professional biographical research and associated speculation (sources are regrettably slender), coupled with a basic failure on the part of such historical researchers to understand Whitehead’s permanent philosophical concerns with the problem of space, and with the various versions of a non-metrical theory of extension he worked toward his entire life.17 Thanks to off-handed, inaccurate, and irresponsible remarks made along the way by Bertrand Russell, many interpreters have acquiesced in Russell’s “authority” and distorted the way Whitehead thought about the relation between mathematical order and knowledge.18 Very few interpreters grasp how Whitehead’s investigations in the foundations of mathematics led him to favor algebraic over geometrical explanations (although Stengers has this right, in our view). But many interpreters, and nearly all casual readers of Whitehead, still confuse the narrow logic of Principia Mathematica with the broader logic of metaphysics and thus exaggerate Whitehead’s commitment to the project of reducing mathematics to an axiomatic system of logic—a project that Whitehead recognized as a failure from an early date and from which he withdrew his energies. Indeed, Whitehead became one of the ablest critics of subject-predicate logic before the third volume of Principia was ever published and he maintained that criticism for the rest of his life.19

And finally, Whitehead’s readers, from students to the most informed teachers of his texts, have not understood Whitehead’s actual achievement in formalizing a non-metrical theory of extension, and how his other methods in Process and Reality have contributed to all sorts of subsequent advances in computer science, abstract mathematics (Whitehead is the true pioneer of mereotopology), and the critique of General Relativity. At the same time, Whitehead avoids the conflation of space with extension that has dogged almost all philosophy since Kant.





Pie in the Sky


In this book, we address and (we believe) solve each of these deficiencies in the understanding and application of Whitehead. We make the case that Whitehead’s thought, properly understood, is not only relevant to a host of contemporary philosophical problems, but also offers both formal and critical tools for addressing serious problems in the contemporary interpretation of science, with applications to every branch of theoretical knowledge. In this book we sketch a formalization of his views of possibility and actuality in ways that may open up empirical research on questions of time and non-local energy as they relate to the idea of possibility and the physical world.20

Thus, the importance of this book, we would argue, lies not only in the correction of a long history of misreading, but contains guidelines for much more effective reading and application of Whitehead, which also makes it possible to teach his books with less confusion (see chapters 1–5). In addition to these contributions, it is hard to predict what importance may be accorded to our constructive applications of Whitehead’s ideas to problems in the interpretation of science and the relations among philosophy, empirical, knowledge, and nature. Obviously we hope these ideas are found to be important and that they do some good in the world.

We hesitate to say that our ideas in the middle chapters are fundamentally “new,” since the vast majority of what we say is found somewhere in Whitehead, or in his background sources, or in the history of science and the history of mathematics he assumed, as well as elsewhere, but we will take credit—or blame—for the arrangement and presentation of these ideas here, which is without precedent, either in Whitehead scholarship or in any other philosophical work. The effect of our ideas will be new, we hope, if they receive any attention. This middle part of the book culminates with a “new” account of philosophical naturalism that would actually settle the current naturalism debate in both analytic/pragmatic and Continental philosophy, if it were to be considered in the context of the philosophy we defend here. We realize how bold this claim is, but we have aimed high and hope to attain some of what we aim for.





Theological Questions


The final chapters of the book (chapters 11–13) complete the account of naturalism and address the important traditions of process theology and theological naturalism that have developed among intellectuals drawn to process thought as a way of re-articulating spiritual traditions and experience among humans. Much creative work in this domain has been done since Whitehead’s death, although we think most of it has little directly to do with Whitehead’s own philosophical concerns or with his actual achievements. As Stengers rightly points out in Thinking with Whitehead, it was Charles Hartshorne, and American philosophical theology, that preserved the strands of interpretation that have become today’s revival. Auxier has addressed his development in previous writings.

Much of what we have to say in these final chapters is aimed at extracting Whitehead from this discussion that has now spanned some four generations, leaving, we hope, both the achievements of process theology and Whitehead’s own thought intact. The tendency among process theologians to venture into scientific metaphysics and to associate their results with Whitehead’s name has had the effect of deterring other serious interpreters of science and philosophers of science from the study of Whitehead, due to a common (although far from universal) scientific superficiality in the theological books and essays, and due to an aversion on the part of philosophers of science to pursue any kind of theological discussion. Some of the theologically oriented process literature is very good, scientifically and mathematically, such as the work of Wesley Wildman, but others are not so good. No one’s misinterpretations of Whitehead are repeated more frequently than those of the theologian Lewis S. Ford. We want it understood that animus toward his views expressed sometimes in our main text is not indicative of any personal disdain. His viewpoint is basically theological and his method of interpretation is an adaptation of New Testament biblical criticism. It is misguided, and it has misled others who are even less well prepared than Ford to deal with the systematic and technical aspects of Whitehead’s philosophy.

Due to the wide reading Ford received, many people simply start studying Whitehead wherever he sets them, with a full set of assumptions in place that, in our view, impairs a person’s ability to understand much of what is plainly before him or her in Whitehead’s text. That situation needs to change, and so Whitehead as a natural philosopher, cosmologist, and philosopher of mathematical order needs to be separated from the theological tradition he helped to start. Whitehead’s concerns and achievements are not of a sort that contributes very much to theological discussion, except through extrapolation. These days, the interpretive tradition in process theology is so well established, with its own fine elders (John Cobb, David Ray Griffin, Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki, and others), that younger theologians and advocates of natural religion are not often aware of the extent of their own extrapolation from Whitehead, and thus, some of their work is passed off as Whitehead “scholarship.” It usually is not. This needs to be corrected and situated rightly in the literature. Theological thinking in a process vein is valuable and ought to be pursued vigorously. Still, our last two chapters do the work of sorting out process theology (which is never “Whiteheadian” in any strict or even fair sense) from genuinely Whiteheadian ideas about God. We draw attention to some of the most important deviations in this tradition from Whitehead’s thought and we show some of the reasons to press for a Whiteheadian naturalism that is for the most part independent of theological concerns.





Thinking with Whitehead


Isabelle Stengers’ Thinking with Whitehead is currently, one might say, “the book to beat” in Whitehead interpretation. Stengers really is only thinking with Whitehead. Her work is not Whitehead scholarship, nor is it intended to be. She leaves that work to others. Whitehead interpreters are very much divided by the position they take regarding Lewis Ford’s “compositional analysis,” as an interpretive approach to Whitehead. Compositional analysis is, as we have said, essentially an application of the methods of New Testament higher criticism to the question of Whitehead’s development (with this supposed “development” limiting and determining interpretation). We absolutely reject “compositional analysis,” and we find Ford’s work to be a house of cards, highly speculative, implausible, and damaging to the understanding of Whitehead. Stengers not only endorses Ford’s method and his results, but does so “unequivocally” and even suggests her book wouldn’t exist without Ford’s results.21

This changes everything, even though Stengers acknowledges that her basic problems are different from Ford’s. Rather than argue with Stengers at every turn, or highlight the places where we agree with her (and there are many), we will set aside her interpretation here and argue mainly along our own line. We leave it to others to decide whether Stengers’ insights can be extricated from the Fordian web.22 Our interpretation of Whitehead stresses the continuities and confluences of his thinking as part of his life as lived. We reject major breaks and sudden discoveries of the sort Ford depends on, and, unfortunately, Stengers allows to influence her understanding.

The common distinction among Whitehead interpreters, first offered by John Cobb, is, or has been, a threefold distinction of “genetic” interpreters, “systematic” interpreters, and the partisans of “compositional analysis.” Our book is both “genetic” (chapters 1–5) and “systematic” (chapters 6–13), but we do not accept anyone’s account of Whitehead’s development (Lowe especially), and no one else has quite the same view of “system” that we defend, although we find in work by Jorge Nobo, James Bradley, F. Bradford Wallack, and several other “systematic” interpreters, much we can endorse and little with which we disagree.





Systematic Interpretations


Among the systematic interpreters, there has not been another book on Whitehead as ambitious as this one since William Christian’s An Introduction to Whitehead’s Metaphysics.23 Christian’s isn’t really an introductory book at all, in spite of the title. It is a good book, but limited by the fact that Christian does not seek to coordinate Whitehead’s mature thought with his earlier writings and, as a result, offers an interpretation that forms a semi-stable island in the much larger sea of Whitehead’s thought and his historical context. Christian’s book is the only one that could easily be compared with ours on the whole, but even it is not nearly as comprehensive.

There are several studies that combine shorter systematic treatments with the aim of “introducing” Whitehead. Ivor Leclerc’s Whitehead’s Metaphysics: An Introductory Exposition,24 is one such, but it suffers from the same overemphasis on Process and Reality as Christian’s book, and also fails as an introduction (being too difficult to read). It has the advantage over Christian of situating Whitehead more astutely in the history of philosophy (emphasizing only those figures Whitehead actually studied), but this virtue eventually becomes a vice due to an over-emphasis of the same. Leclerc tends to reduce Whitehead to Plato or Aristotle or Leibniz in the course of discussion and to play the great philosophers off against one another, a comparison in which Whitehead is usually the loser, according to Leclerc. Thus Leclerc fails to present Whitehead’s true intellectual context as belonging to the mathematics and physics of his own day.

In terms of the actual systematic, total interpretation of Whitehead, carried out in our middle chapters, our book is most similar to Jorge Nobo’s Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity.25 We agree with much of what Nobo has to say. He is one of the few interpreters of Whitehead careful enough to get huge chunks of the philosophy of organism right, in our view. His book is very ambitious, but not nearly as comprehensive as ours. It also suffers from being more difficult to read than Whitehead himself. When one has done the work to figure out what Nobo is actually saying, one finds his book illuminating, helpful, in places brilliant (both intellectually and from a scholarly viewpoint). But Nobo’s influence has been blunted both by the difficulty of his book and by constant negative representations from Lewis Ford’s powerful perch as founder and editor of Process Studies.

Apart from Nobo, there is no total attempt at an interpretation of Whitehead similar to ours, but there are several books that investigate vital parts of the philosophy of organism. The most important of these are John Lango’s, Whitehead’s Ontology,26 F. Bradford Wallack’s The Epochal Nature of Process in Whitehead’s Metaphysics,27 and Judith A. Jones, Intensity: An Essay in Whiteheadian Ontology.28 These studies have a good deal to recommend them, and their results can be used to supplement ours, but they do not attempt total readings.





Genetic Interpretations


Among genetic interpreters we need only mention Victor Lowe’s Understanding Whitehead.29 Lowe was one of Whitehead’s last students and became his reluctant biographer, although his colleague Jerome Schneewind actually had to edit Lowe’s extensive notes and writing into the two-volume biography that every Whitehead scholar now reads and relies upon. But Lowe’s 1962 book is actually a summary of Whitehead’s development as a thinker from 1891 into the early 1940s, when Whitehead really stopped writing. Lowe does, therefore, connect the island of Process and Reality to the rest of Whitehead’s own development, but unfortunately Lowe had no serious training in the history of science or the history of mathematics, and, in our opinion, not much ability as an intellectual historian (something Lowe repeatedly admits himself; he did all this work because someone needed to do it and no one was stepping up).

Lowe’s 1962 book, like his biography, is misleading on many crucial points. His concern was to save Whitehead from criticisms that were popular among narrow-minded positivists and other language analysts during the time after the Second World War. He distanced Whitehead from anyone who might kill his influence among such people.30 He essentially tried to make Whitehead respectable for analytic philosophy, to the extent he could, given the style and dogmas of analytic philosophy during that time. The context has changed in our time.





Verbal Disputes


As for guides to Whitehead, especially Whitehead’s language, there are two well-known companions to Process and Reality by Donald Sherburne and Elizabeth Kraus, and there is John Cobb’s Whitehead Word Book.31 These works could be seen as competing with and complementing both our method of reading Whitehead and our systematic analysis of Process and Reality in the middle chapters. Indeed, our middle chapters, if correct, would largely work against Sherburne’s book as a viable guide, and our account and renders Kraus’s book valuable only for parts of her commentary. But neither of these books attempts the total interpretation offered in our book. We will address ourselves to Sherburne and Kraus in the notes as circumstances warrant, and along with Cobb, these sorts of interpretations can be classed as “genetic,” but limited in scope to a given book.





Out on a Limb


There are many studies applying aspects of Whitehead’s thought to various problems he did not himself address. There are also numerous books that attempt to “update” Whitehead to bring his ideas to bear on the problems in one discipline or another. The results are very mixed. A good deal of success has been achieved in religious philosophy (see Wesley Wildman’s numerous works), and also especially where religious experience touches on social experience (for example, Catherine Keller) and the experience of nature (see Richard Weidig and Ralph Pred, for instance32). Our book does not address directly this sort of study, since science, mathematics, ontology, logic, and the tools of analysis and knowledge are our primary concerns. Our reading has implications for these sorts of books, of course, but only to the extent that it may suggest these various authors are working with ideas they believe to be Whitehead’s, but are not Whitehead’s. We are not purists and are untroubled by the good use of good ideas wherever they may be found, but putting Whitehead’s name to those ideas can be misleading.

The only direct competition regarding this aspect of our book comes from those Whitehead interpreters who seek to apply Whitehead to science in light of more recent developments in physics, especially, after Whitehead’s lifetime. In this domain, our work, if we are right, invalidates the approach of Michael Epperson in Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead.33 This earlier work of Epperson’s was especially problematic in that it slipped from employing aspects of Whitehead’s metaphysics as interpretive tools in the philosophy of physics, to making more broadly exegetical claims about Whitehead’s metaphysics itself, claims which do not hold up under a careful reading of Whitehead’s texts. However, the more recent work by Epperson and Zafiris, Foundations of Relational Realism: A Topological Approach to Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Nature, does not suffer from that weakness.34 In this work, Epperson (who handled the specifically philosophical parts of the discussion) maintains a much cleaner focus on the philosophy of physics, and thus on applying Whitehead’s thought rather than going into deeper interpretations of that thought. But precisely on that account, Epperson and Zafiris are not offering an account that competes with the argument presented here. Rather, their work supplements and complements what we are doing, or so we believe.

In particular, it is worth highlighting two salient features of Epperson’s and Zafiris’s work. The first of these is the “relational realism” from which the book gets its title. One of the most profoundly unfortunate ideas in contemporary physics is the “multiple universes” claim, an especially unhappy piece of nonsense for which we will have some choice words later in this book, especially in chapter 10. This sort of groundless speculation on the part of physicists is driven, at least in part, by a failure by physicists to take relations seriously, while treating their mathematical formalisms as somehow ultimate. Thus, we agree with Epperson and Zafiris when they say that, “when elegance of formalism … trumps empirical applicability, the measure of scientific progress begins to derive from the measure of its appeal, rather than its appeal deriving from its progress.”35 But Epperson’s and Zafiris’s insistence that relations should be treated as having a genuine standing of their own, and not as merely parasitic upon their relata, makes their work one of the most important contributions in the philosophy of physics in recent years.36 The second point to highlight is the use by Epperson and Zafiris of category theoretic ideas, especially that of a “sheaf,” both as an interpretive tool and a primary formal technique applied to quantum mechanics.37 As we will be arguing throughout this book, “algebraic” modes of thinking (which includes category theory) are of vital importance in understanding Whitehead’s relationalism.38

In other areas, we tend to agree on many points with the book by Murray Code, Order and Organism: Steps to a Whiteheadian Philosophy of Mathematics and the Natural Sciences,39 but Code has revised his view on much of what he said in that book, especially the parts we think he had right. We will note our reasons for this view in our notes as the book unfolds.

Our approach tends to agree with the results of the plasma physicist Timothy E. Eastman, who has published many articles on Whitehead and physics, and has gathered together some of the principal contributors to this discussion in his Physics and Whitehead: Quantum, Process, and Experience,40 but one problem we encounter repeatedly is that such interpreters do not rightly understand what Whitehead means by “quantum” and they wrongly assume it is close to what contemporary physicists mean by that word. One challenge for our book will be the displacement of this habit of thinking. What Whitehead means by “quantum” is far more radical, and far more important, than what contemporary interpreters of science suspect.
