1  Reading Whitehead


The order in which the parts should be studied will depend upon the psychology of the reader. I have placed them in the order natural to my own mind, namely, general principles, particular applications, and finally the general exposition of the mathematical theory of which special examples have occurred in the discussion of the applications.

—Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity (vi)





Difficult Reading


Whitehead is difficult to read, and there can be little doubt that the challenge of his language is partly responsible for limiting his influence. The difficulty, however, is not just mastering a new vocabulary. The problems also have much to do with the unfamiliarity, the novelty of the individual thoughts and relations among the ideas Whitehead describes, and this situation is not so much linguistic as intellectual. The ideas themselves are not easy to think. But in addition, it is not always easy to grasp the structure of Whitehead’s exposition because it operates simultaneously at several levels of abstraction (or generality), and Whitehead is in the habit of moving from one level to another with little warning he has done so. He kindly over-estimates his readers and under-estimates the subtlety and elusiveness of his thinking. Whitehead does define his vocabulary carefully and he does clearly describe the various levels of generality among which he hops, and he is very conscientious about laying out the scope, limits, and aims of every inquiry. But he asks too much of us.

The effort to understand Whitehead is further complicated by the organic character of his thought. Each part of his philosophy, every level of generality, every term, and every goal, is immanent in and achieved through all of the others. To understand clearly any given passage in one of Whitehead’s books requires an understanding of the rest of the book. Whitehead is not one to waste words, so unpacking the full meaning of even a single sentence, in light of the work that sentence does in the book, can require a long narrative. Organicity in a philosophy is familiar to readers of Hegel, Bradley, Bergson, Royce, Heidegger, and numerous others, but the problem is especially pronounced in Whitehead’s most important works, since the order of exposition is often very different from the order in which the ideas would be traced if the exposition were linear. As Whitehead says, “In the presentation of a novel outlook with wide ramifications, a single line of communications from premises to conclusions is not sufficient for intelligibility. Your audience will construe whatever you say into conformity with their pre-existing outlook.”1

In addition to these problems, there is also a great difficulty in understanding how one work by Whitehead, whether an essay or a book, relates to or bears upon others in the full corpus. Here we have to confront not only issues of the development of Whitehead’s thought, but also the unity of it. Many incompatible interpretive theses have been defended by various scholars over the decades, but the most influential theses usually involve the idea that Whitehead’s thought culminates in his 1929 work Process and Reality, which is by any standard the heart of Whitehead’s philosophy, and that all other works are to be measured by the content and aim of that work. This prevailing view is neither correct nor helpful in learning to read Whitehead, so we will not assume it in what follows.





Whitehead’s Lexicon


To begin the daunting task of “reading Whitehead,” it is a good idea to start with a discussion of terminology and how it is deployed in service of systematic inquiry. Whitehead organized his inquiries in the way mathematicians do, defining terms clearly but flexibly and generally, and redefining them when he changed from one inquiry to another. Thus, for example, what he calls “eternal objects” in Process and Reality has a close relation to what he calls by the same name in Science and the Modern World, and both are close to what he calls “ideal forms” in Religion in the Making, but there is no reason to assume an identity of meaning for technical terms across different books. Indeed, the meaning of technical terminology develops and deepens more within the context of a single inquiry than across books, so that there is no reason to assume that a technical term, such as “ideal form,” means exactly the same thing from one occurrence to the next within even the same book, let alone across books. For example, in Religion in the Making, the term “ideal forms” is used more or less interchangeably with the terms “ideal entities,” and “abstract forms” and all are closely related to the term “ideal world.”2

Whitehead says, “The fate of a word has to the historian the value of a document.”3 To be a reader of Whitehead is to be a historian of a sort. But Whitehead’s writing style tempts one to treat individual occurrences of technical terms as though they might serve as fixed definitions. He has a habit of saying things like “an actual entity is the outcome of a creative synthesis, individual and passing.”4 But elsewhere he may say something like “to be an actual entity is to have a self-interest,”5 which seems to have no clear relation to what has been said before, and also seems to have definitional force. As a matter of writing style, Whitehead makes hundreds of statements like these in his shorter works, and thousands in the longer works.6

Even if it were clear what force a definition has in Whitehead’s thought (and that could be a long discussion), it would never be clear when he intends a given statement to have definitional force. It is better to think of the occurrence of terminology in Whitehead in hermeneutic terms, to see each occurrence of a term as a promissory note of further refinement, in terminology and in total context, over the course of a work. There is, however, no such promise of refinement when we move from one work to another.7 Whitehead’s philosophy does develop and fill out. His numerous footnotes in later works to earlier works suggest that he thought of the various inquiries in relation to a total development and effort, but with technical terminology he makes no such assurances. In the domain of technical terminology, the safest interpretive course is to confine one’s attention to a single work until the full meaning of the term in that context has been appreciated and understood. Only then is a reader in a good position to consider how the differing aims of various books may affect the comparison of terminology that may seem similar or even be common to both.

For example, the subject matter of Science and the Modern World (1925) is not too far removed from that of Process and Reality (1929) since the latter treats cosmology, which Whitehead understands as a subdivision of scientific thinking, while scientific thinking is the topic of the former book. We might expect very similar meanings to be associated with similar or identical terminology, and the expectation is, we think, fulfilled. But the context of usage does make a difference; the aims of the two inquiries are different, and comparisons in meaning should always resist the urge to assume premature identities of terminology. Thus, not only should we refrain from asserting simple definitions within a single work, we should be even more reluctant to assume identical definitions from one work to another. To use the meaning given to a term in one work as the standard by which occurrences of similar (or identical) terms must be measured (as is lamentably common among scholars of process thought) denies to each inquiry the relative independence Whitehead claims for his works and over-emphasizes the continuities among them in ways that are sure to distort one’s reading and understanding of Whitehead.8

Whitehead’s philosophy of language actually requires such caution as we advise here. Not only is error the ground of meaning for Whitehead, but he continually complains about the poverty and inadequacy of language.9 It is best to take the development of terms in each of Whitehead’s works as open-ended but increasingly adequate metaphors that point to some fundamental relation—a relation that will not come fully to language.10 A definition for Whitehead is not the demonstration of an essence from first principles, or from the four causes. He does not accept the idea that predication (whether traditional or Kantian) is our best route to capturing the meaning of an experience.11

The best place to begin one’s study of Whitehead’s usage is to read Religion in the Making in conjunction with Science and the Modern World. Because the two works were written in the same year, one can largely ignore the question of whether a time lapse has affected Whitehead’s thinking. Whitehead says that these two books are the same train of thought in different applications, so variations in terminology are just as informative as similarities. To master Whitehead’s usage, then, means to grasp first the fate of terms within a single work, and to begin to grasp what is involved in comparing terminology from across works, starting with the easiest. Another option is to compare The Concept of Nature to An Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, which treat similar questions at different levels of abstraction, “companion volumes,” as Whitehead terms them, but these are more demanding works and for that reason perhaps less than ideal for mastering vocabulary.12

In addition to what is said here, it is sometimes illuminating to trace the origins of the technical terms Whitehead chose for his system beyond his own works. For example, the term “ingression,” which Whitehead uses for the way eternal objects enter into concrescence, may seem like a neologism, but it isn’t. It goes back to Middle English and has a long-standing legal meaning, and has been adapted to mathematical and economic uses over the centuries. To ingress is the complementary of to egress, but one hears neither term very much, and “egress” wasn’t adopted by Whitehead as the complementary; rather, he chose “to express” for that role.13

Similarly, sometimes the odd word “prehension” is attributed to Whitehead as a new term (and indeed, his sense of the term is new), but its use dates back at least to 1828 and also has a legal meaning. Whitehead, in spite of appearances, is wary of neologisms, but not wary of making full use of the English language and adapting existing terms to new shades of meaning. As you might expect, however, these adaptations are dynamic and developmental. The introduction of a new term is just the beginning of a process of getting it to do the work he has in mind for it. The cluster of essential terms becomes a mutually defining organic whole—or in Whiteheadian, the multiplicity of terms becomes a plurality.14 That organic whole is firmly in Whitehead’s mind before he writes a book, and the order of exposition in the book is independent of the process by which his thinking proceeded in developing the web of meanings. This is a mark of mathematical inquiry, where what is published has little or no relation to the process by which it was discovered or invented.15 In short, Whitehead is presenting the results of his thinking, not the process. The arrangement is determined both by his habits as a mathematician and his (less than reliable) estimation of what will be clear to his readers.16 Thus, fully grasping one term requires fully grasping all of the terms, and not confusing the order of their exposition in a work with their mutual relations of meaning. For this reason, it can be difficult to know where to begin.

It will be clear that among the strategies we recommend, a good one is listing occurrences of key terms and compiling near verbatim summaries of the meanings Whitehead attributes to them, which is what Auxier did in the glossary to Religion in the Making, while Sherburne has done something similar for Process and Reality. This is obviously a labor-intensive process. One might use Auxier’s glossary as a substitute for doing that work, and to a lesser degree, Sherburne’s A Key to Process and Reality may also be consulted, although its scope of the latter work is limited and it does not try to preserve the order of usage in the book (thus the internal development of terms in the exposition is usually lost). However, even doing this kind of work for oneself will not necessarily provide an adequate understanding of the reading. Some other principles have to be understood.





Whitehead’s Structure of Inquiry


We will now make a suggestion as to how we should understand the structural organization of Whitehead’s inquiries in various works, and how, for him, “method” is subordinate to “theory,” or working hypotheses, within an individual work. As he says, “theory dictates method, and … any particular method is applicable to theories of one correlate species.”17

The first thing to be aware of is that Whitehead is not attempting phenomenology in any of his inquiries. The type of description of experience that (in effect) denies both genuine discontinuity and continuity to the perceptual flux, substituting for that flux some sort of Fürsichsein or intentional condition (by some epoche or reduction), so as to discover discreteness and continuities in acts of consciousness (and structures and principles) is not Whitehead’s aim. Thus, interpreting Whitehead as a phenomenologist is a misstep. He knows very well the importance of phenomenological description, but it is not his task. If Whitehead were to have a phenomenology, it would look very much like the one Ernst Cassirer created in The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms (1923–1929), since the relation of culture and nature was Whitehead’s main preoccupation, as distinct from consciousness and psychology. The complementarity of Whitehead and Cassirer is instructive and worth examining because Cassirer’s project brings to Whitehead the kind of phenomenology his thought requires.

Wilbur Urban, who contributed essays to both of the important Library of Living Philosophers volumes on Whitehead and Cassirer,18 identifies the central issue in attempting to bring their ideas together as follows:

If the ideal form and immanental law of all knowledge is, indeed, to be found in the mathematical-physical sciences, then it would seem the symbolism of metaphysics must also be a symbolism of relations and that a philosophy of events, such as that of Whitehead for instance, would necessarily be the resultant metaphysics. On the other hand, if it is true, as we are told by Cassirer, that science as symbolic form has no exclusive value, but is only one way of constructing reality, and has value only from the standpoint of science, then it would appear that a metaphysics, to be adequate, must be a metaphysics of art and religion also and must have a language and symbolic form which includes these forms also—in which case it could no longer be a symbolism of relations merely, but must be a symbolism of things also.19



Here Urban expresses a point of view quite common not only among critics of both Whitehead and Cassirer, but even among their most sympathetic interpreters. The effort to treat science as both an independent and culturally embedded form of knowing is a delicate task. Urban does not grasp “relation” as a concrete metaphysical hypothesis, as what we call “real” in this book, but sees it only in its logical or mathematical sense, hence assuming that method is prior to theory. He has not understood that for Cassirer and Whitehead, there are no “things,” in science, religion, art, or any other symbolic domain, until the “things” are constituted as the highly mediated relational outcome of a symbolization process. Nor has Urban appreciated that art, religion, etc., are modes of symbolization, ways of relating to and having a “world.” The various symbolic forms of culture invite separate inquiries with methods and ontologies adapted to their variations.

Urban has rightly intuited that a metaphysics of events, like Whitehead’s, is appropriate to the type of philosophizing for what Cassirer is doing, but Urban has not considered that there are “events” in more than the scientific sense of the term. He has also not considered the importance of the deeply aesthetic character of scientific events. Understanding Whitehead involves the recognition that even if, for instance, “artistic events” and “scientific events” are both “events,” the price one pays for seeing them as similar, classifying them under a single term, is that one forfeits most of what makes them interesting, valuable, and even knowable (in any rich sense). To know something abstractly is not to know it very intimately. Certainly the factors that point to any event, as seen in the light of art and the factors that point to the “same” event as seen in the light of science are, in many ways, positively correlated, but there is no good empirical reason to assume the ontological identity of the factors picked out in those variant horizons.

Yet, Urban rightly recognizes that the tendency of Cassirer, in keeping with Whitehead, to endow science with the highest authority in “knowledge” is puzzling to many in light of their similar claim that science is a culturally embedded and thoroughly mediated form of knowledge. Whitehead and Cassirer are indeed both philosophers of science in the highest sense. Urban, like so many other twentieth-century realists, is assuming that science, done rightly (i.e., according to its supposed “method”), has a privileged ontological path to the way things are, independent of the knowing mind. But even the question of mind-independence is a holdover from substance metaphysics, with its assumption that there is some necessary relation between “knowing” and “being” (and that this relation is secured in mathematical or logical relations). In short, Urban is a sort of unconscious idealist, while Whitehead consciously insists upon the stubborn reality of particular experience, i.e., its inexhaustibility in the effort to render it symbolically for our limited and self-interested aims.

Where one assumes only possible relations between reality and knowing, and places necessity strictly within the internal operations of knowing, reality becomes a contingent process, an inexhaustible resource for our symbolic appropriations. On this point Cassirer and Whitehead agree, and in no way does this restriction upon the reach of science reduce its authority. The move to treating possibility as the fundamental modal category in metaphysics simply allows us to situate scientific knowing historically and empirically, and to account for the growth and alterations in our scientific claims. In short, if science wants to know nature, it has to approach nature as a growing, contingent, and dynamic system. That is a stiff demand to make upon static, categorical thinking.

But philosophy deals not with nature or religion or art directly, it deals foremost with the structures of their possibilities. As Whitehead says: “Philosophy is the ascent to the generalities, with the view to understanding their possibilities of combination. The discovery of new generalities thus adds to the fruitfulness of those already known. It lifts into view new possibilities of combination.”20 Its aim is philosophical knowledge. It is worthwhile at this point to give special note to something Whitehead often says near the beginning of his inquiries. Whitehead complains often about how little philosophy can really accomplish, blaming this usually upon “weakness of insight and deficiencies of language.”21 As a result, our initial descriptions remain “metaphors mutely appealing for an imaginative leap.”22 The difficulty, he continues “has its seat in the empirical side of philosophy”:

Our datum is the actual world, including ourselves; and this actual world spreads itself for observation in the guise of the topic of our immediate experience. The elucidation of immediate experience is the sole justification for any thought [note, not just philosophic thought]; and the starting-point for thought is the analytic observation of components of this experience. But we are not conscious of any clear-cut complete analysis of immediate experience, in terms of the various details which comprise its definiteness.23



This is the cost of a radical kind of empiricism.24 With this issue understood, it is nevertheless true that Cassirer and Whitehead undertake very different projects, phenomenological and metaphysical, respectively, from the same basic convictions about process and reality. We see no fundamental disagreement between the two, but we believe that few interpreters rightly understand their full complementarity.25

Interpreters of Whitehead have commonly confused the issue of the development of his ideas, with the meaning and purpose of his individual works. We will take up questions associated with the external motivations for Whitehead’s individual inquiries in subsequent chapters. For the moment it is sufficient to note, for example, that the “triptych”26 was written in response to Einstein, while the development of Whitehead’s metaphysics was a response to the reception of his natural philosophy in the intellectual community. With each individual work, we descry reasons for its existence that are external to its contents. Yet, one must not carry too far the speculations that are invited by supposing we have access to motives and perceptions in the distant past. It is common for interpreters (Lewis Ford is a good example27) to think of each book as presaging some further development of the whole philosophy of organism,28 culminating, for most, in Process and Reality, with the two major books he wrote thereafter drawing out consequences. There is great value in studying Whitehead’s development, but it has led most readers to overlook the common pattern in each of his books, and very often they have misunderstood his method (and how it is dictated by a different working hypothesis in each book) along with his way of structuring an inquiry. The structure of the inquiry is essentially the same in each book, but the methods vary with the hypotheses under consideration.29

Whitehead is always careful in his introductions to supply a clear indication of where his present inquiry fits in the general effort of human thought. He carefully qualifies the project at hand and suggests its limits. The proper “criticism of a theory,” or “working hypothesis,” for Whitehead, “consists in noting its scope of useful application and its failure beyond that scope.”30 In truth, each book is an individual inquiry into some important domain of experience. Each book proceeds along the same basic line: he will describe the phenomena under investigation to provide a version of them, how they may be seen (not how they must be seen), and he also subjects that description to a systematic analysis. In no instance does he claim that the initial description of the phenomena (what he calls their “genetic account” in Process and Reality) is the final or the only way of describing these phenomena. In every case he notes that their analytically detailed and systematic characterization (what he calls the “coordinate account” in Process and Reality) is presupposed by the genetic description, but the coordination of the phenomena sets the scope of the inquiry and their genetic description is limited by that scope. Coordination of the phenomena is closer to the way they are experienced than is their genetic specification.31

In adopting this structure Whitehead follows standard mathematical methods. One must specify the entities and rules in order to provide their systematic interrelations. There is a great deal of freedom in specifying the phenomena or entities genetically, but the test of whether it has been done well is whether interesting systematic relations, “new generalities,” and “possibilities of combination” do come to light in the coordinate phase of the inquiry (the order of genetic and coordinate exposition can vary, as we will explain, but regardless of what order these phases appear in a given book, the genetic specification presupposes the coordinate whole). And the whole analysis, both genetic and coordinate, is measured against the ways in which it illuminates experience. In answer to the question “why should we accept this genetic account?” Whitehead holds that its warrant looks back to experience, first, and attempts as accurately as possible to carve out the phenomena under discussion in ways that accord with our experience. (This is the closest Whitehead ever comes to doing phenomenology—a simple and accurate description of experience, but the coordinate whole is not treated as “given,” and thus the genetic specification does not claim to get at “the things themselves,” as phenomenologists usually want to do.) Adjustments in any genetic account are inevitable in light of our further investigation of the phenomena. In spite of that, we are justified in specifying the phenomena to the best of our ability for the purposes of a more thorough speculative understanding of their interrelations. The adjustments of terminology, along the way, as discussed above, are justified by the way that the initial specification of phenomena is always too abstract, too stipulative, and needs concretization. Looming in the background of this activity is the genuine result of prior thinking, i.e., the coordinate account without which we would have no idea of how to specify phenomena.

Thus, the genetic phase of an inquiry is an initial narrativizing of the phenomena, under descriptive principles determined by the purpose of the investigation at hand, more specifically, the working hypothesis or “theory,” the common character of which is to sequence and specify those phenomena, i.e., to limit what we mean in referring to them in that context so that we can discuss them systematically. The sequencing does not have to be historical or chronological, but it can be, as in Religion in the Making and Adventures of Ideas. In every case, however, the aim is to get the phenomena to “stand still,” to make possible a conceptualization which counters their ephemeral and changing character, so as to provide us with something we can trust from one thought to the next.

With the initial genetic description in place, and the flux controlled, we can move to the presentation of a coordinate analysis (bearing in mind that the coordinate analysis of our inquiry was the prior condition for the genetic specification in our exposition of our results). This is a second order narrativization, providing a bridge to what may fairly be called a “spatialization” of the problem, and this procedure allows us to examine and bring to light systematic features that were immanent in the initial genetic specification of the phenomena. This is, of course, the trick that makes mathematical exposition seem magical. The mathematician certainly knows where the exposition is going, but the auditors or readers do not. When it is shown that immanent relations in the seemingly innocent genetic specification were “loaded,” it is as if the lady sawed in half appears again whole. The truth of the matter is that the “coordinate lady” logically precedes the “analyzed lady,” and the analysis was virtual, not actual.

The exhibition of these relations presumably enables us to see how our own activity of characterizing phenomena genetically will necessitate certain conclusions about their relations and exclude other conclusions. To alter the necessitated results of a coordinate account, one must back up and alter the genetic account, and in so doing attend again to the ways in which experience presents those phenomena together that we had singled out and specified for an initial genetic description (bearing in mind that, in terms of the method, the coordinate account remains primary). Experience comes together, genetic description specifies, and coordinate description restores some portion of the togetherness we lost in specifying, but does so according to some (narratively informed) purpose. The effect of the process is to produce a coordinated description that approximates our original experience, but as adapted to the aims for which the inquiry was undertaken. The coordinate description should exhibit just those characters in experience which are relevant to the defined purposes that produced the inquiry.

The entire undertaking is thoroughly hypothetical.32 No conclusion about reality in itself is forced upon us by any result in the genetic or coordinate accounts, because the option always remains, in Whitehead’s structure of inquiry, of altering the purpose or scope of the inquiry itself, or of describing the phenomena genetically using different principles of specification. No ontological knowledge is claimed for any result, by which we mean, no knowledge of any necessary relation obtaining between the way things are in themselves, our logic, and our knowledge. It is taken for granted that the relationship between experiencing and philosophical understanding is thoroughly contingent, yet there are still pressing reasons to attempt to gain philosophical knowledge, even if that knowledge is only descriptive. Philosophical knowledge of a subject allows one to recognize important possibilities within the adventure of living, possibilities that will be overlooked without it, to the great diminishment of life.

Thus, Whitehead’s books are individual inquiries into well-circumscribed aspects of experience, submitted to a genetic specification and to a coordinate analysis (both are descriptions), the results of which are limited by the way in which the initial inquiry and its purposes were defined. For example, when Whitehead confronts the phenomena of religious experience in Religion in the Making, he is not immediately interested in their implications for modern cosmology. He does not describe these phenomena in Religion in the Making for the purpose of seeing their relation to cosmology, or science of any other kind; rather, he describes them for the purposes stated:

to give a concise analysis of the various factors in human nature which go to form a religion, to exhibit the inevitable transformation of religion with the transformation of knowledge, and more especially to direct attention to the foundation of religion on our apprehension of those permanent elements of reason of which there is a stable order in the world, permanent elements apart from which there could be no changing world.33



When similar concepts come up, describing similar phenomena in Process and Reality, they have been described for a quite different purpose, that of investigating “a phase of philosophic thought which began with Descartes and ended with Hume.”34

In reading the interpretive literature, one gets the impression that Whitehead’s followers simply do not believe him when he states explicitly what he is doing and why, in spite of the fact that he goes on to explain in detail what limits he places upon each inquiry. The inquiry in Process and Reality is about the way philosophers thought between Descartes and Hume, a certain turn of thinking, novel in human history, in which the algebraic and geometrical modes of thought came together. Process and Reality makes no attempt at a full assessment of philosophic thought from Kant forward or prior to Descartes. Whitehead thinks the modern philosophers had some things right that became obscured after Kant. He wants to draw out what they had right. That is the “theory,” to use the term as Whitehead does.35 The method (genetic and coordinate analysis) is post-Kantian, but not the subject of the inquiry, i.e., modern cosmology. Thus, Whitehead’s major work attempts to come to terms with the fundamental insights of modern philosophy.

Another clear example of the ordering of “genetic” and “coordinate” analysis is in Adventures of Ideas. Part I of that book specifies genetically, in the mode of the history of ideas, “the influence exerted by the Platonic and Christian doctrines of the human soul upon the sociological development of the European races.” Part II specifies genetically “the influence of scientific ideas upon European culture.”36 The transition to the coordinate account is in Part II, where Whitehead breaks with his earlier narrative style, numbers the paragraphs into a categoreal scheme of the essential ideas that have been genetically specified, and then proceeds in subsequent chapters to analyze them in coordination with one another. The book’s subsequent structure requires that we pay close attention. The break between the coordinate analysis and the results of it does come when Whitehead moves to Part IV, but he does not there explain it. For whatever expository reason, he saves the explanation for the beginning of the final chapter, but he is perfectly explicit about what he has done and how. He says:

Our discussions have concerned themselves with specializations in History, of seven Platonic generalities, namely, The Ideas, The Physical Elements, The Psyche, The Eros, The Harmony, The Mathematical Relations, The Receptacle. The historical references have been selected and grouped with the purpose of illustrating the energizing of specializations of these seven general notions among the peoples of Western Europe, driving them towards their civilization.37



The selection was done in the genetic accounts of Parts I and II, and the grouping was accomplished in the coordinate account of Part II. These are simply other names for genetic and coordinate analysis, although we may assume that the method of “selection and grouping” here corresponds to the “theory” that Platonic and Christian doctrines of the soul can tell us much about the sociological development of Europeans. To recur to our earlier point about Cassirer’s cultural phenomenology, one can see that in this “theory,” these Platonic ideas function similarly in the domain of a philosophy of Western civilization as “symbolic forms” function for Cassirer’s much broader “philosophy of culture.”

Whitehead goes on: “Finally, in this fourth and last Part of the book, those essential qualities, whose joint realization in social life constitutes civilization, are being considered. Four such qualities have, so far, been examined:—Truth, Beauty, Adventure, Art.”38 Such structural statements as these are the ones that reveal Whitehead’s habits of inquiry, and they cannot be overlooked. For Whitehead, “Truth,” for example, does not mean the same thing from one inquiry to another, for scientific truth and historical truth are related but separate ideas, and they require different genetic phenomena and coordinate analyses to show their respective meanings.

To assume, for example that the account of “Truth” in Adventures of Ideas trumps the account in Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, or Science and the Modern World, or Process and Reality is simply to miss what Whitehead does in a book. This error generalizes the results of one inquiry into or out of the results of another in which the phenomena have been genetically specified for other and different purposes, and coordinately analyzed differently, with different results presupposed. It cannot be assumed that later books reveal a development or change in Whitehead’s basic ideas. Perhaps there is development, but it is not shown to be the case simply because he says different things about, for example, Truth, in later books.

What Whitehead says about Truth in Adventures of Ideas is tied intimately to the genetic specification and coordinate analysis (or more accurately, the “selection and grouping”) of truth in that book, and for its purposes. The project there has to do with the way the idea of truth contributed to the growth of Western civilization, and not more than that (at least not directly more). The results of any inquiry are dependent upon this general way of approaching problems. Results are revisable even within a single inquiry. One can genetically specify different phenomena, or ostensibly the “same” phenomena in other ways. The coordinate analysis is more restricted, because it is logically prior to and therefore answerable to the genetic specifications, but from any accomplished genetic specification, many other coordinate analyses may be undertaken. This is to say, results from one inquiry can be extracted for other purposes, of course, but they must be adapted to those new purposes.

The criterion by which we adjudge the entire process, as having been done either well or poorly, is the criterion of experience. This criterion holds for every inquiry, although one always needs to say what aspects of experience are most relevant to forming the sub-criteria. In general Whitehead does adhere to “adequacy,” and “logical rigor,” and “exemplification” as functional criteria. These are the criteria made explicit in Process and Reality.39 All of these criteria are experiential, but in different ways (a point that will be taken up in subsequent chapters). It would not distort what Whitehead has done in every book to say that

(1) “adequacy” applies most directly to whether the genetic specification is both in agreement with the phenomena it selects from experience (that these phenomena do occur and are appropriately specified in light of the coordination that precedes them), and whether those phenomena are representative of experience more generally, not simply within the domain of the inquiry at hand;40

(2) “logical rigor” (or coherence or necessity, which come to the same thing) deals with whether the phenomena, as genetically specified, are analyzed in accordance with all and only the logical principles required and implied by the prior coordination, and without illicit inferences, contradictions and/or undischarged assumptions when we move from one level of generality to another;

(3) “exemplification” (and/or applicability) deals with whether the outcome of (1) and (2) does indeed illuminate our actual experience as had, while no part of our experience as had fails to be exemplified in the “theory.”



These are ambitious criteria and they set the bar very high for successful inquiry. We would expect nothing less. There is nothing in this procedure that is in the least out of line with radical empiricism as William James defined it (as taken up in chapter 2 and subsequent chapters). It is simply more worked out and systematic than anything James ever managed.

To use Whitehead’s results from one inquiry in another context requires the results to be correspondingly modified for the new purpose. The analogies from one of Whitehead’s inquiries to another are rich and tempting. And there is much in Whitehead’s earlier works, especially on the developments in science, and several explicit discussions of Kant and transcendental idealism, which would aid us in a post-critical framing of the phenomena of post-Kantian philosophical thought, including cosmology, if we wished to undertake the inquiry. Whitehead’s interpreters have habitually treated Process and Reality as if it were a straightforward, post-Kantian piece of ontology. That is a mistake. Whitehead explicitly distances himself from the entire Kantian project and insists that the Moderns were closer to being correct in their efforts at speculative cosmology. To treat Whitehead’s metaphysics as a post-critical contribution to the twentieth-century conversation misses what is so radical and so interesting about his viewpoint. Process and Reality is a book about Modern philosophy and the way it was done from Descartes to Hume—and what it had right. Adventures of Ideas is about Platonic philosophy, seven of its “generalities,” and how they influenced European civilization. That is what the inquiry is. It is not some other. And so on.

Simply to assume that Whitehead’s results in any of his inquiries have automatic application to problems that lie beyond their clearly specified scope is a great mistake. But it is a lamentably common one. To assume that the results of Whitehead’s inquiries include ontological knowledge, necessitated by the order of being and the order of knowing, is to misunderstand completely Whitehead’s structure of inquiry, and how “theory” determines method. Philosophical knowledge is not necessary knowledge, for Whitehead, although the means by which it is attained will employ “necessity,” as a tool and concept, internal to the terms of the inquiry itself.





Levels of Generality in Process and Reality


Another obstacle to understanding Whitehead’s thought has to do with the difficulty many readers have in sorting out the various levels of generality he simultaneously employs in the course of a single inquiry. Apart from the common strategy of genetic and coordinate analysis (or selection and grouping, or something similar,) a Whiteheadian inquiry will be framed by a pair of “bookends,” that is, the most general level of description and the least general (or most particular) level. These levels are adapted to the inquiry at hand, and as the inquiries differ, so do the levels of generality. For the purposes of this chapter, we will make explicit the levels of generality and particularity in Process and Reality, but the pattern is the same in every book and even in the essays. It is almost impossible to do any philosophical thinking without moving among various levels of generality. Since Process and Reality is probably Whitehead’s most important book, and perhaps the most difficult, we will use it as an example.

The most general or abstract level of description in Process and Reality is the “theory of cosmic epochs,” featuring an account of how “the extensive continuum” is divided in our own cosmic epoch. The extensive continuum itself is conceived as an irreducible undivided divisibility, or a divisible continuum as yet undivided. On a few occasions, Whitehead allows himself to speculate about whether there might be any common rules or characters that would necessarily belong to the extensive continuum in cosmic epochs other than our own, but for the most part the theory of cosmic epochs is intended as a construct that limits the highest applicable level of generality for any human thinking as it inquires in the domain of cosmology. Beyond the constraints and presuppositions found in our own cosmic epoch, we possess no method of inquiry that can be counted on to avoid the pitfalls of vacuous abstractionism. Thus, the “cosmic epoch” is the whole to which all parts belong in the course of Process and Reality. The whole is, of course, characterized differently in other books (European civilization in Adventures of Ideas, for example, or what goes toward making a religion in Religion in the Making, and so on). But the cosmic epoch, being the functional limit of inquiry in Process and Reality, is the “universal” to which all particulars belong in that inquiry.

The first division of the extensive continuum in our cosmic epoch is the temporal division of the continuum, which may be specified in any number of ways, but what is revealed in each mode of temporal division of the continuum is the genetic divisibility (note the modality) of the continuum itself.41 In whatever way the continuum is temporally divided (note the modality), the cosmic epoch is designated as the whole to which such temporality belongs, the temporal divisions, no matter how they are specified, being the ultimate character of all parts in the epoch. This, then, is the most general level of description in Process and Reality—the theory of cosmic epochs. Whenever Whitehead uses the term “cosmic epoch,” he is speaking at this level of generality. Other verbal clues have to do with language about “the whole.”

On the other side, the most concrete (or least general or most particular) level of description in Process and Reality is the theory of prehensions.42 Prehensions are “entities” whose mode of existence is described as “concrete facts of relatedness.” Their “entitative-way-of-being” is exhibited in the analysis of actual occasions, but they are not found existing independently of an actual entity in its actual world, nor are prehensions independent of one another. In their concrete existing they are the togetherness of the cosmic epoch, its “solidarity”; prehensions may be treated individually only by an act of abstraction through which real continuities are treated as disjuncts.43 Because prehensions are the most concrete particulars in Whitehead’s inquiry into modern cosmology, they coordinate all the levels of generality in the whole theory. Thus, prehension stands to cosmic epoch as ultimate part to ultimate whole, hypothetically framing the inquiry. There is no claim that cosmic epochs or prehensions are the ultimate units of the universe itself, only that they will serve the roles of ultimate whole and ultimate parts for the inquiry that is Process and Reality. Every inquiry has to make clear what whole it takes as its subject matter, and with what concrete parts it will coordinate that whole.

Between the theory of cosmic epochs and the theory of prehensions in Process and Reality are three major levels of generality: (1) the theory of concrescence and transition, or more simply, the theory of actual occasions; (2) the theory of causal efficacy and presentational immediacy, or more simply, the theory of perception; and (3) the theory of propositions and generic contrasts, or more simply the theory of symbolic reference (or even of judgment). These are presented in order, from more general to less general, as the intermediate levels in Process and Reality.44 The theory of judgment is almost as concrete as the theory of prehensions, while the theory of actual occasions is almost as general as the theory of cosmic epochs.

If some of you find yourselves saying that the theory of actual occasions is like Peircean Firstness, the theory of perception is Secondness, and the theory of judgment is Thirdness, we can only say that we would not discourage that kind of creative thinking. But this is not Peircean phenomenology. It definitely is metaphysics, and the relations of part and whole are what interest us here. Each of these levels of generality has a view of the whole and the whole is analyzed into “entities” appropriate to each level of generality. Is the “whole,” when analyzed into prehensions, the same whole as the whole when analyzed into perceptions? Only by hypothesis, but yes, we do assume it is, even though there is no need to assert its identity or unity in any strict sense. It is more accurate to think of the levels of generality into which the whole may be analyzed as analogous levels. This is how Whitehead speaks, which is another way of saying that we gain in determinateness when we move from more concrete to more general levels, but we lose definiteness.45

Even the whole takes on a different character at various levels of generality. For example, the “whole” as articulated by the theory of perception is called “nature,” and its parts are perceptions, their objects, and the forms of relation between these. Taken together, the (symbolically) coordinate result of these parts is called “science,” when it is derived according to certain kinds of genetic specification (mainly measurement), while that same whole is called something like “beauty” when derived according to certain intensities of organization, best exemplified in art. The point is that the levels of generality in other of Whitehead’s inquiries, apart from Process and Reality, are similar but not identical with those in Process and Reality. Past philosophies have made too much of the problem of perception and have tried to get this level of generalization to do more work than it can credibly bear (these are the famous “dogmas of empiricism”)—a problem which persists into the present. This treatment of the structure and levels of generality in Process and Reality is brief, but it will be explained more thoroughly in chapter 2 and throughout this book.
