2 Whitehead’s Radical Empiricism


In order to discover some of the major categories under which we can classify the infinitely various components of experience, we must appeal to evidence relating to every variety of occasion. Nothing can be omitted, experience drunk and experience sober, experience sleeping and experience waking, experience drowsy and experience wide awake, experience self-conscious and experience self-forgetful, experience intellectual and experience physical, experience religious and experience sceptical, experience anxious and experience care-free, experience anticipatory and experience retrospective, experience happy and experience grieving, experience dominated by emotion and experience under self-restraint, experience in the light and experience in the dark, experience normal and experience abnormal.

—Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas (226).



In this chapter, we are arguing against the mainstream of Whitehead scholarship. There is a standard story about the development of Whitehead’s metaphysics which is not altogether incorrect, but it rests on a misunderstanding of his orientation on the scope and limits of philosophy. In the previous chapter we argued that the right way to read Whitehead respects both the development of his thought and the individuality of his inquiries. We stressed the mathematical habits of inquiry found in Whitehead’s philosophy, even though these habits are unfamiliar these days among conventional philosophical procedures. Now we go further.

Whitehead was a radical empiricist, following William James, Henri Bergson and John Dewey.1 One can be a radical empiricist without being a pragmatist, as we will explain.2 However, good pragmatists tend toward radical empiricism because one of the keys to pragmatism is its commitment to philosophizing all of experience and only experience. Yet, if pragmatism has an Achilles heel, it is in assuming that possible experience need not be robustly philosophized. Radical empiricists who do not profess pragmatism, such as Whitehead and Bergson, will tend to give possible experience greater weight than do their pragmatist counterparts.3





The Unholy Trinity


As we have argued earlier, Whitehead always held that metaphysics is descriptive and hypothetical in character, and that philosophical hypotheses do not yield ontological knowledge—knowledge of necessary relations among knowing, being and thinking. For example, Whitehead says that “speculative philosophy embodies the method of the ‘working hypothesis’.” He continues:

The purpose of this working hypothesis for philosophy is to coordinate the current expressions of human experience, in common speech, in social institutions, in actions, in the principles of the various special sciences, elucidating harmony and exposing discrepancies. No systematic thought has made progress apart from some adequately general working hypothesis, adapted to its special topic.4



Please note the use of the term “coordinate” in this passage. This statement, along with others, is the basis for our repeated assertion of the primacy of the “coordinate account” (over the “genetic account”) in Whitehead’s method. His assertion here is unqualified. All progress in systematic thought—not just philosophy—depends upon the prior coordination of an “adequately general” working hypothesis. In this chapter, we will more thoroughly discuss how working hypotheses are adapted to their special topics in Whitehead’s own inquiries. As we mentioned above, Whitehead uses the word “theory” to describe a working hypothesis when it is adjusted to the proper level of generality, and coordinated with the needed concepts for the purposes of a given inquiry.5 But for the moment, we ask, do “working hypotheses” or “theories” in philosophy result in ontological knowledge? Whitehead says they do not: “Philosophy has been afflicted by the dogmatic fallacy, which is the belief that the principles of its working hypotheses are clear, obvious, and irreformable.”6 That is, philosophers think that their hypotheses, when taken as conclusions, provide them with ontological knowledge.

By “ontological knowledge” we mean basically the set of characteristics Dewey associated with “the quest for certainty,” which we would summarize as an unholy trinity in which the necessitarian structure of logic is used to close the gap between knowing or experiencing something, on one side, and the being or existence of the thing known or experienced on the other side.7 The exact character of that gap will be addressed in the chapters 4 and 10, when we defend Whitehead’s “radical realism.” For now we are interested only in Whitehead’s rejection of ontological (or necessary) knowledge.

The tradition of associating logical and epistemological with ontological necessity, the “unholy trinity,” was the basis for claiming ontological knowledge from Aristotle up to the mid-nineteenth century.8 As the last 150 years have unfolded, the old assumptions about all types of necessity have come unraveled. All philosophy and most science that depends upon the iron association of logical, cognitive and ontological necessity have become untenable. Many scientists simply will not speak of “laws of nature” these days, except as approximate descriptions of regularities that can be profitably generalized, and even then they often balk at the word “law,” for fear it will be taken in a universal sense.9 And as a negative example (of what not to do), the conception of “rationality” used by mainstream analytic philosophies is dependent upon at least the association of logical and ontological necessity (this is the very meaning of “rationality” in the way the term is used), and to the extent that scientific conceptions of knowledge have moved beyond this outdated idea of necessity, science rightly ignores the demands made by mainstream philosophy that science should be or must be “rational.”10 “Rationality,” in common and even intellectual discourse, today, is based on the structure of possibility and probability, not on the structure of necessity and old-style, essentialist actuality; and knowledge today does not require necessity of any kind.

Even the movements, following C.I. Lewis, to reinvent logic so as to deal effectively with possibility, have been rendered largely pointless because they have clung to various modes of necessity to account for possibility, with each version of modal logic interpreting possibility according to a slightly varied sense of necessity and its corresponding notion of validity.11 So long as necessity is taken to be the guarantor of rationality, the conception of rationality advocated will be as useless to science as it is to practical life. We will not here go into David Lewis’s “modal realism.”12 We will only make the point that realism (of any kind), when it adopts a narrow conception of rationality and necessity, has been left behind by any philosophy that has a genuine chance of surviving in the present century and beyond.13 Whitehead’s ontology presents “living ideas” precisely because it does not employ necessity of the indefensible kind for its ground.14 Whitehead’s ontology is grounded in the assumed equiprimordiality of possibility and actuality, and whatever necessity may be, it is subordinate to possibility.15

Thus, Whitehead never subscribed to the unholy trinity.16 When he dealt with questions of the broader aesthetic order, it was grasped by imagination and was prior to the enlivening exercise of reason as brought to bear upon the possibilities we imagine.17 But since there is an entrenched habit of reading Whitehead as though he embraced ontological necessity and associated it with logical necessity, it is needful that we begin to modify that habit.





Radical Empiricism


We want to make it clear that by “radical empiricism,” we do not mean a “method” in philosophy. It is a broad orientation on the scope and limits of philosophy itself, within which any number of methods might be adopted, including but not limited to those favored by pragmatism. Let us begin at the source. William James wrote:

Radical empiricism consists first of a postulate, next of a statement of fact, and finally of a generalized conclusion. The postulate is that the only things that shall be debatable among philosophers shall be things definable in terms from experience. The statement of fact is that relations between things, conjunctive as well as disjunctive, are just matters of direct particular experience, neither more nor less so than the things themselves. The generalized conclusion is that therefore the parts of experience hold together from next to next by relations that are themselves parts of experience. The directly apprehended universe needs, in short, no extraneous trans-empirical connective support, but possesses in its own right a concatenated or continuous structure.18



It is not crucial here to pin down every historical detail to show that Whitehead was a radical empiricist in precisely James’s sense. We think he was.19 What Whitehead called “the fallacy of misplaced concreteness” (and James called “the philosopher’s fallacy”) is not avoidable unless one is a radical empiricist. Perhaps the greatest barrier to clear philosophical thinking is our habit of substituting the abstractions produced by our simplification and analysis of experience for the fullness of experience itself. Whitehead certainly used abstractions, so what prevents an abstraction-dealer from misplacing a few of them? It is really simple: never claim ontological knowledge, and never sell experience short.

The place where we depart from many other readers of Whitehead, has to do with whether Whitehead claims for his view “ontological knowledge,” or whether the logical rigor and rational necessity in his metaphysics entitles us to claim ontological knowledge. Many readers assume that Whitehead took himself to be claiming ontological knowledge. This is incorrect. A close reading of Whitehead’s defense of speculative metaphysics at the opening of Process and Reality shows that Whitehead never claims any such thing there, and his discourse on the scope and limits of philosophy in Adventures of Ideas20 is only one of several places one can check to confirm it—indeed he never makes a claim of ontological knowledge anywhere.

One might approach a defense of Whitehead’s radical empiricism relative to any of a number of topics, but we will restrict our demonstration to the issue of what Ford calls Whitehead’s “discovery” of “temporal atomicity” (a term Whitehead himself never uses). As Ford reads the text, in works prior to 1925, Whitehead defended a view of overlapping temporal events, or an overlapping hierarchy of durational epochs, but by 1929, Whitehead was defending “temporal atomicity,” the view that “continuity concerns what is potential whereas actuality is incurably atomic,”21 and that there is a “becoming of continuity but no continuity of becoming.”22

The term “atomicity” occurs twice in Process and Reality. The first is the reference mentioned above. At page 292, Whitehead says: “In this theory the notion of the atomicity of the actual entities, each with its concrescent privacy, has been entirely eliminated. We are left with the theory of extensive connection, of whole and part, of points, lines, and surfaces, and of straightness and flatness.” Please note the use of the word “theory” in this passage, in light of what we argued in chapter 1. If atomicity can be “entirely eliminated” in a theory that is not itself guilty of misplaced concreteness, then how could it be ontologically necessary that actual entities are incurably atomic? The incurable atomicity is a function of the “theory,” the generalized working hypothesis, applicable in Process and Reality, and is an instance of the quantum of explanation. Understanding more thoroughly what temporal atomicity is, in the context of Whitehead’s radical empiricism, is an important illustration of our larger claims about how he conceives of philosophy, how methods are subordinate to working hypotheses and “theories,” and how this result provides some instruction for how to read Whitehead. We will take up in detail later the proper interpretation of these passages, especially with respect to the relation between the theory of extension and the concept of physical space.





Mementos of a Timequake


We will approach the question of Whitehead’s radical empiricism in relation to “temporal atomicity” using a pair of artworks, the film Memento, written by Jonathan and Christopher Nolan, and directed by the latter, and Kurt Vonnegut’s whimsical 1996 memoir Timequake. These two works point to the central problem of temporality in experiential terms, and will nicely orient us upon the issue of framing any sort of empirically adequate philosophy about time. We begin by confronting the problem of discontinuity—which is the very problem posed by “temporal atomicity.” After all, the temporal atom is characterized in the first instance by its indivisibility and in the second instance by its disruption of the continuity of the temporal flow.23

Memento teaches us the problem of discontinuity “from the inside out,” as it were. The story assumes that time is continuous and orderly in the objective world, but our central character, Leonard Shelby, has suffered a head injury and can no longer move his short-term memories into long-term memory.24 Thus his world effectively begins anew every five minutes or so. This is a fundamental internal disruption of the temporal flow. In order to live life, Leonard has to find ways of arranging the objective world so that he can interpret it, and most importantly, he must discern the difference between the truth and deception. Is there an adequate method of arranging the objective world so as to compensate for radical discontinuity in our internal temporality, our concrescence?

Leonard combines many methods, but the most poignant among them is tattooing on his body “true propositions,” certainties. These get him into trouble, eventually, since it turns out that they may not all be true. Nevermind that. It’s a different problem than the one we are interested in. Our point is a small one. How Leonard remembers that the things on his body are “truths” is one of many problems the Nolans cannot really solve, since such memory requires the continuity, in Leonard’s experience, of the proposition “the propositions on my body are true,” to be both true and to hold from one radical break to the next in Leonard’s experience. This is how, having posited radical internal discontinuity, or subjective temporal atomicity, the Nolans smuggle temporal continuity back into Leonard’s inner experience.

Kurt Vonnegut’s Timequake teaches us the problem of discontinuity “from the outside in,” as it were. In this fanciful memoir, the universe suffers a tiny crisis of confidence regarding its own “decision” to expand. It pauses, hiccoughs, contracts for just a moment, and then recovers its confidence and expands again. The “moment” of contraction turns out to be almost exactly ten years on earth, which is nothing much from the standpoint of the universe, but it’s a significant durational epoch for the little creatures on earth, as they have to live the years 1991 to 2001 all over again, a repetition of what Whitehead calls “transition”. Disappointingly, they quickly discover that they are not free to change anything they did—which suggests that in fact they weren’t really free the first time either, they just didn’t know what would happen, so their actions and decisions felt like “free will.” When the rerun of those ten years ends, and “free will” (i.e., ignorance of the future) kicks in again, everyone is caught off guard, having become bored with the rerun, and all sorts of accidents occur because people have to start actively paying attention to things like steering their cars and watching where they are going.

Vonnegut is toying with Nietzsche’s eternal recurrence, of course, but he would have no story at all if he didn’t assume that people were conscious of the fact that the rerun was in fact a rerun. This is to say, they all remember the timequake and retain their memories of the events that have happened to them before, and will again, and they remain conscious of the radical objective discontinuity in time, the timequake, even though they are not free to study it or do anything to prevent it, or make any different decisions while reliving the ten years. Vonnegut thus compensates for the discontinuity of the objective space/time “continuum” by smuggling in the continuity of particular conscious experience (concrescence). Otherwise timequakes could be occurring all the time and it wouldn’t matter, since no one would be aware that reruns were reruns—and this idea is actually closer to Nietzsche’s eternal return of the same, but it doesn’t frame a story in any interesting way, and it’s a purely imaginative construction, not an experiential possibility.25

When we mess around with the idea of time’s continuity, whether it is the continuity (or at least the accumulative tendency) of internal time consciousness, or the assumed continuity of objective temporality, things get strange in a hurry. We humans can’t make phenomenological or narrative sense of radical temporal discontinuity, or as one might just as well call it, “temporal atomicity.” In order to make sense of the supposition of radical discontinuity, we must cheat, and reintroduce continuity at some other level of supposition. But we need not go to the world of film or literature to find versions of this problem. Whitehead was a mathematician. He understood the problem of discontinuity very well indeed.

Getting from any natural number to the next poses the same difficulty of continuity. If one thinks of the natural numbers as embedded in a continuum, so as to overcome their discreteness, that continuum is subject, then, to the same problems time suffers in the hands of the Nolans and Vonnegut. Internally it proves nothing to count one’s way from 1 to 9 unless the person counting can retain 1 and 2 and all the way to arriving at 9; this is a feat of continuous memory. Similarly, if one wishes to proceed from a square on the sidewalk numbered 1 and arrive by successive steps at a square numbered nine, the continuity of the walker as a continuous body against which the discreteness of the squares is overmatched, is a requirement. Thus, the discontinuity of the natural numbers cannot be treated as radical, or ontologically atomic.

How many ways can we pose the problem of atomicity? Well, how many ways can we introduce discreteness between, say, 3 and 4 (however defined)? Infinitely many ways; for example, in the case of Dedekind cuts.26 But is there genuine, ontological discreteness between three and four? We don’t really know; the Pythagoreans thought there was, but for more modern number theory the situation is vague. In the case of 0 and 1, for example, in certain mathematical inquiries we do suppose, hypothetically, an absolute break in the continuum, in order to commit to binary coding the situation we observe when either a circuit is complete or not complete (even a value of 0 draws current). We know that empirically, the situation is not absolutely discontinuous. We know that some energy moves between and through an incomplete circuit, but we discount that energy because it’s “nothing” compared to what happens when a circuit is complete. In fact, if the circuit were not at least potentially complete-able, there would be no point in describing it at all.27

Yet, we have no compunction about calling the completed situation “1” or “the switch is on” and the incomplete situation “0” or “the switch is off.” In binary, the discontinuity between 1 and 0 is, abstractly at least, radical discreteness—we choose either 1 or 0 to represent the situation, and there is nothing in between allowed by the description, considered abstractly (i.e., the code strings are composed entirely of 1 and 0). The description of the situation for the sake of binary is idealized (i.e., it is a “theory” prescribing a method); we begin with a continuous empirical situation—the continuity of a potentially complete-able circuit, and encode it with discrete characters for certain purposes. If we take numbers to be our imaginative descriptions, then binary is sort of like Leonard Shelby’s efforts to tattoo words on his body to arrange the world in a reliable way. There is a sense in which binary is far more reliable, and to that extent “truer,” than actual circuitry. It would be like offering Leonard some phrases he could really count on, more than he can count on the empirical world to live up to them.

In calculus, of course, the situation is reversed. We begin with a discrete empirical situation, say, where the moon is observed to be now, and where it will be a year from now—two discrete observed places, and we attempt to find symbols to integrate the two. We still use 0 and 1, but now as extremes or continuous poles of what we seek to measure. The whole effort is to find ways of overcoming the discontinuity (very real) between 0 and 1, on the one hand, and between the position and motion of a body at one time, and its position and motion at another time, on the other hand. Things approaching one another asymptotically meet at 1, in infinity of course, for calculus, but empirically, well, the moon gets where it is going, just as Achilles outruns the tortoise and his arrow arrives at the target.28 Numerical continuity is created by a recursive function so as to approximate the continuous change in an empirical body, at least when we make no errors in the calculation and constrain our calculation within sufficiently narrow durational epochs. This is not greatly different from the timequake, if we think of the moon’s motion as the first run-through and our calculus as the rerun—mechanical, predictable, and not quite real.

And this is to say nothing of the way we have to scratch our heads about physics, when it comes to quantum discontinuity in relation to relativity (which asserts continuity on a grand scale). It is not as if Whitehead lacks awareness of this situation. His writings from the first make it abundantly evident that he is interested in dealing with both sorts of discontinuity. Do his interpreters believe he would simply grow impatient with this when it comes to metaphysics and suddenly make a final decision about how things are, choosing discontinuity as the reality and continuity as an appearance? The text simply does not support any such reading. Whitehead does not believe temporal atomicity is “just the way things are.” He believes that metaphysical explanation needs, in order to give a description that is logically rigorous and empirically adequate, to privilege atomicity, and all he means by this is precisely what James meant in saying that “direct particular experience” is the stated fact of radical empiricism. Particular experience imposes atomicity on metaphysical explanation, not vice-versa.29

If we insist or assert that there is any sort of thing as “experience in general,” which is neither yours, nor mine, nor anyone’s, then we commit the fallacy of misplaced concreteness. Experience is always, as far as we know, experience from some particular perspective, and since we do not know much about the “experience” of non-human beings, we cannot safely postulate that all experience is like human experience. Nor can we easily be certain, on the one hand, what characteristics of human experience are shared by other beings, and, on the other hand, which are accidents of our kind of existing. To make our way of experiencing the measuring rod of all that exists is the mistake Protagoras made. The idealists exacerbated this error by making up an abstract (i.e., fallacious) God and putting all time, and hence all experience, into that being’s “perspective” (in truth, this is no perspective at all).

So Whitehead postulates the “actual entity” as a metaphysical version of a geometrical point, calls it a “drop of experience” (James’s phrase), and denies to it any alteration or change as a matter of definition. It is surprising how powerful this strategy of explanation turns out to be (as we will take up in chapter 4). The actual entity is a spatialization, by extensive abstraction, of time, for the purposes of metaphysical description. The idea may be employed beyond metaphysics, but the strategy for explanation is the more important characteristic in this scenario. In the end, we will have no choice but to restore its continuity with other unanalyzed events, and that is what the coordinate phase of inquiry does.30 Coordinate analysis proceeds algebraically by emphasizing what is structurally common and internal to the relatedness of the whole to any actual entity (as distinct from the self-externalizing achievement of satisfied concrescence, which is “narrative” in structure). The structural description is co-present throughout the whole; in the coordinate phase, no traditional narrative can be constructed, but values that satisfy the requirements of a coordinate description of any given actual entity are structurally continuous with all other values. A working general hypothesis is not a likely story, structurally or otherwise.31

Whitehead is simply counterbalancing James in this, when James says: “… my ‘radical’ empiricism denies the flux’s discontinuity, making conjunctive relations essential members of it as given, and charging the conceptual function with being the creator of factitious incoherencies.”32 But James could only get good phenomenology this way, not good metaphysics. When it comes to the arrangement of the objective world in accordance with this kind of continuity, James is about as badly off as Leonard Shelby, and cannot distinguish a true proposition from one that merely seems to work. The other side of radical empiricism denies to the flux its continuity of becoming, in order to make it yield to spatialization. That gets us good metaphysics, but its descriptions have a kind of necessity that is untrue to experience. But no one would say Whitehead is a determinist, so the necessity in the logical rigor required of good metaphysics has to submit to some limitation.

Yet, in order to be a consistent “temporal atomist,” if Whitehead really believed this were a bit of ontological knowledge, determinism would be his only option, since he would be allowing logical necessity to become ontological necessity in governing whole-part relations (as Vonnegut does in Timequake). But radical empiricism, so long as it treats experience as particular experience, can have a good metaphysics. In fact, it does have a good metaphysics. It is in Process and Reality, and there Whitehead’s Ontological Principle is what guarantees that misplaced concreteness will not occur, i.e., we allow only one actual entity per actual world. But he does not take the principles of his working hypothesis to be “clear, obvious and irreformable,” any more than he thinks it merely a likely story. He adopts the principle for this one inquiry, and different versions of it for other inquiries.

Let us review and summarize what we have outlined in this chapter:

First, what we have presented here is perhaps less of an argument, in the “strict” philosophical sense of the term, than a narrative framework for interpreting Whitehead’s philosophical methodology (the method of genetic and coordinate analysis and division, upon which we will expand greatly in chapters to come). As we pointed out in the Introduction, narrative intelligibility is an essential component in the business of “making sense” in philosophy, and especially important due to the general absence of correctives that would be sticks and goads in other disciplines.

But we do not wish to suggest that this story in the first part of this book—by itself—composes a compelling demonstration. Nevertheless, our story does help to establish in no small part: (1) how we are reading Whitehead, with the why part of the argument making its many appearances in the chapters that follow; (2) why, among other problems with the existing interpretations that are so deeply problematic, the assertion of “temporal atomism” is the one we chose for critique; and (3) the nature of Whitehead’s philosophy (including the point that it isn’t phenomenology).

As for radical empiricism, which, James insists, is composed of a postulate, a statement of fact, and a generalized conclusion: the postulate (that everything must come back to experience) is so obviously present at every stage of Whitehead’s thought (and, we hope, ours as well) that one would scarcely know how to challenge it. That said, every aspect of this book returns to this point again and again. The central thesis of our argument, that the concrete explains the abstract, rather than vice versa, drives home this postulate of radical empiricism. Yet, even without our argument here, we submit that the burden of proof rests upon anyone who would dispute this postulate, or the fact that Whitehead accepts it. His repetitions of it as an orientation on all philosophical questions is constant from his earliest works to his last ones.

With respect to the statement of fact (that relations are real, and real constitutive elements of experience), we will be showing in the following pages that not only did Whitehead accept this point, but also, as a mathematician he carried it forward well beyond what James, the psychologist, could readily imagine. When James thought of relations, he thought of feelings that could be interpreted in the higher phases of experience. Whitehead’s view was far more radical, reaching down into every concrescence, however simple. There is radical empiricism of the sort that complex biological organisms with cultures and civilizations adopt for their own improvement, and then there is the radical empiricism that describes the real cosmos. We do not set aside the importance of the higher phases of experience, but we insist upon the priority of the order exemplified in the physical universe in our interpretations of that experience.

Finally, as to the generalized conclusion (that experience holds together by virtue of the relations that are already in it), anyone who has considered Whitehead’s criticisms of Hume in Process and Reality can hardly entertain any lingering doubts of Whitehead’s thoroughly reasoned conviction on this point. Relations are not simply to be included among the real things, there are no things apart from the more or less stable relations that constitute them as societies of occasions with physical and, in Whitehead’s special sense, “mental” histories. Thus, where many in the secondary literature have lost themselves on the garden path is in their failing to see all three of these points of radical empiricism as operating together in Whitehead’s thought and philosophical methodology. We intend to take significant steps to correct this failure in this book.
