3  The Logic in Metaphysics


The idea of equivalence requires some explanation. Two things are equivalent when for some purpose they can be used indifferently. Thus the equivalence of distinct things implies a certain defined purpose in view, a certain limitation of thought or of action. Then within this limited field no distinction of property exists between the two things.

—Whitehead, A Treatise on Universal Algebra (5)





Introduction


At first blush it might seem odd, even unreasonable, to speak of a mathematician as a radical empiricist. After all, a mathematician trades in high abstractions, while radical empiricism is about the concrete fullness of experience. However, this way of phrasing matters rushes past essential aspects of that very experience which we are supposed to be attending to. Specifically, experience in its concrete fullness includes multiple layers and dimensions of robust relational connections as an ineliminable component of that concreteness. James spoke of the immediate experience of such relations as “and,” “or,” and “but.” However, these terms represent only the thinnest and most tepid of the relational possibilities to be found in experience. Other relations include such things as rotational and translational forms of symmetry, congruence (an example that Whitehead frequently uses), continuity, and discontinuity, whole and part. When we look at such relations in their purest forms—and this is true of “and,” “or,” and “but” as well—our inquiry has centered itself solidly within the field of mathematics. Absent a thorough grasp of mathematical reasoning, the true wealth of relational connections that infuses our experiences might easily be overlooked for its subtlety.

Indeed, so central is the field of mathematics in schematizing and understanding relational structures that perhaps the surprise is not that a mathematician could be a radical empiricist but rather that a radical empiricist should ever fail to be a mathematician. But just as one does not need to be a jazz musician to develop an appreciation for jazz itself, we can, and, in the case of Whitehead’s thought, must develop an informed appreciation for the nature and role of mathematical thought and inquiry in philosophical contexts. So in the first part of this chapter we will examine Whitehead’s ideas about mathematics both from a general, pedagogical perspective and more specifically as an instrument of philosophical investigation. The second part of this chapter will involve some direct application of these ideas as we examine the role of one particular thread of mathematical/relational thinking as a “bridge” between logic, broadly construed, and metaphysics. As such, this is not about the philosophy of mathematics, nor even of philosophy and mathematics. Rather, we wish to draw attention to the nature of mathematical thinking as Whitehead argued for it, and its central role as an instrument of philosophical advance that is not limited to any one “tradition” of philosophical inquiry. Our discussion in this part will be divided into two major sections, the first focusing on pedagogy, the second on philosophy per se—a distinction of degree and emphasis rather than fundamental kind. For focus, we will draw mainly on two sources: Whitehead’s 1917 essay “The Mathematical Curriculum,”1 and the 1941 “Mathematics and the Good.”2





Mathematical Thinking: Preliminary


So, as a first step in cultivating our sensitivity to the character and function of mathematics, let us set the stage with a pair of quotes from a couple of Whitehead’s works. In the first of these he states:

It certainly is a nuisance for philosophers to be worried with applied mathematics, and for mathematicians to be saddled with philosophy.3



In the second, without any hint of apology, he says:

Philosophy is akin to poetry, and both of them seek to express that ultimate good sense which we term civilization. In each case there is reference to form beyond the direct meanings of words. Poetry allies itself to metre, philosophy to mathematic pattern.4



The first quote came from the latter-middle part of Whitehead’s career when he was still making the transition from mathematician to philosopher; the second is from the very end of his last major publication. Despite the evident sop at apology in the first quote, Whitehead never backed away from his commitment to mathematical thought as an essential component of a liberal, well-educated mind, in general, and philosophical thinking in particular. These two are, of course, related, as we have tried to demonstrate in the first two chapters.





Mathematical Thinking: Pedagogy


It has been observed on a number of occasions that there is considerable sympathy between Dewey and Whitehead on the subject of education. And indeed, while Whitehead never stated matters so succinctly, it seems reasonable that he would agree with Dewey’s claim that, “If we are willing to conceive education as the process of forming fundamental dispositions … toward nature and fellow men, philosophy may even be defined as the general theory of education.”5 Certainly with respect to mathematics, its purpose in education—whether liberal or technical—is for Whitehead very much of a piece with its place in philosophical thought itself. Thus a solid first step toward understanding the importance of mathematical thinking in philosophy is to grasp its general pedagogical role.

Stating a general characterization of mathematics—we deliberately avoid the term “definition” here—would not be very useful by itself, but it will provide a helpful framework that the following discussion will flesh out. Two more quotes will provide us with this starting place:

Mathematics is merely an apparatus for analysing the deductions which can be drawn from any particular premises, supplied by commonsense, or by more refined scientific observation, so far as these deductions depend on the forms of the propositions.6

(M)athematics is nothing else than the more complicated parts of the art of deductive reasoning, especially where it concerns number, quantity, and space.7



Both of these quotes were written at a time when there was still a reasoned belief that mathematics might, in some formal sense, be “reducible” to symbolic logic.8 Yet the operative terms in the forgoing are “formal” and “symbolic.” The co-author of the Principia shows little interest here (or anywhere else, for that matter) in taking such “reduction” to logic as naively as some of his contemporaries, including his counterpart; he remains firmly settled in the conviction that the forms of reasoning he is describing are decidedly mathematical in character.

Three of those forms Whitehead holds out for special attention: number, quantity, and space. Mathematical thinking is not exclusively limited to these forms—it is, in fact, a far more general science than just these subjects.9 But these forms are of special interest in the concrete pedagogy of mathematics. “Concrete” in this instance does not mean an avoidance of abstractness, but rather a commitment to relevance. “Education to be living and effective must be directed to informing pupils with those ideas, and to creating for them those capacities which will enable them to appreciate the current thought of their epoch.”10

The thing to be avoided in this process, so that one might have living and effective education, is “reconditeness.” Whitehead says ideas are recondite when they are, “of highly special application and rarely influence thought.”11 He continues: “The goal to be aimed at is that the pupil should acquire familiarity with abstract thought, should realize how it applies to particular concrete circumstances, and should know how to apply general methods to its logical investigation.”12 To this purpose, the above named classifications of study are brought to bear. However, in this context Whitehead refines and specifies things from just the naming of those classifications, and states instead that study should concentrate on, “the relations of number, the relations of quantity, the relations of space.”13

We should bear in mind that this pedagogical theory is not directed at persons who will be requiring specialized mathematical skills only, but even and especially toward those engaged in a purely liberal course of education.14 At the same time, this course is not to be a “fluff” exercise, and one is to eschew all “pretty divigations.”15 Whitehead insisted on emphasizing these basic notions of functions, of relations, and their rigorous connections with concrete examples, such as the laws of mechanics.

In addition, one of the primary tools that Whitehead highlighted was the study of mathematics from the perspective of its history. Whitehead emphatically does not mean the “mere assemblage of dates and names of men,” which is as tediously recondite an exercise in pointless memorization as one might care to identify. Rather, historical study is “the exposition of the general current of thought which occasioned the subjects to be objects of interest at the time of their first elaboration.”16 In other words, what Whitehead is advocating as a minimal component of any liberal education is a thorough facility with the basic forms of mathematical inquiry: Why were these particular problems interesting? How do they get applied in specific instances? How do these forms illuminate the “general methods” of “logical investigation”? It is worth noting that since Whitehead’s time, excellent historical works of just the sort he was wishing for are readily available, yet still largely ignored by both mathematical and humanistic educators.17

Whitehead’s focus becomes even clearer as we look more closely at the details surrounding the pedagogy of the above relations. The first such relational fact that Whitehead draws our attention to is that these three areas of interest (number, quantity, and space) are interconnected—densely so.18 Focusing for the moment on the relations of number, Whitehead means something far beyond just and only arithmetic. Whitehead himself observed that, “the amount of arithmetic performed by mathematicians is extremely small. Many mathematicians dislike all numerical computation and are not particularly expert at it.”19

The relations of number offer an entrance into that most general logic of relations known as algebra. In such study our ability emerges to formulate mechanical laws accurately, to illustrate functions, and to draw out relational structures that take on an interest of their own. But again, this study is not done in isolation. Rather, these instruments are developed as tools in the discipline of thought and inquiry; we avoid reconditeness by developing their real connections with real issues. One prescient instance Whitehead gives in this regard is the early introduction to elementary statistical methods in the social sciences, since this “affords one of the simplest examples of the application of algebraic ideas.”20 As Whitehead foresaw, s grasp of basic statistical methods is today an essential requirement for any functional member of a modern democratic society. Yet, there is almost no comprehension of statistical tools except among those who specialize in the topic.21

Another notion that wants some clarification is that of “quantity” and its relations. One immediate reaction to the term “quantity” is that this is just another term for number—unless, of course, one is an Aristotelian, in which case what will come to mind is much closer to Whitehead’s meaning: quantity, in this classical sense, is about relations of more or less. Now there is certainly this aspect in Whitehead’s meaning, but he takes it much further as the general theory of measurement.22 Among other things, the use of quantity means here that the relations involved must take care to be ones comparing like to like. Linear measurement cannot properly be compared to volume measures, regardless of whether those quantities have been assigned “the same” numbers or not.23 (This issue of “quantity” will be developed in detail in later chapters.) The field of “quantity”—i.e., measurement—is one of those places where the dense interconnectedness of the relations of number, quantity, and space stands out with striking clarity. The theory of measurement, for example, is at the heart of Whitehead’s critique of Einstein’s general theory of relativity.24 More recently, Krantz et al., published a massive three-volume study on the subject of measurement that touches on every major area of applied mathematics.25

This interconnectedness and wide-ranging applicability serve to highlight one of the central pedagogical features that the study of mathematical inquiry brings out. It is, Whitehead insists, “the chief instrument for discipline in logical method.”26 While all of the three special foci of mathematical study that Whitehead noted are useful in this regard, he believed the study of the relations of space to be especially important. In addition, even as “such training should lie at the basis of all philosophical thought”—that is, the relations of number, of quantity, and of space—the relations of space will not only best highlight logical method, but those relations do so by surveying some of the functional aspects of “identity” that the undisciplined use of language tends to gloss over.27 This point provides us with our segue to more philosophical concerns.





Mathematical Thinking: Philosophy


The elephant in the room here is Plato. First off, we have that grand piece of apocrypha, the declaration over the entrance to the Academy: “Let no one ignorant of geometry enter.” Geometry was the first formal system for developing “discipline in logical method.” There was a tremendous amount of formal geometry in Plato’s time, and this was his basis for rigorous thinking in philosophy. Quoting Whitehead:

Plato, throughout his life, maintained his sense of the importance of mathematical thought in relation to the search for the ideal. In one of his latest writings he terms such ignorance “swinish.” That is how he would characterize the bulk of Platonic scholars of the last century. The epithet is his, not mine.28



Now, obviously “discipline in logical method” is a matter of central concern to all philosophers, regardless of their thematic orientation. But the structures of mathematical thinking cut even deeper than this, according to Whitehead, and, on Whitehead’s reading, Plato agrees. We will return to those relations of space that best exemplify and cultivate that discipline, but first, Whitehead finds an even deeper source in the connections between mathematical thinking and philosophy in his home field of algebra. “What is the fundamental notion at the base of algebra?” Whitehead asks.

It is the notion of “Any example of a given sort, in abstraction from some particular exemplification of the example or of the sort.” The first animal on this Earth, who even for a moment entertained this notion, was the first rational creature.29



Whitehead has here taken the extraordinary step of identifying algebraic thinking with the very foundation of rationality itself.

Pedagogically—and, in terms of actual formulation, historically—geometry claims first place amongst the mathematical disciplines. But logically, it is the algebraic mode of thinking that is the distinguishing characteristic of rational thought.30 This logical primacy can be attributed to the fact that, “You can observe animals choosing between this thing or that thing. But animal intelligence requires concrete exemplification. Human intelligence can conceive of a type of things in abstraction from exemplification.”31 This abstraction from the concrete—which we should recall is different from being recondite—this taking of types as types without the crutch of specific examples, is the principal move of algebraic thinking. And it is the first instance of genuinely rational, as opposed to narrowly biological and immediately practical, thought. (This is not a bifurcation of nature, it is a development and essential qualification from nature, a matter we address in detail in chapters 10 and 11.)

With the onset of algebraic reasoning the study of pattern for pattern’s sake—“and mathematics is the study of pattern”—begins in earnest; and so too does the beginning of philosophical thought.32 Philosophical thought begins because, “[t]he history of the science of algebra is the story of the growth of a technique for representing finite patterns.”33 Any pattern must be an exemplification of a type or kind, specifically a relation that connects one thing with another (actually, many others). Failure of such relatedness—which would amount to absolute metaphysical individualism—would also be totally outside of the possibility of thought. If it is not possible to identify some subject-predicate complex “X” in which subject “A” is an instance of that complex, then that subject “A” genuinely fails to qualify as any-thing at all. Yet any such “X” is a kind of boundedness on “A”; in other words, it is a way or form of finitude, and that finitude is of the very essence of “A’s” relatedness, algebraically speaking (which includes the high abstraction of subject-predicate forms). In contrast, that which is without bound—the infinite—is also without the kind of “generic specificity” (such as “A is an X”) that is the characteristic of an identifiable thing. “The superstitious awe of infinitude has been the bane of philosophy. The infinite has no properties. All value is the gift of finitude.”34

The previous quote references “value” because it is part of Whitehead’s larger argument in “Mathematics and the Good,” in which Whitehead is reconnecting contemporary philosophy’s project with Plato’s. The value that is given is a result of the algebraic character of relatedness that is fundamental to rational thought and inquiry. All finite things are variously related to other finite things: they are material or ideational, simple or complex, subtle or brute. But they are related; and this is both what makes them finite and what makes them intelligible. Yet finitude itself cannot be had sui generis. Infinity may have no properties of its own, yet infinity is that which makes finitude possible; the two do not stand in opposition so much as in constructive tension. Glossing over the details as Whitehead develops them, he concludes that, “the notion of ‘understanding’ requires some grasp of how the finitude of the entity in question requires infinity, and also some notion of how infinity requires finitude. This search for such understanding is the definition of philosophy.”35

Prior to turning our attention to the promised examination of “identity,” a few more words situating mathematical thought are in order. Whitehead was quite emphatic that, “mathematics is the most powerful technique for the understanding of pattern, and for the analysis of the relationships of patterns.”36 Algebra is thus a logically—but, recall, not pedagogically—primary tool in this task of developing pattern and understanding thereof. Completing his circle with Plato, Whitehead states, “if civilization continues to advance, in the next two thousand years the overwhelming novelty in human thought will be the dominance of mathematical understanding.”37





Mathematical Thinking: Identity


We come at last to the mathematical analysis of identity. Despite the fact that Whitehead develops his examples in the context of specifically spatial reasoning—which, we will recall, is particularly suited to the “discipline of logical method”—the tools he brings to bear are themselves highly algebraic in character. This should not be a surprise. Quite aside from the fact that the relations of number, of quantity, and of space are highly interconnected; beyond even the fact that mathematics itself is a much more general science than just these relational studies; Whitehead’s first major work, A Treatise on Universal Algebra, was an algebraic generalization of abstract spatial relations.

So what is it about identity that makes it even possibly suitable for mathematical analysis? Let us start with the fact that when we speak of identity, we are speaking in shorthand for the identity relation. After all, some “thing” that retains its identity as the “thing-it-is” does so across some background of changes which leave the “thing” in some stably functional state of its own “self-hood.” That is, we have the functional identification and re-identification of some “thing” as the same thing, across a more or less fluid multi-dimensional context of transformations. Mathematics offers a vast selection of tools for comparing and contrasting these modes of “sameness” within densely related systems of changes.

Whitehead develops three especially relevant mathematical relations in spatial reasoning. While he does not specifically focus on their roles in the analysis of identity, by the very nature of the case they serve just such a function. Each of the relationships evinces certain classes of transformations and the sorts of “things” that remain the “same” throughout those changes. The three mathematical ideas he describes are congruence, similarity, and the relations of trigonometry.

Whitehead first notes that, “our perception of congruence is in practice dependent on our judgments of the invariability of the intrinsic properties of bodies when their external circumstances are varying.”38 The mathematical study of congruence gives logical rigor to the idea of a physical thing being the same thing even when its position and orientation in space, or other “trivial”—that is, non-identity affecting—changes are made. With similarity one has, “an enlargement of the idea of congruence”39 However, the enlargement goes beyond just sameness of the individual thing to the simple identity of type, a sameness of relational kind.

But similarity comes to genuine fruition in trigonometry, which is, “the study of the periodicity introduced by rotation and of properties preserved in a correlation of similar figures.”40 While the second half of the last quote clearly defines trigonometry as a study of relational and typic sameness (that is yet another advance from mere similarity), the comment about “periodicity” is independently interesting because it opens us up to the possibility of rhythm.

Rhythm is an avenue into identity, and one that Whitehead identifies as of supreme metaphysical importance. Rhythm, Whitehead suggests, is the “causal counterpart of life: … wherever there is some rhythm, there is some life.”41 Periodicity by itself—and hence the analysis that trigonometry provides us—is not the same as what Whitehead calls “rhythm,” since periodicity is just the empty repetition of pattern. But this is still an essential component of rhythm: “A rhythm involves a pattern and to that extent is always self-identical.”42

Mere algebraic pattern does not take us all the way to the rhythmic fullness of organic identity, but it does provide us with an essential tool of analysis that philosophers have under-utilized. And upon that note—a conscious pun for any musicians—we will change keys as we segue to the second movement of this chapter.





Logic and Inquiry


Before going any further, a few words need to be said about the nature of logic itself. The term has been used quite freely in the preceding, and the attentive reader might well and justifiably come away from such readings with the sense that it is being used in a way that goes beyond that particular adjunct that is variously qualified as formal, symbolic, or mathematical logic. And, indeed, the guiding notion of logic that is at work here is very much akin to that which Dewey articulated in his 1938 Logic43 and is very similar to ideas recently presented by Jaakko Hintikka.44 This approach is also similar to Whitehead’s method. This last claim might come as a surprise to those for whom the Principia occupies a dominant place in their image of Whitehead’s work and thought. However, such imagined dominance is a result of the tremendous influence that the Principia exercised on others, Russell most particularly. For Whitehead, that work was never more than an interesting formal inquiry, a façon de parler with respect to a certain style of mathematics.

This last is an inference rather than an explicit claim Whitehead makes in any of his published works. Nevertheless, as should be evident from the preceding examination of Whitehead’s pedagogical theories regarding formal reasoning (all of which were written after the Principia was published), the Principia simply did not loom in Whitehead’s mind in the way it did Russell’s or that emerging methodology that would come to be known as analytical philosophy.45 As we will see below, the one part of the Principia that Whitehead retained any particular interest in was the theory of types, although his interest was in formal and structural relations—class logic and propositions—and not the logical atomism and the metaphysics Russell built from this part of the Principia. And even here this conclusion must be taken in a purely hypothetical mode.

None of this can be construed in any way as a criticism, much less a dismissal, of formal logic or its importance.46 Aside from their purely mathematical interests, such symbolic methods share with general mathematics the virtue of cultivating disciplined habits of thought. In addition, formal logic is directly relevant to the process of inquiry, since formal logic highlights possibilities so as to illuminate explicitly the next constellation of questions we ought to ask. Thus, formal logic is not so much concerned with what we know as with what we want to find out. By precisely displaying the ways in which our hypotheses connect, we can generate concrete methods of testing those ideas and eliminating those ideas which do not stand up when confronted with further facts that we now know to look for.

However, as Hintikka observes, the question of what we want to find out divides into two primary trends: one “tactical” and the other “strategic”; the place where traditional pedagogy of logic fails is with its excessive focus upon issues that are purely tactical in nature.47 Such tactical questions include matters of consistency and validity, the avoidance of fallacies, and so on. These tactical considerations are on a par with knowing what the allowable moves are for the various pieces in a chess game. However, knowing that you can or cannot move a chess piece in a certain way tells you nothing about whether you ought to do so in any particular situation. Strategic issues come into play with that “ought.”

Within the traditional divisions of formal logic, such strategic approaches do in fact make themselves felt. In model theory,48 for example, game theoretic methods are explicitly applied in the building of models and the application of quantifiers.49 Hintikka highlights the methods born of the work of Gerhard Gentzen, which originated in proof theory, specifically the sequent calculi.50 Sequent calculi are proving especially useful in computer science in their applications developing strategic rules and methods needed in automating the proof of theorems.51

The tie-ins for us are several, and we will develop these in greater detail in chapters 9 and 10. But for now, we can say that, first, the above simply makes evident the connection between logic and inquiry by emphasizing the fact that this is not some vague arm-waving by persons allergic to formal methods. A rather more indirect connection, yet one which will be coming up throughout our discussions, is the numerous and unexpected points of contact between Whitehead’s ideas and methods and results in computer science52—none of which will be referencing the Principia. Finally, when it comes to making strategic, rather than merely tactical, decisions about inquiry, the most strategic choice of moves is metaphysics itself. Once we begin to appreciate the bridge that spatial reasoning provides between logic and metaphysics, we will be better situated to understand that this bridge is not merely a formal, but a strategic one which will help illuminate what we are calling “the quantum of explanation.”53

With that in mind, Whitehead’s theory of extension has been generating an increasing amount of interest amongst logicians, computer scientists, and mathematicians in recent years, yet arguably it still has not received the measure of attention it deserves from Whiteheadians themselves.54 Whitehead’s mature theory of extension represents the culmination of a lifetime of work on what might be called “the problem of space,” a problem that Whitehead always approached as an algebraist. The significance of the algebraic approach is that it focuses squarely upon systems of relations, a focus that is exemplified throughout Whitehead’s metaphysics.

But the same algebraic approach to spatial reasoning, the center of Whitehead’s metaphysics, is also of paramount importance in the study of formal logic itself. The connection is that spatial reasoning is a bridge between logic and metaphysics. This point argues for a much broader range of application and importance for Whitehead’s theory of extension than just process thought, or the formal developments mentioned above.

We want to eschew any attempt to reduce metaphysical thought either to logic or spatial reasoning. We find Whitehead’s own refusal to make such a move quite compelling. It is not an accident that Process and Reality is built around two relational structures, developed as the coordinate and the genetic account. And while Part IV of Process and Reality can be read as a treatise on mereotopology, the irreducibly narrative structure of Part III requires that it be read more in the way of Finnegans Wake—especially since the holistic character of the theory of prehensions means that the “end of the story” brings us back to the “beginning of the story” and is already presupposed in it.55 Thus, the relationship we are arguing for here is a bridge only: the gap between the two sides is not eliminated simply because a connection is made.





Spatial Reasoning and Logic


It is important to understand that the algebraic approach to problems—whether in the direct application to mathematics or as an analogical technique in other areas—is particularly relational. The manner in which such relational characteristics are highlighted is by way of “structure preserving” transformations—where the “structures” are the relations—that connect disparate systems to one another in such way that the interesting relations/structures are shown to have an equivalent role within the disparate systems. This emphasis on structural relationships is nicely illuminated in algebraic logic. Paul Halmos notes that, “it turns out that from the point of view of algebraic logic the most useful approach … is not to ask ‘What is a proof?’ or ‘How does one prove something?’ but to ask about the structure of the set of provable propositions.”56 Structure is revealed in this and other instances by the equivalencies of relations among different systems. This relational focus is particularly noteworthy since Whitehead’s approach to logic in both his earliest and later works was explicitly algebraic in character.57

The algebraic approach is especially fruitful in the study of various kinds of spatial entities because it enables investigators to classify spaces according to their relational structures, thus capturing their essential characteristics while paring away details of lesser relevance. For example, this was the focus of Felix Klein’s Erlangen Program: the classification of geometries by the use of the algebraic theory of groups, where a “group” is a system of reversible structure preserving transformations.58 These group-theoretic ideas are also important in developing such applied spatial concepts as, for example, the nature and degree of uniformity of space (an essential component in the development of Einstein’s general theory of relativity and Whitehead’s criticisms thereof).59

While there are many parts to this tale, the one that is of greatest interest to us here comes with the development in the 1940’s of “category theory.” Category theory emerged from inquiries into common algebraic features of various geometric/spatial systems. In particular, it was discovered that structure-preserving transformations in the field of topology bore interesting connections to a much wider array of mathematical relations.60 Topology might be loosely described as a kind of “spatialized set theory” (our phrase), in which the non-metrical relations of connections and neighborhoods of a point or region are developed; these connections and neighborhoods are then studied for their algebraic properties and their common structural relationships with otherwise heterogeneous spaces.61 As we shall see, topological notions (although Whitehead does not name them such) came to play a vital role in Whitehead’s mature theory of extension.

Category theory’s connection with spatial reasoning was never lost, but it rapidly became apparent that it generalized the algebraic and structural approach to the entire spectrum of mathematics.62 Among other things, it became clear that a category can be viewed as a kind of deductive system, and it was shown that category theory with its focus upon relation-preserving transformations offered a competing “foundation” for mathematics to that of set theory, as well as offering a robust alternative to the orthodox concept of logical structure itself.63

The first of the two central categorical ideas in developing this connection between category theory and deductive systems revolves around the concept of a “topos.”64 Robert Goldblatt notes that the sources of the idea include algebraic geometry, category theory itself, as well as logic and model theory.65 Skipping over the technical details of its definition, it turns out that the spatial construct of a topos can function as a generic structure with which to model or interpret other structures with such universality and effectiveness that it can serve as the above noted “foundation.” The second aspect of this formulation of the topos is the primary tool used in building those models. Rather than falling back on the traditional notion of “set,” the fundamental building block here is the neo-Russellian idea of the “type.” We will have a bit more to say on this matter in the final section of this chapter. But it is worth noting here that type theory is a way of concentrating one’s attention upon functional and relational aspects of the units of one’s operations—that is, on the structural transformations—as opposed to the merely collective aspects that are characteristic of sets.66

A couple of points can be made to bring the above together: First, since model theory is the attempt to connect relational structures to formal languages,67 the fact that the formal languages of spatial reasoning as manifested in category theory are such an effective instrument for understanding relational systems in general seems scarcely the sort of thing that can be dismissed as mere coincidence. Furthermore, the structures of spatial reasoning have a fundamentally empirical and experiential character that differentiates them from the abstractness of set theory and thus offers potential insights into ontology that set theory does not.

Finally, it is worth observing that the category theoretic systems of topoi are directly related to what are known as “complete Heyting algebras,” which in turn are a generalization of typed intuitionistic logics. As these are algebraic generalizations of spatial structures, the emphasis is once again on forms of transformations of relationally equivalent systems. Also, it is suggestive to note that Michael Dummett turned to intuitionistic logics for his work The Logical Basis of Metaphysics.68 Dummett did not associate this turn with spatial reasoning, but that association is already built in to the algebraic and relational structures of the intuitionistic approach via the above mentioned Heyting algebras.





Spatial Reasoning and Metaphysics


Let us recall that Whitehead was quite explicit that the theory of extension was every bit as central to his metaphysical schema as the theory of prehension; thus, prioritizing one over the other has the general effect of falsifying both.69 The mature theory of extension as presented in Process and Reality is a kind of “mereotopology,” which means that it is a topological theory of part and whole. Just from the relevant terminology, one can begin to sense suggestive connections between the foundational studies in category theory glossed above and Whitehead’s “coordinate account,” which will be discussed in detail throughout the remainder of this book.

Whitehead’s extensive structures—what we call “extensa” for convenience—are essentially topologies in a point-free relational system. We use this latter, somewhat awkward phrase rather than just saying a “space” to emphasize that the relational structure of Whiteheadian extensa is metaphysically prior to any system that could properly be called “spatial” in the sense of physical nature or experience. Mathematically, of course, extensa still qualify as “spatial,” and it will be in this latter sense that we will continue to speak of these structures as fundamental forms of “spatial reasoning.” Again, mathematics is one of the cardinal forms of relational thinking, and the one that Whitehead argued is of greatest importance to philosophy.70 Within Whitehead’s metaphysics the system of extensa is logically and metaphysically prior to both time and space as these express themselves in nature.71

As topological relational systems, extensa carry within themselves most if not all of the previously discussed functional corollaries with category theory and general logic. We qualify the foregoing only because the point-free nature of Whiteheadian extensa introduces some complications into the standard theory of topoi. But these complications do not seem to be essential differences, particularly since “points” can be recovered in Whitehead’s system as ideal elements, while most of the principal logical relations of topoi and their related intuitionistic Heyting algebras depend on the topological and typic relations rather than any of the specifically set-theoretic and/or intrinsically punctiform aspects that are introduced for formal simplicity.

But Whiteheadian extensa and their concomitant interpretive framework carry an even deeper metaphysical meaning than suggested by their purely formal relations. For Whitehead recognized that the part/whole relation is the fundamental form of internal relatedness itself.72 For our purposes we may differentiate the notions of internal and external relatedness by how they reveal/form (the language here is tricky) the nature of identity. For external forms of relatedness, a “thing’s” identity is the first, analytically given fact; for internal forms of relatedness “identity” is the final, synthetically achieved result. Part/whole relationships are the image of internal relatedness because there is no actual part until the whole is given. Yet by the same token, the whole is itself presupposed, but vague—that is, undefined if one wants to hint at some Aristotelian metaphysics—until the parts are definite. The identities of part and of whole are thus synthetically correlative to one another and not initially given, independent facts; it is Whitehead’s argument that it is logically impossible for things to be otherwise.

The theory of internal and external relatedness is an essential piece in Whitehead’s solution to the problem of the one and the many. Internal relatedness is an expression of the holism of reality, of the world manifesting itself as the One. Thus the theory of extension is the “story” of the world becoming One.73 Our earlier discussion of the contrasts between transition and concrescence at one level of generality, between causal efficacy and presentational immediacy (i.e., perception), at another level of generality, and between physical and conceptual feelings (i.e., prehension) at the most concrete level of generality, is but an application of these mereotopological structures to various experiential domains.

The other half of the story is of course that of the genetic account, or what might be called the externalization of relatedness in the concrescence of an occasion as its superject. This, again, is why spatial reasoning is only a bridge—one cannot reduce external relations to internal ones, or vice versa. Each has an essential—and essentially different—role to play.

But already we are seeing signs of a larger project than even Whitehead’s theory of extension. His mereotopological system of part and whole relates in one direction to the formal and logical structures characteristic of relational thinking that connect to category theoretic notions of topoi and logical structures of typed intuitionistic calculi. In the other direction his system connects to foundational aspects of metaphysics, especially as these emerge in the forms of internal relatedness and the central problem of the One and the Many. These issues obviously run beyond “just” process metaphysics, grand as that project is. Furthermore, neither direction of these connections can be dismissed as an accident or a merely coincidental artifact of Whitehead’s work.

What might be called “the problem of space” composed the earliest part of Whitehead’s work as a professional mathematician. The logic of spatial relations was the driving interest in A Treatise on Universal Algebra, the theory of extension was to be his primary original contribution to the Principia; it underscored all of his work in the philosophy of nature and science as the basis for his systematic criticism of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. The development of Whitehead’s metaphysical work was a direct outgrowth of his epistemologically oriented work on nature and science, due to the need for a more fundamental logical grounding of that historically earlier work. Thus the fact that his most mature development of pure spatial reasoning is presented in his metaphysical magnum opus is anything but whimsical.





Spatial Reasoning and Ontology


A few additional points deserve to be made here. Rather than speak directly to the issue of spatial reasoning and metaphysics, we want to close this chapter with a few words on ontology. Clearly metaphysics and ontology are related; we tend to view the connection as one between relational structures (metaphysics) and their various relata (ontology).

One of the most interesting of the non-speculative matters that emerges here is the fact that Whitehead’s mature theory of extension is frequently identified as foundational in studies of robotic vision and spatial reasoning in artificial intelligence. (See our notes on Randell and Pratt). Of particular interest to us here is the motivation of the researchers involved in these developments. It is not a matter of abstract mathematical consideration nor speculative philosophy; rather, their interest is driven by both the logical and the practical constraints of programming machines as they actually attempt to “see.” Quite independently of any philosophical concerns, these researchers have offered a strong empirical argument that Whitehead’s logic of extension is a kind of “formal ontology of vision.” Obviously this line of research in computer science opens up tantalizing avenues of inquiry along a third axis from those of pure logic or metaphysics, an axis that runs well beyond any of Whitehead’s explicitly stated projects.

A second point worth wondering about, although this one is entirely at the speculative level, is the connections among type theory, spatial reasoning, logic, and metaphysics. The fact that there are such profound connections among typed intuitionistic calculus, category theory, and spatial reasoning does seem to beg the question of what else might be lurking in the shadows. Our own sense is that either we have stumbled onto some profoundly deep connections between logical structure and metaphysics, or we are looking at a pure coincidence of genuinely comic—that’s “comic” not “cosmic”—proportions. In either case, it is also worth wondering if there is any connection between type theory and Whitehead’s broader philosophical concerns. First, as important an innovation as it was in its day, the type theory of the Principia is less sophisticated than its latter progeny in typed intuitionistic calculus. Also, while hints of these later developments are in the original, Whitehead does not tell us much about even that early version of type theory, apart from what has cited above. He gives some additional discussion of it in his essay “Mathematics and the Good,”74 but his comments there are painfully brief, amounting to little more than the possibility of an argument for moving beyond formal theory to a sound metaphysics of relations.

Last, given the widespread interest in relating Whitehead’s ideas to quantum mechanics, efforts that (we will treat in the next chapter) are often badly misdirected, it seems reasonable to suggest that Whitehead scholars ought to explore the possible relations between the theory of extension and another point-free geometry that was specifically formulated with an eye toward quantum theory. We are referring here to von Neumann’s Continuous Geometry.75 Among his many achievements, von Neumann demonstrated the deep formal equivalence between the Schroedinger and Heisenberg conceptions of quantum mechanics. But by some reports, at least, von Neumann came to be dissatisfied with this work, and sought to find a deeper unity in these theories. Such concerns were evidently at least part of the motivation behind von Neumann’s work with mathematical rings of operators and projective geometry that led to his continuous geometry, a point-free projective geometry of non-finite dimension. Whitehead’s own background in projective geometry was quite significant, and this work certainly informed his thinking with respect to his inquiries into the foundations of spatial relations in general.76

One significant point of formal difference between Whitehead’s and von Neumann’s work is that the latter was explicitly framed as an infinite dimensional geometry. Whitehead did insist that nature was essentially four-dimensional, but these dimensions are of the structure of events, not of spaces and times. We deliberately pluralize these latter terms because for Whitehead spaces and times are particular manifestations of the relational structures of events and not ontologically prior facts about the world. The “multi-threaded” character of these spaces and times (this being our phrase, not Whitehead’s) leaves them unbounded in their formal dimensions.77 So formally, both theories exhibit exceptionally high levels of compatibility; ontologically, both theories seem particularly suited to the interpretation of quantum mechanics; yet historically, neither theory’s relations to the other appears to have been explored in any depth, much less substantially.78 This is an issue that merits some further attention.
