4  The Quantum of Explanation


In mathematics, the greatest degree of self-evidence is usually not to be found quite at the beginning, but at some later point; hence the early deductions, until they reach this point, give reasons rather for believing the premisses [sic] because true consequences follow from them, than for believing the consequences because they follow from the premises.

—Whitehead (and Russell) Principia Mathematica (vol. 1, v)





The Quantum Principle


As we have seen, Whitehead’s theory of extension is intimately and consciously connected with both the basic structures of spatial reasoning and fundamental ideas of formal logic itself. We will continue to emphasize that the theory of extension is not a subject Whitehead casually tacked onto his metaphysics; rather, it is an ineliminable part of the very structure of reasoning internal to that metaphysics. However, there are two types of interpretive failure that can occur with this aspect of Whitehead’s speculative scheme: the first is to fail to appreciate the importance of extensive relatedness; the other is to assign the wrong kinds and qualities of importance to it.1 This latter will be a primary focus of this chapter, for it is a source of, or contributor to, an array of errors in interpreting Whitehead.

Among the problems that can arise is an inappropriate concentration upon Whitehead’s seeming shift from the continuities of extensive forms of relatedness in the Triptych—with its emphasis on nature and science—to the more thorough-going “atomism” of the later, metaphysical works.2 Taken to an extreme, this misreading of Whitehead’s “atomism” becomes the misguided idea of a fundamental shift, if not a complete disruption, in Whitehead’s philosophy between these two general sets of works, occurring in the years between 1922 and 1929. This view simply cannot be supported by a careful reading of Whitehead’s texts (see chapter 5).

Of immediate interest to us here is the error of stampeding over the Triptych entirely by leaping into the metaphysics and attempting to convert that part of Whitehead’s thought into a philosophy of nature of its own. Following such an ill-advised path, the theory of extension is then taken in a superficial way as glossing basic natural spatial relationships, though even in this case its role is typically given short shrift. This error seems most likely to happen when the above noted emergence of the “atomic” character of reality in Whitehead’s thought is taken up in a naïve form, often enough because the word “quantum” has made its arresting and seductive appearance upon the stage.

Issues arising from the quantized behaviors of phenomena at the micro-physical level were not new in the 1920s: Clerk Maxwell and Boltzmann had both encountered them in their theories on the behaviors of gasses in the 1860s-70s, although they did not know at the time what to make of their observations; Planck’s constant on the minimal quantum of energy was formulated in 1899; and Einstein’s work on the photo-electric effect—demonstrating the corpuscular nature of light—was published in 1905. But the seminal works of Heisenberg and Schrödinger appeared in the years 1925–1926, after the work that became Science and the Modern World had been done, and seeing these as important (if not dominating) influences in the system of Process and Reality has tempted many persons with backgrounds in physics to leap to conclusions. Nevertheless, it is a temptation resolutely to be avoided, as it results in a profound misdirection in the effort to grasp Whitehead’s thought.

The unfortunate part of the above error is that both generic and specifically physical ideas of the quantum had already appeared in the 1919 Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge3 and the 1920 The Concept of Nature.4 Whitehead explicitly eschewed metaphysics in the Triptych, and indeed there is nothing particularly metaphysical about the notion of the quantum as it appears in those works.5 So when the quantum makes its appearance in his metaphysical works, it is essential that the idea of “the quantum” be handled both in its properly metaphysical context and with a view to its relevant history; one must address oneself to individual instances and the situationally relevant circumstances of the particular text and inquiry that Whitehead is engaged in. As we have noted, this interpretive care is needed because at all times and in all places Whitehead adjusts the details and peculiarities of his methodology so as to address the topic of his present concern; exactly, one might add, as any good mathematician always does.6 So imposing external interpretations upon the idea of the quantum, such as occurs when quantum physics is taken as the model of Whitehead’s metaphysics, is not the road to understanding but the path to misrepresentation. Whitehead had already warned us of the dangers of mistaking an exemplification of a principle for the principle itself in The Principle of Relativity; and, for better or worse, he was not in the habit of repeating himself once he had made a point that he considered settled.7

For example, amongst Whitehead’s earliest arguments in Process and Reality we find that, to the oft-quoted claim that “the ultimate metaphysical truth is atomism,” is then added the caveat that, “atomism does not exclude complexity and universal relativity. Each atom is a system of all things.”8 Whitehead then immediately contrasts metaphysical atomism with the wave/particle duality of light, distinguishing the latter as “corpuscular.” Whitehead’s choice of examples here seems rather telling since, as previously noted, it was precisely such behavior of light that Einstein highlighted in his 1905 paper, a paper which served as an important step in the quantum revolution in physics. The fact that Whitehead is so careful to distinguish the two can hardly be an accident. “A corpuscle,” Whitehead states, “and an advancing element of a wave front, are merely a permanent form propagated from atomic creature to atomic creature. A corpuscle is in fact an ‘enduring object.’ ”9

Thus, the idea of the quantum as it appears in the Triptych is an expression of matters of nature as these are investigated in natural philosophy. But the quantum in Process and Reality is of a much more general character than that which is revealed in nature, especially nature as it manifests itself in this cosmic epoch.10 And by “general” it must be understood that the subject matter of Whitehead’s work here is not limited to a mere illumination of this or that theory of physics. Such work remains squarely a part of natural philosophy, and carries with it none of the issues relating to the full range of metaphysical interpretation. Moreover, Whitehead was not one given over to racing after the latest façon de parler in physical theories and mathematics.11 The puzzles that commanded his attention were the same ones that had stayed with him from his days as an undergraduate at Cambridge.12

This aspect of Whitehead’s professional focus is what we have called “the problem of space.” The physical-scientific source of this issue predates both relativity and quantum theories; the problem of space came thundering into physics with the publication of Clerk Maxwell’s seminal works on electromagnetic theory.13 Indeed, Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory is the very real source of the crisis in physics that led to relativity itself. It was Maxwell’s theory that motivated Michaelson and Morley in their attempts experimentally to measure the earth’s movement through the æther that was postulated as the medium for electromagnetic waves. And while Einstein glosses over all of the experimental evidence that supposedly led up to his 1905 paper on special relativity (SR), he gave explicit pride of place to the formal problems of space that Maxwell’s theory introduced into physics, and the mathematical asymmetries between it and Newtonian mechanics.14

This problem of space is the most visible thread of continuity in all of Whitehead’s work, both as a mathematician and as a philosopher. Whitehead’s thesis on Maxwell’s theory earned him his Trinity Fellowship at Cambridge. The effort to find the most logically basic relational formulation for the characters of space was the primary motivation behind his Universal Algebra. His final statement on the problem of space does not occur until Part IV of Process and Reality. So it strains credulity to argue that he abandoned this line of inquiry—a focus of the previous fifty-plus years of his scholarly life—in favor of the “latest-greatest” topic in physics.15

As we have seen, the developed results of Whitehead’s work on the problem of space display a fundamental connection to basic principles of logic itself, relations which Whitehead was aware of from the earliest stages of his professional career. He realized that this work was more fundamental than projective geometry—and more logically basic than affine and/or metrical geometries: The theory of extension is the instrument from which these others are constructed. This focus upon logically fundamental characteristics is, by the same token, our Ariadne’s thread for finding the role of the quantum in his metaphysical thought. However, the path we need to follow is not in the emerging studies in physics in the latter part of Whitehead’s career, but in the logical structure of explanation that was already manifesting itself in his earliest publication.

As such, it is important that we maintain a sharp distinction between the order of explanation and the order of reality. Here we begin to make good on the promissory note in the previous chapter regarding the strategic rules of logic. Care is needed to avoid conflating the order of reality with the order of nature. Whitehead’s naturalism (see chapters 10 and 11) is non-reductive, and it is most assuredly not the grand total of all that is real. It is with the latter that Whitehead’s metaphysical speculations are concerned (and even then, the discussion of reality is almost exclusively limited to the present cosmic epoch), while it is to a single structural feature of those speculations that we must here attend. And precisely because we are primarily concerned with such structural features, our attention must be drawn to what we call the “quantum of explanation.”16 Given the close connection between Whitehead’s logic of extensive relatedness and his metaphysics, the insights we gain into the quantum structure of explanation, our toe-hold on the real (in our own cosmic epoch) is similarly reinforced.

We can already see from the quotation a few pages above, where the “atom” (the undivided) is a system of all things, that, since the metaphysical atomicity of the real does not exclude complexity, the order of the real is not an order of simple parts contributing to the making of a complicated whole. Indeed, given that the “atoms” of which Whitehead speaks are “systems of all things,” we already have before ourselves rather telling evidence that Whitehead means his “atoms” to be taken in the original Greek sense of “uncut”; that is, as irreducible wholes. This holistic sense of reality was not driven by exotic physical effects such as “quantum entanglement.”17

While there are sources of inspiration for Whitehead’s “atoms” in the physical literature, the deeper sense of it comes from his educational background, which includes his mathematician’s appreciation for systematic totalities, his understanding of Clerk Maxwell’s field theory, and his poetic ear for the holism and rhythm native to human experience.18 But the holism at stake is, once again, as much a matter of the order of explanation as it is the order of reality. In any discussion of a systematically interconnected whole such as Whitehead attempts, there is a kind of “falsification” of the real that occurs the instant one chooses to emphasize one aspect of that whole in one’s descriptive explication.19 Yet such selective attention is not optional; it is the sine qua non of engaging in any manner of rational inquiry whatsoever, regardless of whether one is engaging in high-energy physics, speculative philosophy, abstract mathematics, or making dinner with what is currently in the refrigerator.20

Ultimately it is not falsification but abstraction that is occurring here.21 And as long as one does not confuse or conflate the order of explanation with the order of reality, then just as with a great work of literature, such an abstract metaphor—that poetic “little lie”—becomes the instrument of telling a much greater truth.

The above point was not in any way lost upon Whitehead himself:

Philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical first principles. Weakness of insight and deficiencies of language stand in the way inexorably. Words and phrases must be stretched towards a generality foreign to their ordinary usage; and however such elements of language be stabilized as technicalities, they remain metaphors mutely appealing for an imaginative leap.22



The italicized portions of this passage are particularly striking, since they are precisely the kinds of tropes required to engage a literary work. Quoting Whitehead again, “but no language can be anything but elliptical, requiring a leap of the imagination to understand its meaning in its relevance to immediate experience.”23 Whitehead had already emphasized in the preface that, “the unity of treatment is to be looked for in the gradual development of the scheme, in meaning and in relevance, and not in the successive treatment of particular topics.”24 This highlights once again the focal role of the structure of explanation in Process and Reality as opposed to just and only a dogmatic claim about the constitution of reality. As is the case with any thoughtful piece of writing, one cannot say what the real “story” is if one is content to shatter it into pieces and simply gaze upon the disconnected heap.

It seems at least a little ironic that it should be a mathematician reminding us that comprehensive explanation depends not only upon empirical adequacy and logical coherence, but also upon the “narrative intelligibility” of an account as well. That is to say, no small part of the explanatory force of an idea comes from the kind of appreciation that only emerges from a pan-synoptic grasp of the whole that is both cognitive and felt, this latter term being chosen quite deliberately.





Extensive Relatedness


It is appropriate that a consideration of some of the more literary aspects of Whitehead’s explanatory schema provide us with our segue into his most mathematical discussion in Process and Reality. But the logic of this step is two-fold: first, it is Whitehead himself who insists that the intelligibility of the whole can be found only in the whole, and to leave out any part of it is, in effect, to falsify that totality by destroying its atomicity (un-cut-ability). Secondly, the theory of extension is of immediate relevance to the misreading of the quantum as somehow derivative from its physical exemplification. So, while the fullest discussion of extension must wait for chapter 5, we can no more ignore it entirely until that time than Whitehead could meaningfully quarantine his discussion of it until just and only Part IV of Process and Reality.

We must always keep in mind the distinction Whitehead draws between atomic characters of reality with their “system-of-all-things” holism, and the corpuscular societies of occasions that are tagged in non-metaphysical parlance as physical “particles.” There is simply no reducing the former to the latter without completely losing sight of Whitehead’s real meaning. Whitehead’s “atoms” are uncut in a sense that would still be the prevailing one at the time Whitehead was coming up through University. Physical corpuscles, on the other hand, are not “atomic” at all in Whitehead’s sense; rather, they are societies—ordered and organized serial collections—of occasions, “objects” in the non-metaphysical sense, propagating themselves in physical space and time, under a coordinate analysis.25

Second, extension (or more appropriately, “extensive relatedness,” a term favored throughout this book) is one of those aspects of structure that is native to any actual entity in its actual world. For instance, Whitehead notes that:

Thus, the [extensive] continuum is present in each actual entity, and each actual entity pervades the continuum…. Thus, an act of experience has an objective scheme of extensive order by reason of the double fact that its own perspective standpoint has extensive content, and that the other actual entities are objectified with the retention of their extensive relationships.26



The term “extensive,” it must be recalled, is used in reference to Whitehead’s scheme of mereology—that is, logic of part and whole—which morphed into the mereotopology of Process and Reality. This is not simply a perspective of natural space or time, but of the logical and coherent (in Whitehead’s sense of mutually interdependent) mereotopological sense that lies at the foundation of our conceiving the very possibility of natural spaces and times.

In the third place, “this extensive continuum is ‘real,’ because it expresses a fact derived from the actual world and concerning the contemporary actual world.”27 This is part and parcel of Whitehead’s “radical realism” (a term we will explain in chapter 10). This relational system is not abstracted from concrete experience but rather infuses every vital, innermost part of it. Thus, extensive relatedness is not a set of concepts that is just casually superadded to actuality in its naively “atomic” ultimacy, but is an inherent fact expressed by that actuality; it is an irreducible “part” of the “system of all things.”

Extensive relatedness was something that Whitehead argued was of immediate relevance to the issue of the quantum; indeed, the quantum is at the center of his opening discussion of the technicalities relating to the coordinate division.28 But in coupling these ideas as closely as Whitehead does, he also significantly undermines any hope of identifying his quantum of explanation with quantum mechanics. The latter is expressly a matter of micro-physical reality while the theory of extension—as Whitehead explicitly tells us—is logically prior to any metrical considerations whatsoever. Yet, such metrical properties are absolutely essential in order to distinguish something as “small” or “large.” Whitehead reminds us of this absence of intrinsic metrical content in Process and Reality at various places: “the properties of this continuum are very few and do not include the relationships of metrical geometry.”29 Indeed, “these extensive relationships are more fundamental than their more special spatial and temporal relationships. Extension is the most general scheme of real potentiality, providing the background for all other organic relations.”30 On the other hand, quantum mechanical relationships and physical corpuscles, in physical theory, are inherently metrical in the sense that ideas of measurement completely permeate physical theory—even when such measurements prove rather paradoxical in nature.31 As such, these metrical concepts are not, and cannot be, fundamental in any relational system that is itself logically prior to, and grounds the very possibility of, measurement.32

Indeed, metrical relationships are, in comparison to other structures within a generalized “spatial” logic, scarcely general at all. Rather, they are highly specialized developments in their own right. At the point at which one has a metric, one has proceeded through many successive layers of differentiation and particularization, such as those that generate topology, projective relations, affinities (similarities of angles but not size), until one has finally developed such detailed and narrowly determined relationships (“congruences”) that will finally allow one to speak meaningfully of metrical forms of relatedness. One of the most obvious such forms is size itself (see our chapter 7). All such measuring is far from Whitehead’s concerns in Process and Reality.

If one’s logical machinery is so general that it has yet to include metrical functions, then considerations of size, including differences as gross as that of “micro” and “macro” physical scales, are logically meaningless because they can not be expressed. However, caution must be exercised (here as everywhere) because as Whitehead quite carefully illustrates, there are other senses of “micro” and “macro” that one can employ without presupposing a reductive collapse to mere physical size. “In the philosophy of organism,” Whitehead tells us,

it is held that the notion of ‘organism’ has two meanings, interconnected but intellectually separable, namely the microscopic meaning and the macroscopic meaning. The microscopic meaning is concerned with the formal constitution of an actual occasion, considered as a process of realizing an individual unity of experience. The macroscopic meaning is concerned with the givenness of the actual world considered as the stubborn fact which at once limits and provides opportunity for the actual occasion.33



What is striking about this initial definition of these ideas is that the “givenness of the actual world” that “limits and provides opportunity,” which Whitehead identifies with the “macroscopic,” is precisely the sort of real potentiality that is part of the province of extensive relatedness.

The macroscopic cannot be identified with extensive relatedness, of course. Indeed, one possible criticism of the above reading is, on the surface, provided by Whitehead himself some pages on. There he says,

There are two species of process, macroscopic process and microscopic process. The macroscopic process is the transition from attained actuality to actuality in attainment; while the microscopic process is the conversion of conditions which are merely real into determinate actuality.”34



In some ways, this might seem like the opposite of the previous characterization. However, Whitehead immediately refines this last quote, stating that, “The former [macroscopic] process effects the transition from the ‘actual’ to the ‘merely real’; and the latter [microscopic] process effects the growth from the real to the actual. The former process is efficient; the latter process is teleological.”35 The fact that Whitehead so carefully associated the macroscopic with efficient causation is, again, a very thorough-going connection of the macroscopic with extensive forms of relatedness, because it is here that the overtly causal forms of interaction—in their more commonly understood physical sense—play out most directly. This becomes particularly obvious when one casts an eye to the nature of presentational immediacy and the theory of perception. (See chapter 8.)

Once again we must emphasize that the connection between macroscopic forms of relatedness and extensive connections is emphatically not an identity. What this brief examination shows is the focus within Whitehead’s magnum opus upon the structures of explanation. The uses to which Whitehead puts the concepts of the “macroscopic” and the “microscopic” have explicitly eschewed such trivialities as metrical size. Whitehead addresses these concepts in their generically cosmological sense; that is, in their “specific” metaphysical relevance to this cosmic epoch. And it is within the scope of this relevance that we find the real meaning of the quantum.

As previously noted, Whitehead’s concern with extensive forms of relatedness initially emerged from purely physical, scientific connections, but those connections are not seated in micro-physics. Rather, the scientific breakthroughs that inspired Whitehead and started him on his lifetime inquiry into the logical foundations of space, time, and reality came from Clerk Maxwell’s work in electromagnetism. It was Maxwell who unified electromagnetic phenomena into a conceptually integrated whole. Only on account of such a unification were the respective developments of special and general relativity on the one hand, and quantum mechanics on the other, even possible in physical theory.

Maxwell’s revolutionary theory of electromagnetism systematized what had previously seemed to be disparate phenomena under the aegis of a single, comprehensive explanatory framework. It also brought to light a fundamental problem in nineteenth-century physics, illuminating a fundamental asymmetry between the theory of electromagnetism on the one hand and Newtonian mechanics on the other. Maxwell’s theory set a fixed, finite speed to the propagation of light waves, a speed which did not seem to vary with differing frames of reference or the relative motions of those frames, which starkly contrasted with the way motion behaved in Newtonian physics. By the evidence, this irreconcilable difference between the mathematics of Maxwell’s and Newton’s physical theories, rather than any issues relating to specifically empirical evidence, was the real motivation behind Einstein’s development of relativity.36

With regard to the micro-physical theory of quantum mechanics—and here it is essential that we be clear about the distinction between physical and metaphysical principles,—it is only because Maxwell so meticulously unified electricity, magnetism, and light in a single, relational whole that the puzzles of quantum mechanics could manifest themselves as puzzles. It was Maxwell’s work that demonstrated the unity of electro-magnetism as an undulatory phenomenon. But at a later date—1905, to be precise—Einstein also experimentally demonstrated the corpuscular nature of light with his paper on the photo-electric effect. This contradiction of the wave and corpuscular properties of light, in conjunction with Planck’s work on the transitional energy states of physical systems, defined the research program for micro-physics for the foreseeable future by creating the equally irreducible and seemingly irreconcilable wave/particle tension in physical theory (raised by the theories now known as quantum mechanics). But physical corpuscles are not the minimal units of explanation. This is not because there are corpuscles that are smaller still, but because there are logical quanta that are more basic in the process of fundamental explanation.

The term “basic” here is not tossed about casually. The logical/explanatory primitives Whitehead is working with are prior to space and time. Referring to the development of extensive relatedness in Whitehead’s corpus as “the problem of space” is simply a metaphor. We justify ourselves here in the use of this half-truth on the Whiteheadian grounds that it creates an effective path of narrative intelligibility. But that justification does not change the fact that an imaginative leap is required, a leap that can only be made from the precipice of algebraic reasoning.

For example, Whitehead tells us that, “other actual entities are objectified with the retention of their extensive relationships. These extensive relationships are more fundamental than their more special spatial and temporal relationships. Extension is the most general scheme of real potentiality, providing the background for all other organic relations.”37 He expands upon this notion by saying, “Physical time makes its appearance in the ‘coordinate’ analysis of the ‘satisfaction.’ The actual entity is the enjoyment of a certain quantum of physical time. But the genetic process is not the temporal succession: such a view is exactly what is denied by the epochal theory of time. Each phase in the genetic process presupposes the entire quantum, and so does each feeling in each phase.”38 And further on, Whitehead says, “physical time or physical space … are notions which presuppose the more general relationship of extension…. The extensiveness of space is really the spatialization of extension; and the extensiveness of time is really the temporalization of extension. Physical time expresses the reflection of genetic divisibility into coordinate divisibility…. The immediately relevant point to notice is that time and space are characteristics of nature which presuppose the scheme of extension.”39

The serial, narrative structure of language makes it impossible to talk about anything—even purely logical/algebraic relations—except in terms of “before” and “after.” But as the above quotes from Whitehead make clear, the sense of priority that appears at the foundational basis of extensive relatedness is not one of temporal “earlierness,” but of logical—which is to say, inquirential—presupposition. The order, once again, in not an expression of nature, space or time, but of the quantum of explanation.





Propagation


Whitehead’s metaphysics includes a detailed development of a theory of internal and external relations or, more accurately, a systematic account of the mutually referencing internalization and externalization of relatedness. Whitehead’s quantum is a quantum of explanation precisely because it coherently outlines the salient structural features of these forms of relatedness within the linguistic and algebraic frames of expression available to him at the time. He did this while consciously pressing the boundaries of those frames to say more than they were accustomed to saying. To follow through with this task, we must go well beyond simply trying to characterize the quantum, as it stands by itself—as though it were even possible to stand by itself(!)—in a manner that other philosophers might describe as “in-itself.” We must also trace an outline of the paths through which the quantum expresses its-self as one atom in the many creating the one. Which is to say, we must gloss the ways in which the quantum propagates its-self in the systematic and relational totality of the real. Such paths will illuminate the logical function of the quantum, and help further distance us from the unfortunate physicalistic reductions that have dogged so much of contemporary Whitehead commentary.40

It is worth reminding ourselves here of some of the details of the categoreal scheme. Perhaps the most important of these is that “philosophy is explanatory of abstraction, and not of concreteness.”41 There are two salient points here. The prioritizing of the concrete over the abstract is the obvious one, and must be understood in the context of Whitehead’s radical empiricism. However, of greater importance for us is the easily neglected claim that philosophy is explanatory, and not merely descriptive, even if the term “explanation” is being used in an unfamiliar way. We are going well beyond a mere analysis of sentences or a phenomenological description of experience. We are stretching our cognitive “legs” in an effort to reach the real and the true.

The direction of explanation is always from the more abstract back to its grounding in the more concrete. But the nature of that grounding is never in the simplistic form of “one thing:: one explanation.” To begin with, the “principle of relativity”—which might be called the “principle of relationalism” to avoid confusion with the far more narrowly construed physical theory of Einstein’s—requires that, “every item in its [the actual entity’s] universe is involved in each concrescence. In other words, it belongs to the nature of a ‘being’ that it is a potential for every ‘becoming’.”42 We must not suppose that the use of the term “potential” in the preceding is somehow to be viewed as nugatory, a “mere” potential. The pure potentials—the eternal objects—together with actual entities stand out from the other categories of existence with what Whitehead characterizes as having “a certain extreme finality.”43 So Whitehead is not one to treat potentiality as a second-class citizen.

Indeed, it is this “potency” (a term we use guardedly for its common root with “potential”) that makes each metaphysical atom a “system of all things.” Whitehead characterizes the meaning of potentiality in the sixth Category of Explanation as “indetermination rendered determinate in the real concrescence.”44 The indetermination is rendered determinate because while “each entity in the universe … can … be implicated in that concrescence in one or other of many modes … in fact it is implicated only in one mode.”45 It is quite determinately one mode, and not merely “possibly one” mode. The entire universe is expressing itself in some determinate manner in each concrescence. That expression—which is to say, its prehension by the concrescing entity—might be negligible or even negative. But it will be that determinate one way which contributes its mode of potency to the systematic totality of that concrescence.

What stands out for us is the enormous difference between these richly textured modal forms of explanatory propagation in Whitehead’s metaphysics versus the extremely narrow possibilities of a merely physical set of relations.46 Physical waves and physical particles are not the paradigms of relatedness, but merely their simplest examples. It is worth noting how Whitehead reinterprets the wave/particle aspects of microphysics in the light of his logical Categories of Explanation. Microphysics is an abstraction from the fullness of nature, and it must find its explanation in the completeness of the categoreal scheme as a model.47

Thus, Whitehead notes that, “both a corpuscle and an advancing element of a wave front are merely a permanent form propagated from atomic creature to atomic creature.”48 Notice that neither the corpuscle nor the wave is itself such an atomic creature, and hence can not be identified with the fundamentals to which all explanations must be referred. Furthermore, while a train of waves will always exhibit social order, at the earliest stages of its propagation this order takes on the character of a more or less loosely organized personal one.49 At the same time, a corpuscle is the type of society that manifests itself as an “enduring object.” But Whitehead goes on to remind us that, “The notion of an ‘enduring object’ is capable of more or less completeness of realization.” On account of this, a wave can be more or less corpuscular; indeed, “the train of waves starts as a corpuscular society, and ends as a society which is not corpuscular.”50

There are two points in the above that are worthy of note. The first is that Whitehead completely inverts the standard interpretation of quantum mechanics: for Whitehead, there is no “collapse of the wave-packet.” Rather, there is a dissipation of the “corpuscularity” in the initiating social order. Thus Whitehead states that:

[W]henever we are concerned with occupied space, we are dealing with this restricted type of corpuscular societies; and whenever we are thinking of the physical field in empty space, we are dealing with societies of the wider type. It seems as if the careers of waves of light illustrate the transition from the more restricted type to the wider type.51



The second point is that the relational structures that are involved in this discussion are highly specific instances of the far more generic quantum of explanation. For example, immediately preceding the quote above, Whitehead highlighted the fact that, “in speaking of a society … ‘membership’ will always refer to the actual occasions, and not to subordinate enduring objects composed of actual occasions such as the life of an electron or of a man.”52 Whitehead quite explicitly sets an electron and a human being upon equal—and equally derivative—footing. These kinds of high end “entities” are the conjunctive abstractions from the genuinely concrete actual occasions that go into their extensively constituted natures. So, while, on the one hand, the “general principles of physics” emerge from these purely logical considerations exactly as one would require them to from any metaphysics with even a marginal claim upon our attention, it remains the case that these are purely logical considerations.53 Physical instantiations are merely exemplars, and not paradigms, of the holistically organic approach that Whitehead is working from. The densely structured societies that compose the abstract “enduring objects” required by our habits of subject/predicate speech are not the foundations of explanation, but merely the cognitively identifiable abstract constructs of a deeper and more immediately present experience.54

So when we speak of “propagation” we cannot limit ourselves to just and only a physicalistic propagation of mere abstract corpuscles and/or waves.55 We must dig deeper for the concreteness of the objectifications made by actual occasions in their variegated processes of becoming that go into making all manner of such structured societies. It is here that we find the logical order, which is to say, the quantum of explanation.

This quantum is, by logical—if not altogether “formal”—necessity, sensitive to context. The explanatory quanta relevant to a structured society of electronic occasions will vary in significant details from those applicable to a structured society of human occasions. Yet, as was noted above, both such structured societies are abstract derivations of a deeper layer of concreteness than that to which our lazy usages of language have for long ages habituated us.

One way to look at this is through the lens of reductionism. Reductionists say that, ultimately, there is only one type of explanation, and all forms of explanation are, by logical and/or metaphysical fact—or even necessity!—reducible to examples of this one privileged type. This approach to explanation is different from monism, which says that all that is real can be traced back to a single kind of “stuff.” However, while every hybrid entity will be rooted in that stuff in a unique way, the explanatory path that traces those roots might be different from other entities in fundamental ways. Moreover, there may be even more than one such path for any given entity, depending upon the context and the inquiry. Thus, not only is “is” said in many ways for Aristotle, but things variously participate in all four “causes,” a term that might be better translated as “reasons” to avoid confusion with the contemporary scientific senses of “cause.”

It is worth recalling Whitehead’s frequent use of the ideas of both efficient and final “cause.” And if we fully embrace the sense of “cause” as reason noted above, then we can find a sense of formal “cause” occasionally used.56 An immediately notable point about these techniques of explanation is that they are all highly generic in themselves, and as such none of them can be reduced to a specific type. Whitehead’s sensitivity to the multidimensional demands of explanation, exemplified throughout Process and Reality, is part and parcel of his holistic, organic approach. The analysis of any part is itself only a part that must wait upon the development of the whole for the fullness of even that partial, analytical meaning, while the whole has no meaning in the absence of its parts.





Death and Dissipation


The requirements of explanation cannot be limited to just and only those positive factors that capture our attention in any given instance, any more than a part can take on its meaningful place in the scheme of things in the absence of the whole of which it is a part. The whole, of course, is also just the whole it is because of the parts of which it is composed. This is the a-tomic, undivided character of the quantum of explanation: the most concretely real “elements” of “the world” are those undivided totalities of experience which can only be analyzed through abstraction, but which are the explanatory basis of that which has been abstracted.

The concrete—and, hence, the atomic whole—is the center for relevance. Or, more correctly, any particular “atomic occasion” (by which we mean any actual entity in its actual world) is centered upon its unique, perspectivally informed universe. However, the relevance centered upon this perspective is not (in general) a Pascalian God whose center is everywhere. One need not slip into the fallacy of simple location to realize that there is a fringe of diminishing relevance to any particular atomic occasion. Relevance is undoubtedly the primary requirement for a quantum of explanation. But for any finite entity, the scope of that relevance is bounded. This boundedness of relevance works both upon the relevance for the particular atomic occasion and also upon the relevance of that atomic occasion.

For how such an occasion—typically as a member of a society of such occasions—slips beyond the horizon of relevance for most if not all other entities is itself an essential component in the quantum of explanation.57 In other words, in order fully to appreciate the vividness of explanatory relevance we must also appreciate the evaporation of that relevance in dissipation and death. We will make a major theme of this dissipation in the final chapter of this book, but for now, a preview is needed.

As always, the concrete—and hence, the a-tomic—is the basis of explanation. How then does an atomic occasion lose its purchase upon other occasions such that the traces of relevance of the first occasion cease to manifest themselves in others? The answer can be sketched only in a generic way (to believe otherwise would be to endorse a form of reductionism), but the central idea is that as an ordered society begins to lose its cohesion, its atomic occasions cease to exercise the collective potency to propagate their objectified selves with any but negligible intensity. The model for this is not the death of an ordinary living creature, since biological creatures are such astonishingly complex societies that one can too easily lose track of the more generic patterns amidst the chaos of details. Nevertheless, the simpler examples we will turn to below are still possessed of significant organic interest.

The first of these examples is less obviously so: the Cosmological Microwave Background Radiation, or “CMBR.” In what respects is the CMBR still relevant to human existence? It has only been in the past few generations that the CMBR has even been detected, and then only with the most exotic of high-tech equipment. It would seem as if the entire history of life on Earth has been blithely ignored by the cosmological context of its existence and evolution. Or is this way of framing the question perhaps missing something? The answer to this question is a straight-forward, “Yes.”

It is a matter of comparatively little interest whether or not beings like ourselves are consciously aware of the fact that we are awash in a sea of electromagnetic fields—what Whitehead tellingly and repeatedly refers to as “electronic occasions.” The simple fact is that everything on Earth has been inundated by the CMBR since the inception of life and, indeed, much earlier than that. The CMBR has been an ever-present fact with which all actualities on Earth have been interacting since such interaction was even possible. But this physical influence is quite small, so very small that it is arguably the case that its relevance to this planet had all but effectively died. Such loss of relevance is, however, a thing very much in need of qualification. After the construction of highly specialized technological enterprises, humans were able to revivify the CMBR in their own conscious thought processes, surprising some small number of us in our practical activities by the discovery of what had always been there (e.g., radio waves in general, but the CMBR more specifically).

To put this point in Whitehead’s vocabulary, elements of the CMBR concresced into our field of relevance long past the point of any substantive physical effects it might have had upon simpler occasions. But herein lies both the strength and tragedy of the CMBR. Its tenacity of endurance is reflective of its grotesque simplicity and absence of organizationally coherent nexūs. The CMBR endures because, from almost the very moment of its inception, it was already so irrelevant to most concrescences that its ongoing propagation entailed no meaningful costs to the occasions propagating it. Meanwhile, its numbing simplicity closed the doors almost entirely to any possibility of “error” such as might lead to creative advance.58

As another example, consider the influences of childhood memories and how these variously propagate and dissipate in individual human lives. Events that seem sharply etched on our experiential fabric at the time of their occurrence dissipate into a kind of shadow realm of our own ongoing concrescence. These earlier actualities can propagate themselves in ways that range from a kind of potency so thoroughly established in our actuality that we scarcely notice them. For example, consider when we first began to walk. This was a tectonic change in our lives, and one whose echoes have not subsided insofar as our walking improves for many years, and stays with us as long as our knees and hips last. But no one actually remembers the event itself. What a pity that so momentous an event is dead to us forever even as its consequences so immediately permeate our every concrescent actualization.

Alternatively, consider a memory from childhood that actually can return in force many years later. Such memories will often be painful or shameful ones. There is a good chance that our mere mention of such things already will have caused one such memory to leap to the reader’s mind. Two things are worthy of note here: first, the original event and its revivification in memory occurred as discrete pulses, as quanta. This is also true of the walking example: The first time one walked more than two steps bipedally was exactly that, the first time, a Zenonian burst of origination that never occurred before or after, since all subsequent trials were no longer first and were fundamentally informed by what had come before. The mature experience of walking seems like a continuous stretch from the period of very young childhood, but even that impression misses the significantly distinct and a-tomic act that constitutes each step. Moreover, each one of those steps is itself informed by the quanta of past experiences that led up to it, no matter how specialized the present “two steps” may have become in the interim. For example, if one is fencing, the change in foot movement that became habituated when one “learned how to fence” comes to be internalized in one’s walk. One can identify the walking gait of a dancer if one is attuned to such movements. Similarly, we detect the compensations in the hips as the cartilage in the knees degraded from too many years of fencing, or too much stress from dancing, or too little exercise, or a thousand other variations that descend from the first two steps a person took.

The overarching purpose of these last examples is to emphasize that the logical relationships of propagation and dissipation, of origination and loss, of creation and death, are forms that manifest, themselves, the variegated quanta of explanation. Each quantum of this relational fabric might trace out forms that share analogies with other quanta: the painful memory from childhood vanishes into the background of actualization like the CMBR until some unexpected event (a casual sentence, a radio-telescope) suddenly focuses it back into a relevance that seemed—up until the immediately preceding “moment,” which is to say, appropriately a-tomic duration—to have been lost entirely to any real potency. Instead, and seemingly against all reason, the past event bursts like a nova upon the current scene of actualization. Conversely, a childhood memory can cross the boundaries of the normal into the traumatic, and hang on with an operational force as definite as that of walking, while yet being pathological to its core. Some such memories are genuine horrors, not to be minimized, yet others—seemingly against all reason—hang on with nearly equal force and dog a person’s life at every new step.

Yet it is certainly the case that none of these (and an indefinite variety of examples that could be offered) is ever against all reason. However, the reasons—despite their analogies and even because of them—are uniquely the quanta of explanation, irreducible and atomic. If we lack complete clarity in regard to the whole, we need not lack it relative to a perspectival part. It is in many ways here, in the realm of death and dissipation, that the proper disanalogies of Whitehead’s quantum of explanation stand out with sharpest clarity against the scientistic reductionism that is often applied to his metaphysics. These quanta have reality only as analogies, and not simplistic identities.
