5  Extensive Connectedness (The Metaphysics in Logic)


If civilization continues to advance, in the next two thousand years the overwhelming novelty in human thought will be the dominance of mathematical understanding.

—Whitehead, The Interpretation of Science (199)





Modes of Thought


As we have argued, Whitehead was a mathematician to the core, and if we ever hope to understand his philosophy we will have to understand the particular natures of his modes of thought—and we very deliberately pluralize both. We have been pressing the idea that an insufficient amount of attention has been paid to Whitehead the algebraist, leading to a frequent failure to appreciate some important functional characteristics of his philosophy. We have emphasized the unity of Whitehead’s thought as against the prominent interpretations that see a fundamental disruption between the natural philosophy of the triptych and the later metaphysical works. We will contend here that no small part of the reason for this failure to take proper account of the unity of Whitehead’s thought is the absence of a sufficiently nuanced appreciation of the nature of algebraic thinking.

Whitehead was no ordinary mathematician, and no ordinary grasp of mathematical thinking by itself will serve to interpret the body of his work. Whitehead frequently demonstrated a poetic, even lyrical, appreciation for language—a rare gift amongst publishing mathematicians. Nevertheless, the nature of our topic here is such that we will, of necessity, set aside Whitehead’s oft demonstrated sensitivity to poetic forms and focus on his other central modes of relational thinking, on the mathematical mind that framed his “pre-geometric” spatial theory of extension. But this is not the most important difference between Whitehead and other mathematicians. Rather, the stand-out fact for us is that Whitehead was a radical empiricist. Evidence for this claim is already present in Whitehead’s first major publication, his Treatise on Universal Algebra, and we will be visiting some further suggestive passages in the second half of this chapter. It is a matter of comparatively little importance for us here whether Whitehead was already a full-blooded radical empiricist in 1898, or if he was “merely” so natively sympathetic to the position that he (more or less seamlessly) made the transition at a somewhat later date.

This chapter will be completing a “local” constellation of ideas within the broader context of this book. In chapter 3 we examined the “logic in the metaphysics,” while chapter 4 provided a focused examination of the quantum of explanation both as a logical “atom” and a functional unit in Whitehead’s metaphysics. This chapter will be the first “ribbon on the box” as we look now at the “metaphysics in the logic.”

The first part of this chapter will be critical, directed at that thread of interpretation that tends to downplay (if not outright dismiss) the role of the theory of extension in Whitehead’s thought. This opening critical move is intimately connected to the later constructive work, in that the dismissal of the theory of extension serves—or rather, dis-serves—both to shatter the unity of Whitehead’s thought and to lose sight of the truly radical form of empiricism that is to be found in that thought. We will be using Lewis Ford’s influential work, The Emergence of Whitehead’s Metaphysics, as our foil in this initial stage of the chapter. We have great respect for Ford’s scholarship and subtlety of thought, and we dislike commenting upon another commentator’s work in an exclusively negative manner. But the constraints of this chapter do not permit us the space to treat of Ford’s principal theses as anything but mistaken.





Skip to Page 337 [512]


The title of this section is a reference to the opening page of Part V of Process and Reality, and a swipe at that portion of the Whitehead community that so recklessly skips the preceding part. We are, of course, referring to Whitehead’s mature and final contribution to his mereotopological theory of extension. We emphasize that this theory has not received the attention from many of Whitehead’s interpreters that it deserves—either in terms of quality or quantity of that attention.1 There is a substantial irony in this neglect. But for the moment we have a different issue to focus on: specifically, why have so many scholars chosen to skip to page 337?

It is perhaps uncharitable to answer a question that requires speculating upon other people’s psychological processes. But it seems inescapably likely that no small part of this problem stems from a general “math-phobia” that we find in almost all areas of human activity, and against which Whitehead scholars have seldom shown an especially high resistance. And there is no denying that the coordinate account of Process and Reality reads much like a textbook on topology and the logic of spatial relations. Few philosophers are trained in these subjects. However, such training is a vital resource in following one of the primary modes of Whiteheadian thought.

This is not the place for a comprehensive exegesis of Ford’s analyses of the (by his estimation) non-role of extension in Whitehead’s mature metaphysics, or of Ford’s claims of a fundamental discontinuity between Whitehead’s earlier and later projects. Rather, it is sufficient to highlight just a few of the issues we wish to argue against. These issues are so central to Ford’s reading that if these foundational premises are undermined, the entire edifice collapses. The very first of these premises is found in the opening few sentences of his book.

Ford begins his book with the statement that, “Most readers have found a vast difference between Whitehead’s earlier works in the philosophy of nature, published 1919–1922, and his later metaphysical writings, starting with Science and the Modern World (1925).”2 By itself, this is not problematic. But Ford next asks, “Why is this so?” and then proceeds to treat its being so as not only an essentially correct estimation of “most readers” responses, but as an altogether accurate and appropriate evaluation of Whitehead’s texts.

Let us be clear here: This move by Ford—which establishes his entire thesis and provides the foundational support for the principal ideas that inform the rest of his book—this move, as it stands, is an argumentum ad populum fallacy. Ford apparently takes it for granted that “of course” there is this fundamental difference between the earlier and the later works. But insofar as this is offered as an argument, it is a fallacy pure and simple. And insofar as it is not offered as an argument, we should be justifiably suspicious that it is present at all. The remainder of Ford’s book is intended to justify this move, but it does so largely on the basis of a significant measure of evident confirmation bias. There are very important aspects of Process and Reality that directly refute Ford’s primary thesis.

But returning to Ford’s opening move, we should ask: what if there is no “of course” to be found where Ford is pointing? Even assuming Ford’s estimation of the majority of readers is correct, what if this reading of Whitehead is a mischaracterization of the relational continuities between Whitehead’s earlier philosophy of nature—in particular, the three volumes we have been calling “the triptych”—and his later metaphysical works? Even if we granted the factual accuracy of Ford’s claim (which we do not), that factual accuracy would not (by itself) carry any logical force. This lack of logical force becomes even more evident once we wonder whether that reading majority is sufficiently informed in the methods and structures of formal algebraic reasoning to adjudicate the matter properly of the appropriate place of Whitehead’s theory of extension, its role in Process and Reality, and the presence or absence of real discontinuities in Whitehead’s methods and topics.

We are arguing that, among other things, such a background acquaintance with algebraic thought is an important ingredient in even a basic understanding of Whitehead’s philosophy. We would all be deeply suspicious of a scholar who stood before us and announced, “I am an expert on Aristotle and Plato; but I’ve never learned any Greek language or culture.” Why should we be any less concerned about a Whitehead scholar who never learned the mathematical language and culture? The only hope we have to “get” Whitehead is to think like him, which means thinking with and through the tools that defined his life as a professional mathematician for some forty years.

One important step toward seeing the unity in Whitehead’s works is to understand how mathematicians engage their problems—a methodologically vital aspect of mathematical culture. As we have already pointed out, this methodology underlying Whitehead’s texts is recognizable to mathematicians. It is a pattern of setting out the aims and limitations of one’s program, then developing and deploying the tools that will be brought to bear upon the proposed analysis. The specification of the topic will presuppose a comprehensive grasp of the background materials and previous developments of the topic—often without explicitly saying as much. This is a procedure that frequently leaves the uninitiated feeling that they have entered into the middle of an ongoing conversation, because in reality they have.

Nevertheless, even as the specific topic might shift away from or build upon a previous inquiry, the techniques of setting out one’s agenda—and then sticking to it with meticulous care—remains constant. On the other hand, the structure of such a methodology is not a mechanically applied formula that is indistinguishable from one thinker to the next. The nature of the topics chosen as well as the specific techniques of analysis employed will regularly display the intrinsic thought patterns of their authors. In this regard, the methodological approach—or perhaps one should say, the “meta-methodology”—taken by Whitehead is recognizably continuous from before and after (as well as between) such works as his Enquiry, his Science and the Modern World, and of course, Process and Reality.

We would add that a mathematician does not, in general, abandon a previous project without comment. This is especially true when one’s current project continues to reference previous thematic development. If there is a problem with the earlier work, then one articulates the issues and discusses directions for their potential resolution. On the other hand, if there is not a problem then one takes the previous work as given and moves on, referencing it only in so far as the earlier conclusions are appropriate to the topic at hand. This is exactly what Whitehead does: On only two substantive technical points does he correct a major component of the triptych: the first of these is the shift from a pure mereology of part and whole to the mereotopology of extensive connection, and the second is the introduction of strains into the technical machinery of his natural philosophy. Otherwise, many of his numerous references to his earlier philosophy of nature found in his later works are wholesale citations of entire volumes from the triptych.3

It is equally worth observing the wholesale and directly topical continuities between the triptych and the later metaphysical discussions. We have already spoken of the two principal thematic threads that run through Whitehead’s work as “the problem of space” and “the problem of the accretion of value.”4 We are concentrating here on the first thematic structure, the “problem of space,” because it is precisely here that the substantive continuity between the triptych and the later works stands out most sharply. Quite aside from the fact that, here, Whitehead’s natural philosophy finds its vector into his metaphysics, Whitehead’s entire theory of perception collapses without the fully articulated theory of extension presented in Part IV. Moreover, absent the theory of extension Whitehead would neither be able to discuss—much less resolve—the questions of the one and the many nor the nature and connections between internal and external relations.

The roots of Whitehead’s evolving theory of extension first appear in his Universal Algebra, which was supposed to have a second volume. That second volume evolved in time to become the intended fourth volume of the Principia Mathematica, which shares with its earlier planned manifestation the ontological distinction of having never appeared. But through all of its various incarnations, even into its ultimate form in Part IV of Process and Reality, Whitehead’s theory of extension was driven by the desire to develop a “pre-geometric” logic of spatial relations. With the emergence of Einstein’s general theory of relativity, this project took on the added urgency of explicitly developing an empirically meaningful logic of spatial measurement as well. All of these ideas, in their various thematic developments, are clearly present in the triptych and the later works such as Science and the Modern World and Process and Reality. So, in lighting upon the supposed “vast difference” between the triptych and Science and the Modern World, Ford has pushed the putative dis-analogy too far.

As one last item on this point, we find Ford’s opening assertions to be themselves quite surprising. Until Ford announced them as such, the thought that there was a “vast difference” between the triptych and the metaphysical works had never occurred to us. The nature of our experience and study—which, admittedly, has included a moderate amount of logic and abstract algebra—emphasized to our way of reading the enormous continuities that we found in Whitehead’s texts. Now, having criticized Ford for his ad populum we would do well not to slip into our own ad vericundiam argument here. But it is important to note that the weight we are asking you to place upon our personal authority is only that of possibility: if an alternative reaction than Ford’s ad populum is possible, then obviously there is nothing necessary to this “common reaction.” In accordance with what we like to call the “first law of metaphysics”—what is actual is possible.

The next constellation of problems we wish to note in the Fordian interpretation of Whitehead’s theory of extension, turns upon the status of internal and external relations on the one hand, and the status of extension versus prehension on the other. Ford cites (on at least five occasions) Whitehead’s note on page 202 of the 1924 reprint of Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, where Whitehead says that, “the true doctrine, that ‘process’ is the fundamental idea, was not in my mind with sufficient emphasis. Extension is derivative from process, and is required by it.”5 Based upon this note, and his reading of Science and the Modern World, Ford argues that extension is relegated by Whitehead to a secondary status. “Prehension,” Ford asserts, “now replaces extension as the primary relation between events”6 Indeed, Ford goes on to assert that, “Extension can be interpreted strictly in terms of external relations, while prehension is precisely a spatiotemporal internal relation”7 Given Ford’s otherwise detailed scholarship, this is a peculiar claim to make. We cannot see how one could hope to justify such a position in the light of Whitehead’s actual statements on the subject.

To begin, Whitehead makes relatively little use of the notions of internal and external relations prior to Science and the Modern World, and even in that book their appearance is limited. Nevertheless the continuity of Whitehead’s thought from the triptych to Process and Reality is readily discernible. Let us look again at the quote above, from Whitehead’s Enquiry: “Extension is derivative from process, and is required by it” (our emphasis). Ford apparently only looks at the first half of that quote, that extension is derivative from process. But Whitehead concludes by noting that extension is “required” by process! We are hard-pressed to imagine Whitehead ever being so egregiously ungrammatical as to invert the above relation by accident, but this is evidently what Ford is taking for granted in his blanket dismissal of the extensive forms of relatedness.

Moreover, while it seems obvious that prehension adds a dimension to the structure of process, nevertheless there is nothing in Science and the Modern World, or any of Whitehead’s other works, to suggest that extension has been relegated to a mere sidebar of his overall scheme. In addition, the notion that extension provides only external characters of relatedness is not credible on the face of it—extension is nothing if not the basic form of pre-spatial relations, as we have seen here and throughout.

Furthermore, Whitehead explicitly argues that extension is an essential, irreducible character of temporal epochs, even in the initial development of these notions in Science and the Modern World. As Whitehead states in that work:

Realization is the becoming of time in the field of extension. Extension is the complex of events, qua their potentialities. In realization the potentiality becomes actuality. But the potential pattern requires a duration; and the duration must be exhibited as an epochal whole, by the realization of the pattern. Thus time is the succession of elements in themselves divisible and contiguous. A duration, in becoming temporal, thereby incurs realization in respect to some enduring object. Temporalisation is realization. Temporalization is not another continuous process. It is an atomic succession. Thus time is atomic (i.e., epochal), though what is temporalized is divisible.8



Extension is not an accidental or secondary adjunct to the above; it is an essential quality and principal qualification of duration and realization. (We would note that the above quote also makes it evident that Whitehead’s use of the term “atomic” does not mean microscopic, but “irreducible”—i.e. “ατομώσ” or “uncut” in the original Greek sense. It is a divisible—which is to say, extensive—actual whole.)

In The Principle of Relativity, Whitehead had already noted that, “It is evident that essential and contingent relationships correspond closely to internal and external relations.”9 It is also worth recalling that as early as Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, Whitehead was already breaking out the relatedness of extension along both internal and external lines.10 Thus, the duality Ford notes above—setting out extension as both derivative from and required by process—is not some comet that just miraculously appeared in the Whiteheadian sky. Along the same lines, we should observe the continuities that run from Enquiry, where Whitehead says that “Time and space both spring from the relation of extension,”11 to the more mature claim found in Process and Reality that:

Physical time or physical space … are notions which presuppose the more general relationship of extension…. The extensiveness of space is really the spatialization of extension; and the extensiveness of time is really the temporalization of extension. Physical time expresses the reflection of genetic divisibility into coordinate divisibility.12



Note that the later quote has acknowledged the need to bring prehension (genetic divisibility) into the picture. But note, more importantly, that space and time remain derivative characters of the essential relation of extension. There is nothing in Science and the Modern World which breaks this unity of thought, even as (for the technical purposes of that specific inquiry) different aspects of those relationships as given, are varyingly emphasized.

Since extension and prehension are prior to space and time, they are also prior to the metrical relations of space and time. Hence, in speaking of the atomic nature of an occasion, especially in its extensive character, it is logically incoherent to regard that “atomic” nature as in any sense referring to the size of the occasion. While “large” and “small” can be dealt with qualitatively in purely ordinal terms, this should not be supposed to translate into any absolute quantitative measure, a point Whitehead emphasized in chapter 3 of Principle of Relativity, a work he quite explicitly continued to endorse throughout Process and Reality.

Finally, to cast the internality of spatiotemporal relations entirely upon prehension, as Ford does, flies directly in the face of Whitehead’s discussion in Process and Reality, where he explicitly associates internal relations with extension.13 “The ‘extensive’ scheme is nothing else than the generic morphology of the internal relations which bind the actual occasions into a nexus, and which bind the prehensions of any one actual occasion into a unity, coordinately divisible.” Whitehead immediately goes on to observe the internally related nature of, “the mutual implication of extensive whole and extensive part. If you abolish the whole, you abolish its parts; and if you abolish any part, then that whole is abolished”14 This is a refinement of, rather than a breach with, the discussions that had come before. As one can see in chapter VII of Science and the Modern World, Whitehead continued to endorse the philosophy of nature that is found in the triptych, including the central and essential role of extension in the processes of nature. While there is a great deal more that can be said on this topic, we hope the above is sufficient to motivate us to return to page 283 of Process and Reality and keep reading, because our story does not end there.15





How Is a Computer Scientist Like a Radical Empiricist?


It is difficult to understand how exactly the “skip to page 337” readers of Process and Reality hope to deal with Whitehead’s theory of perception—that level of generality where causal efficacy becomes presentational immediacy, or, in a sense, time becomes space. Surely no one is prepared to argue that that theory of perception is a disposable part of Whitehead’s metaphysical program, or that the structure of presentational immediacy is in any way an otiose appendix to the theory of perception. Yet presentational immediacy scarcely ever appears in Process and Realty, except in more or less direct conjunction with extensive relatedness, not only in Part IV itself but throughout the entire book. In Part IV, presentational immediacy is discussed directly in connection with both strain loci and measurement. It is worth repeating the point for emphasis: how is one supposed to look upon Part IV as a mere adjunct or a tangential addendum when one of the two fundamental characteristics of perception relies entirely upon the nature of extensive relatedness even to be possible, let alone actual?

One “moderate” version of the “skip to page 337” approach to Process and Reality might be this. These interpreters might say: “Granted that extensive relatedness is a vital aspect of Whitehead’s theory of perception, even perhaps his entire metaphysics, still the technical development of Part IV does not really advance the primary argument of that book, and can be effectively addressed by persons with more narrowly focused technical interests.” We are not aware of anyone who has stated the above argument. The avoidance of such technical details has consequences both inside and beyond the Whitehead community. For one thing, it remained for Robert Palter to notice that there was a formal inconsistency in Whitehead’s development of extensive connectedness in Part IV.16 However, Palter himself did nothing about this issue, and it was not until the early 1980’s and a pair of articles by Bowman Clarke that a formally consistent set of axioms was developed, which completed that part of Whitehead’s project.17 Clarke published these two articles in the Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic. This is significant, because computer scientists do not, as a rule, browse the pages of Process Studies. And it is to computer scientists that we must now turn.

One notable group of computer scientists is working on the formal and practical characteristics of the artificial intelligence of visual processing. A less technical phrase for that would be “the folks trying to teach robots to see.” It is a widely acknowledged fact in this sub-discipline that Alfred North Whitehead’s work on extension is foundational for their enterprise.18 Our experience has been that Whitehead scholars are simply astounded to learn of this fact. Yet we should have expected and even predicted such a connection. After all, Whitehead was digging into the fundamental structures of perception as these connect directly to nature and natural philosophy. Meanwhile, the only way a computer scientist will ever teach a robot genuinely to see is by becoming a radical empiricist about visual and spatial relationships.

We will return to this last claim. First, we want to cover some of the recent history of post-Whiteheadian theories of spatial relations, because these are topics of independent philosophical interest. We will not be engaging directly in any formal analysis here; rather, we will content ourselves with briefly placing some of these formal aspects of Whitehead’s thought into context and attempting to situate them in the general universe of contemporary thought on the topics of logic and spatial reasoning. Much of this discussion will hearken back to chapter three. But recall that while that chapter was examining the logic in metaphysics, we are ultimately looking at the metaphysics in logic.19 The change in perspective is important, and we will say more about how such changes function in both logic and metaphysics in the final section of this chapter.

Anecdotes are not the strongest form of argument, but one is appropriate here. It will place our topic in a more intelligible narrative frame, while at the same time emphasizing the nature of discovery rendered more accidental and almost miraculous because of the extent of the aforementioned neglect.

In the summer of 2003, one of us (Herstein) was still a graduate student. Being bored, unemployed and penurious, Herstein was naturally shifting around for ways to spend money he did not have. He discovered what was—for him—the perfect opportunity: the 2003 meeting at Indiana University of the North American Summer School in Language Logic and Information. Herstein registered for this conference, drove up on the appointed days, and joyously filled his time there with numerous things logical.

One of the sessions was a special focus group on computers and spatial reasoning. Because spatial reasoning was a topic of interest to Herstein from his work in Whitehead’s theory of extension, he attended. One can appreciate his astonishment when not one but two leading researchers in the field got up and independently acknowledged that the originating work in their discipline was Part IV of Process and Reality. Herstein made a special effort to catch up with both presenters afterwards in order to get references and further information, all with an eye toward tracking down this development of Whitehead’s thought in greater detail. Along the way, Herstein had a particularly amusing conversation with Ian Pratt-Hartmann:20 “I understand all that stuff about extension,” he told Herstein, speaking of Process and Reality, “but what is the rest of that book about?”

In any event, here is some of the front-and back-story on Whitehead’s theory of extension:

The theory of extension that appears in Part IV of PR is a type of “mereotopology”; which is to say that it is a mereological theory of part and whole coupled with a topological (and therefore, non-metrical) theory of neighborhood and connection. The significance of Whitehead’s shift from the pure mereology of the triptych to the mereotopology of Part IV is substantial (we will have more to say on that in the final section of this chapter). Whitehead’s presentation in Process and Reality was largely informal and he never noticed that there was the previously mentioned inconsistency in his basic axioms. Again as noted, it was only with the pair of articles by Bowman Clarke that these inconsistencies were resolved in a formally acceptable manner that retained the philosophical intentions of Whitehead’s theory.

Clarke’s formalization had the disadvantage of being presented in second-order logic, but because these articles were published in a respectable venue, they succeeded in bringing Whitehead’s system of extensive connectedness to the attention of researchers in computer science. People such as Ian Pratt-Hartmann and David Randell reformulated the system into a first-order theory, which could then be employed in computer and robotic systems. It is also worth mentioning that Whitehead’s mature theory of extension includes a non-metrical theory of convexity—his theory of flat-loci—that has yet to receive adequate attention from either a philosophical or a mathematical perspective.

The earlier theory of extension found in the triptych is a purely mereological system. Alfred Tarski, partly inspired by Whitehead’s discussion in The Concept of Nature, wrote his famous paper “Foundations of the Geometry of Solids,”21 which brought mereological concepts back to the forefront of work in formal logic. It is perhaps not an accident that Tarski was also responsible for reviving interest in algebraic logic, which (as we have seen in chapter 3) is intimately connected to broadly spatial forms of reasoning. Ultimately, Whitehead abandoned the strictly mereological approach after a series of articles in the Journal of Philosophy by Theodore de Laguna which pointed out a logically more parsimonious method of achieving Whitehead’s intended results.22

But the story neither begins nor ends with the triptych. As already noted, Whitehead was exploring the idea of extensive relations embedded in an algebraic logic more than thirty years earlier, the ultimate result of which was his universal algebra. At the time Whitehead was doing this work—indeed, from before he’d first begun his University studies at Cambridge—philosophical arguments were raging as to the nature and reality of such mathematical entities as the infinitesimal point and, later, given the work of Georg Cantor, the nature and reality of the “element” of a set. Many of these discussions explicitly hearkened back to Aristotle’s notion of the “undivided divisible,” and appealed to nascent mereological concepts as an alternative to set theory.23

Formal developments were slow in coming; still, Whitehead’s theory in the triptych was not the first to appear. That honor goes to Lesniewski, who published his work in 1916. But since that publication was in Polish, it exercised no influence on the English-speaking world for many years.24 However, Lesniewski’s motivations in developing his mereology were not that different from Whitehead’s in the development of the theory of extension: Lesniewski was an empiricist. He was an “old/new fashioned” empiricist, very much of the positivist stripe that was becoming so popular in the 1920’s, which is perhaps a contributing reason for his lack of lasting philosophical influence. Still, he was powerfully motivated by a deep-rooted suspicion of set theory and its foundational pretensions. So while Whitehead was largely indifferent to the foundational enterprise in mathematics (once the Principia was published, he never troubled himself with any of the philosophical motivations that drove Russell), both Whitehead and Lesniewski were concerned with the empirical content of the ideas they espoused.

Whitehead, on the other hand, was a radical empiricist. We are beginning to see avenues of change with regard to Whitehead’s contemporary significance, emerging in the multi-dimensional and multi-modal disciplines of computer science. And as noted above, this recent influence should not come as a surprise. Computer scientists working in the field of robotic vision (whether at a theoretical or an applied level) are obliged to deal with the world as it is genuinely delivered to experience. Geometries of infinitesimal points and breadthless lines are the abstracted arcana of mathematical inquiry, not the presentations of experience. Complexly involved extensa are the genuine and atomic—that is to say, irreducible—constituents of our presentationally immediate encounters with spatialized reality.

Indeed, any functional system with finite visual resolution—such as a computer or a human being—attempting to engage or assemble a cognitively meaningful picture of the world, while employing limited processing capacities, is not only logically and mathematically, but metaphysically required to do so in a manner that takes extension, mereological relations, and elementary topology as its primitive elements. Finite eyes and finite minds do not encounter infinitesimal points or the geometries built from them. The reason a computer scientist is like a radical empiricist is because she is dealing with a world of spatial relations composed of atomically real, projectively related extensa—which is to say, the mathematical structures around which Whitehead built the first forty years of his professional life. We, as Whitehead scholars, need to relearn this lesson that Whitehead never forgot.

One final point to note here: we referred to the “projectively related extensa” that are the cognitively meaningful spatial relations that present themselves to experience and are open to analysis by a radical empiricist. We wish to re-emphasize the projective aspect of that observation. Such relational structures as are formally represented in projective geometry are precisely the sorts of structures that any radical empiricist would—or at least ought to—recognize as being immediately present in the field of experience.

And we have the testimony of a particularly fine set of radical empiricists in our possession to justify this claim. Those include the artistic geniuses of the Renaissance. It is useful to recall that projective geometry did not originate in the dingy studies of mathematical researchers. Rather, it emerged as a concrete development of the well-lit studios of those painters and artisans of the post-medieval world who were struggling to render upon canvas the basic spatial relationships of ordinary perception. These relationships were not the products of abstracting intelligences unanchored to the radically real world of empirical fact; they were the direct presentations of experience itself. This is to say, the very relational matter that any good radical empiricist would find within the elementary structures of experience includes those complexly and projectively related extensa of our spatial experience. These are the self-same mathematical fundaments of Whitehead’s thought that have been ignored in the philosophical literature.

Perhaps we might fault Whitehead for not emphasizing this aspect of spatial relatedness more than he did. However, as we have noted, Whitehead was not one for repeating himself. To include the relevant sections from his Universal Algebra and Axioms of Projective Geometry would have easily added another hundred pages to Process and Reality without ever once saying anything that he hadn’t already said.





The Metaphysics in Logic


In chapter 3, we speculated about some potential lines of research leading from Whitehead’s theory of extension into other areas of inquiry. A few reminders of and additions to those speculations will be useful here. We begin with a quote, this time from a decidedly non-Whiteheadian source:

The eyes of the scientist are directed upon those phenomena which are accessible to observation, upon their apperception and conceptual formulation. In the attempt to achieve a conceptual formulation of the confusingly immense body of observational data, the scientist makes use of a whole arsenal of concepts which he imbibed practically with his mother’s milk; and seldom if ever is he aware of the eternally problematic character of his concepts.25



These words are not those of Thomas Kuhn as he was manning the barricades of a revolution in the philosophy of science. Rather, they were written by Albert Einstein in 1953, even as Einstein himself continued his lifelong habit of blissfully disregarding the implications of these sage observations in his own work. And while Einstein’s comments are certainly ironic, there is no irony per se in what Einstein says; he was himself largely unaware of the eternally problematic character of the concepts with which he laid the foundations of contemporary physical cosmology. Science, insofar as it hopes to be scientific, must deal with the deliverances of experience as these are genuinely delivered. In addition to the critiques regarding the issues of the orthodox Einsteinian formulations of the nature of space and measurement, we will have more to say about some of the consequences which accrue when scientists leap beyond this responsibility into a realm of ill- or uninformed metaphysical speculation (in chapter 10).

The fact that such poorly conducted metaphysical speculation should be running riot in physics is a bit ironic. Meanwhile, so abstract a discipline as formal computer science has trumped even our best philosophical intentions, and arrived at a radically empirical formulation of space and cognition ahead of almost everyone, other than Whitehead himself. It is past due that we in the philosophical community catch up with our more mathematical cousins. Because it is not enough that we explain to “them” what “the rest of that book is about”; we need to need to come to a rigorously formulated answer to that question ourselves. For we, as philosophers, are no less habitually blinded by the concepts that we have imbibed with our “mother’s milk,” which we may all happily understand as a metaphor for our too readily accepted forms and frames of interpretation.

We have previously touched upon the interesting connections between algebraic logic and spatial reasoning, as a “bridge” between logic and metaphysics. We mentioned that Paul Halmos, in his classic on the subject, observes that with regard to algebraic logic, “the most useful approach to that theory is not to ask ‘What is a proof?’ or ‘How does one prove something?’ but to ask about the structure of the set of provable propositions.”26 We have seen how Whitehead says that “Geometry, in the widest sense in which it is used by modern mathematicians, is a department of what in a certain sense may be called the general science of classification,” where “classification” means such structural relations as order, betweenness, connection, containment, and so forth.27 We brought up fruitful connections among intuitionistic logic, topology, and structures known as “Heyting algebras.” Category theory—which has been significantly cited by Leo Corry as the key element to the very notion of algebraic structure—arose from a consideration of relations in topological and projective spaces.28 The spatial concept of “topos” was held up as a significant alternative to the traditional approach to the foundations of mathematics.29

Good theories fructify in unexpected ways. We have already mentioned John von Neumann and his “continuous” projective geometry, with no “points” whatsoever. “Points” for Von Neumann were treated as limiting abstractions, while the primary structures that one works with in continuous geometry were extensive sub-spaces. The formal analogies here between Von Neumann’s system and Whitehead’s mereological/mereotopological theory of extension are more than a little striking. Thus, for example, the computer scientist Giangiacomo Gerla has observed the familial relation between Whitehead’s and Von Neumann’s point-free approaches to geometry.30

Another example worthy of mention is modal logic. This is particularly appropriate here rather than in chapter 3 because modal logics are so much more intrinsically metaphysical in nature. While modal operators are popularly treated as dealing with possibility and necessity within the philosophical literature, computer scientists are more inclined to treat them as “essentially a simple way of accessing the information contained in relational structures.”31 This connects with spatial reasoning on several levels. In the first place, the basic modal operators of C. I. Lewis’s S4 are readily interpreted as topological closure operators—which is to say, as distinctively spatial functions. Furthermore, the “frames”—as in “Kripke frames”—which provide the relational connections of relative possibility, are themselves “essentially a set-theoretic representation of Boolean algebras with operators,” again a distinctively spatial structure.32

An especially interesting—and unexplored—connection with these modal ideas is Whitehead’s theory of measurement. Measurement is a central concern of Whitehead’s natural philosophy, and receives an entire chapter in Part IV of Process and Reality. The discussion in that chapter of strain-loci and projective relations is a considerable refinement of that which appears in chapter 3 of Principle of Relativity. Nevertheless, it is a refinement only, as is made clear by his citation of the earlier book, where he advises his audience to read the entire volume.33

For simplicity of comparison, then, we would draw the reader’s attention back to chapter 3 of The Principle of Relativity, where Whitehead discusses the concept of equality.34 Whitehead makes the case that there is no such thing as equality simpliciter; rather one always and only has equality with respect to some contextualizing characteristic. Whitehead represents this as “A = B → γ”, where “γ” is the determining common character that makes the comparison of “A” and “B” possible. In other words, this relevance function “γ” is a modal operator, with some pretty striking formal similarities to the structural relations of a Kripke frame. Stated in another form, “A = B” means that “A” is commensurably possible with respect to “B” within the frame “γ.” The notion of this commensurable possibility is expanded in Process and Reality with the subdivision of the frame into strain-loci, which establish the physical anchor for the measurement, and presentational immediacy which provides the mathematical-relational content. The presence of these spatialized, modal concepts is unsurprising, since clearly the possibility of measurement must be implicated in the fact of measurement. This idea is yet another at the heart of Whitehead’s theory of space and measurement, and it provides yet another example of what we have been calling “the metaphysics in logic.”

One cautionary note here: the philosophical significance of extensive relatedness must not be buried under the guise of merely “formal” developments. Gerla himself commented that, “surely there are philosophical motivations on the basis of Whitehead’s passage from the inclusion-based approach proposed in the books PNK and CN to the connection-based approach proposed in PR.”35 While Gerla demurs comment on those philosophicalreasons, he goes on to point out the significant mathematical reasons for making just that change (from inclusion to connection, or straight mereology to mereotopology). Among the issues that Gerla especially attends to is the relative ease with which a mathematical point can be defined, a factor which Whitehead himself specifically highlighted.36 But as Gerla observes, it would be a mistake to think that the formal advantages exhaust the reasoning behind the change.

We can find a hint of this reasoning in the computer scientists themselves. We have mentioned Tarski’s development based on pure mereology. Yet, despite the fact that Tarski is such a significant luminary in the literature of logic, his approach was not the one chosen by people like Pratt-Hartmann and Randell to build their AI visual systems. Instead it was the approach of a relatively obscure (from the point of view of formal logic) process theologian (i.e., Clarke) who formalized Whitehead’s mereotopology. This is only an outline of the steps that led from Part IV of Process and Reality to their modern applications in computer science, but it should suffice for our purposes.

More needs to be said regarding formal topics. Even when one mathematical system is formally identical to another, the two need not be the same heuristically. The principles that guide inquiry—and we should just call these metaphysical principles—do not always lead in the same directions, even on a formal level. An example here is the difference between Gentzen-forms of sequent calculi and Hilbert-style axiomatic systems. “In a Hilbert-style system, formulas rather than sequents are derived, starting with instances of axioms and using in the propositional case only the one rule of inference, modus ponens.” However, “These [Hilbert] systems are next to impossible to use for the actual derivation of formulas because of the difficulty of locating the substitution instances.” This difficulty comes despite the fact that the completeness and consistency of both types of system guarantees that they can prove exactly the same set of formulae. Moreover, “There seems to be very little relation between the simplicity of the conclusion and the complexity of its derivation.”37 As a result, automated proof systems used in computer science invariably light upon techniques derived from the work of Gentzen, even as mathematics departments continue to teach the formally “equivalent” Hilbert-style of logic.

Philosophically there are other reasons for turning away from Hilbert axiomatics. As Jaakko Hintikka has observed, if formal logic is to have any genuine interest (beyond what Whitehead might characterize as a merely recondite exercise) then it needs actively to inform the real process of inquiry. Just as Gentzen style tools provide a computationally effective means for deriving proofs (when such proofs are derivable), these Gentzen techniques also structure the deductive organization of inquiry in a more natural way. Hintikka further observes that the so-called “cut” rule, while formally eliminable, is so heuristically illuminating that as a technique for informing and structuring inquiry, Gentzen logics are superior tools when that rule is included.38

These examples bear directly on Whitehead’s mature theory of extension and his methodological approach. Whitehead’s theory was not an accident in either form or intent. Thus, methodologically, Whitehead frequently emphasized heuristic and pedagogical clarity (in his selection of axioms) over mathematical parsimony. We see this in works as diverse as his little Axioms of geometry tracts from 1906–1907, to his final development of extensive connection in Part IV of Process and Reality. We see this also in his choice of categoreal principles, selected for their comprehensive strengths and mutual coherences rather than their formal minimalism. This, indeed, is the method of the quantum of explanation, both for Whitehead and for inquiry in general. This is why the theory of extensive connection, built to encompass presentational immediacy and the nature of nature, seamlessly integrates with computer science and robotics. The metaphysical principles illuminated in the very heart of logic itself express the quantum in its purest form.





Conclusion


The above examples of formal and scientific developments all bear strikingly interesting connections with Whitehead’s theory of extension and spatial relations. But this latter is a product of Whitehead’s commitment to a radical empirical interpretation of experience. The formal structures of the above are representative developments of the “direct deposit” of relational characteristics that truly radical empiricists will find in experience, should they be meticulous enough to analyze such deposits with care and with an eye for mathematical detail.

As for Whitehead’s theory of extension, we note these following senses in which that theory is patently irreducible:

The theory is clearly not eliminable from the greater corpus of Whitehead’s work as somehow a purely secondary and ultimately uninteresting development of merely formal details devoid of philosophical import.

Extensa are atomic not because they are very small but because they are themselves irreducible wholes. In other words, they are not composed of atoms; they are “ατομώσ” or “uncut.”

The theory of extension is irreducible because it provides if not the, then certainly a fundamental theory of basic spatial experience.

The theory of extension is irreducible because it stands at a foundational nexus of an astounding array of seemingly disparate scientific disciplines that are currently dogged by a lack of thorough-going philosophical interpretation.



We submit that on account of the above and more, we in the interpretive community have not been doing Whitehead’s work sufficient service. Following the taxonomy of the Function of Reason, while we have done well, we need to do better. We need to give the theory of extension its due.
