6  The Principle of Relativity


The misconception which has haunted philosophic literature throughout the centuries is the notion of ‘independent existence’. There is no such mode of existence; every entity is only to be understood in terms of the way in which it is interwoven with the rest of the Universe.

—Whitehead, Essays in Science and Philosophy (64)





Introduction


We now turn our attention to Whitehead’s arguments regarding “relativity.” This examination will serve several purposes. On the one hand, it will allow us to distinguish between Whitehead’s metaphysical sense of the term, as opposed to the almost exclusively physical meaning that is now associated with it. On the other hand, it will also serve to commence another aspect of our critical enterprise by examining some of the deeply problematic issues that have come to be entrenched at the heart of contemporary physics. Our primary focus will be on the standard model of gravitational cosmology,1 the core principles of which stem from Einstein’s general theory of relativity. The problems with general relativity we will highlight here serve to draw attention to the difference between Whitehead’s approach to nature and science, and what we are calling “model-centrism.”

By the term “model-centrism,” we mean something similar to the critique of the language of “models” for the sake of “explanation” in science. Old-style scientific realists who were persuaded by Einstein’s decision to claim that his theory of General Relativity was not a model of the world, but the way the world is, used such language (e.g., such as Hans Reichenbach, Grover Maxwell),2 This is misplaced concreteness at its worst.

But what is a good model? For us, following Paul Ricouer, a “model” is a heuristic fiction which may grow from a root metaphor, be brought to bear by imaginative work on an experience of a discursive world, as a symbol, having both semantic and non-semantic aspects, and being then brought back to the world as a model. Ricouer says, “Thanks to this detour through the heuristic fiction, we perceive new connections among things.”3 Ricouer may use the term “perception” as Whitehead does. Ricouer’s method is a version of coordinate and genetic analysis, undertaken as a new approach to explanation. This is in keeping with Whitehead’s use of models and language. We also see the problem of reference, when employing models in science (and philosophical cosmology), as implying that “the suspension of referential function of the first degree affects ordinary language to the benefit of a second degree of reference, which is attached precisely to the fictive dimension revealed by the theory of models. In the same way that the literal sense [in Ricouer’s technical usage] has to be left behind so that the metaphorical sense [also in technical usage] can emerge, so the literal sense must collapse so that the heuristic fiction can work its redescription.”4 With Ricouer we affirm that metaphors, when they ground models, add something new to our knowledge. The “as if” of scientific explanation, understood as “discourse,” does not undermine realism, it avoids model-centrism—the mistaking of the model for the thing it models. But models are indispensable to scientific knowledge. This account includes the role imagination plays in forming those models.

It is important to realize that the support for general relativity is far weaker than one might suppose from reading the popular or scientific literature. There is no real experimental evidence for general relativity, and the observational evidence is severely undermined by the large number of untested (or even untestable) assumptions applied in interpreting those observations.5 There is a significant amount of contemporary scientific work—beyond Whitehead’s 1922 developments—challenging general relativity and the framework it imposes when interpreting that observational data.6 Our approach in criticizing general relativity will be fairly intuitive; a more detailed and technical discussion may be found elsewhere.7 It is sufficient to understand a little of what motivated Whitehead in building his theory of nature, so that we can then see how that concept integrates with his larger project.

So, having focused in the last three chapters on generically logical issues, we turn now to consider the metaphysical principle of relativity. On the one hand, shifting our attention to this principle will deepen our appreciation for Whitehead’s use of the term “atomic” in the sense of “uncut.” Whitehead’s use of the term “relativity” is also “old school”; it is not based upon the Einsteinian sense of the term that has emerged from physical science. This physicalist usage is radically limited in comparison to what Whitehead means by it. For Whitehead, “relativity” has to do with the densely relational character of all that is real. On the other hand, the narrowly Einsteinian sense also has its place here; together with the role of extensive connectedness in presentational immediacy, “relativity,” in the Whiteheadian sense, is an essential link connecting Whitehead’s metaphysics with his natural philosophy.

On the side of nature, Einstein created an insurmountable problem for physical cosmology by building his theory of space and gravity upon an irreducibly relational basis, yet all the while taking for granted a non-relational epistemological and metaphysical framework for interpreting that theory. This approach has had the disastrous effect of institutionalizing a fundamental incoherence in the theory of measurement at the very heart of the standard model of gravitational cosmology. The “heart” of that standard model is, of course, Einstein’s general theory of relativity, “GR.” We will begin with the exemplification of the principle and then turn to the principle exemplified.8





The Logical Problem with Cosmological Measurements


There is a fundamental problem at the heart of general relativity that relates to the very possibility of generating meaningful cosmological measurements; measurements that are fully interpretable, empirically adequate, and logically coherent within the framework of general relativity and its presupposed philosophy of nature. The above claim does not relate (directly, at least) to the empirical results that are obtained when numerical calculations based upon GR are compared with various observations. Rather, our claim here relates to the underlying logical basis by which it is assumed that those numerical calculations and refined observations are, and can be, meaningfully interpreted—interpreted in a way that is scientifically valid. The critical aspects of this argument were developed by Whitehead in his triptych on natural philosophy between 1919 and 1922. Our interest here is not exegetical. It is with the logical problem of measurement persisting to this day in contemporary physical cosmology, and the implications of which reach further than that specific discipline.

This “measurement problem of cosmology” is easy enough to state and understand, and is directly related to what has commonly been presented as one of the principal strengths of GR. This, ironically, is part of our difficulty today: The “measurement problem of cosmology” is so straight-forwardly described and so effortless to understand, that we are inclined to conclude that it must be mistaken. General relativity is far too “successful”—or so we have been assured—for any such difficulty to be real. But these are our assumptions. (We remind readers of the Einstein quote about “mother’s milk” from the previous chapter.) We must set aside our certainties if we are genuinely to examine what we really know.

Throughout this book we have been using the term “logical” in the broader and more traditional sense one finds in such thinkers as Aristotle, Dewey, and Hintikka, as the general theory of inquiry and not merely as a formal subdivision of mathematics. So in characterizing this problem as a “logical” one, we do not mean to suggest that there is a flaw in the formal, mathematical reasoning involved. The logical issues here are erotetic ones about the kinds of questions we ask, and the presuppositions we make about what qualifies as an answer. These erotetic/inquiriential issues raised by the measurement problem of cosmology go far beyond any specific facts about physics per se, and raise questions about the kinds of things that must be presupposed by any form of measurement-based inquiry. We will find that a substantive degree of uniformity of subject matter must be presupposed throughout the inquiry itself by any act of measurement, in order for said inquiry to terminate in meaningful operations and logically valid conclusions. This uniformity has a very well developed formal/mathematical structure. We will have more to say on that later.

With regard to GR, there are a few salient facts we should review. GR is a genuinely relational theory of space—it holds that space is not an independent “thing-in-itself,” but rather a relational structure that is an emergent property of such realities as bear spatial relations to one another. This is not a new idea, even in physical science: Newton’s proxies argued this matter with Leibniz in the early eighteenth century. However, as far as physical science was concerned, Newton “won” that argument for 200 years until Einstein and GR came along. Where GR is unique is in the degree of dependency of space upon other realities (we are making an effort to avoid using such loaded words as “things” or “objects”) that the innermost characteristics of space are as contingent as the most arbitrary non-spatial entities, such as might relate themselves spatially. There is nothing necessary in this contingency—space can be relational and yet still uniformly spatial in all of its relations, without ever being independent of the relational totality from which it might properly be said to emerge.

General relativity denies not only the independence but the uniformity of space as well. Indeed, GR collapses space and physical properties (mainly in the form of gravity) into a single structure. This structure is the “metric tensor” of GR, usually represented as “gμν,” where Greek subscripts are indices along which the character “g” is “summed up” into a single physical quality. But this physical quality varies from one “point” of space to another, because the physical factors that operate on any given “point” of space will differ—at least slightly—from those operating at other “points.” What makes them all “points” is no easy question. On account of this “mono-metric” structure of Einstein’s metric tensor, where both physical and geometrical characters are bound into a single feature, there can be no genuine uniformity of space. Space itself, on this flawed account, is totally dependent upon the physical—and hopelessly contingent and various—factors that impinge upon space at different locations, which in turn lend every local “gμν” exactly the characters it possesses. These characters will include the basic geometrical shape of space at each and every individual “point” of space.

To see how this contingency of geometrical structure undermines the logic of measurement, let us step back from the details of GR and ask “What kinds of logical relations are presupposed by spatial measurements in general?” Any measurement, whether it is quantitative or of a merely qualitative character (e.g., an ordinal comparison of more or less) requires the comparison of like to like. Thus, for spatial measurement, the comparison of one spatial segment to another is an essential aspect of this kind of measuring operation. In other words, some established spatial segment must be held up as the “standard unit” to which others will be compared. Whether this standard unit is taken to be universal for all such comparisons, or specific to some single act of comparison, it must nevertheless be functionally uniform throughout the act of measurement. In other words, the standard unit of measurement must “mean the same thing” throughout the act of measurement. Moreover, this standard must ultimately be manifested in the form of an extended physical object, such as a yardstick, so as fully to ground the spatial standard of measurement upon that of a rigid physical one. It is this physical standard unit that establishes the baseline of spatial extension that is the necessary basis in any spatial measurement. This standard unit is the possibility of “conjugacy,” of a meaningful act of comparison, within the logic of measurement. But as vital as this physical standard unit is, by itself it is not enough.

It is also a logical requirement of measurement that it be possible to bring the likeness of the standard into comparison with that which is to be measured. There may be no practical way of achieving this direct comparison. But we must be able—in some indirect manner or another—to bring our “yardstick” up to that which we intend to measure. If our unit of measure is locked in a vault in the National Institute of Standards in Washington, DC, while the bit of extended space we need to measure is in the form of a 2×4 piece of wood in a lumber yard in Los Angeles, then either we must directly carry that standard unit from the one location to the other to make our measurements, or we must have a more readily transported surrogate we can use for the job. For the purposes of measuring yards of wood on this planet, such surrogates are readily found in the forms of the vast array of acceptable measuring devices permitting us to project our standard unit to our points of interest. This is the second, absolutely essential, relational factor in the logic of measurement. While we must have a standard unit of spatial comparison for conjugacy, we must also have standard(s) of spatial projection such as will allow that unit of comparison to be uniformly brought into comparison with—i.e., meaningfully projected onto—those things we mean to measure. The conjugate relation must be formally possible.

It is this second step which GR denies us. The requirement of uniform geometrical relations that make such projectively conjugate comparisons possible are rendered dubious if not impossible by the fundamental assumptions of GR. These assumptions include the idea that the necessary and uniform relations of geometry are collapsed into the contingent and heterogeneous physical relations of matter, energy, and gravity. Thus, the very geometry of space is dependent upon the varying physical effects of matter and energy at each “point” of space. Einstein’s move of collapsing the formal and logical structures of geometry into the contingent and variable relations of physical interactions, has long been viewed by physicists as one of Einstein’s most brilliant postulates. Einstein himself viewed this conceptual collapse as an act of essential insight, and looked with disdain upon such alternatives as that formulated by Nathan Rosen. By eliminating the distinction between geometry as a purely mathematical discipline and physical space (as it is studied in empirical cosmology), Einstein also compromised the relational structures that make a coherent theory of measurement possible.

The question now arises: how are we to bring into comparison our chosen standards of measurement and the objective spatial extensions that are to be measured? We have no a priori basis for making a comparison of a unit of measurement to a structure that is to be measured. This is because in GR, the geometrical structures of physical reality are dependent upon the contingent distributions of matter and energy throughout the universe. We do not know in advance what the geometrical characteristics of any piece of space happen to be, so we have no direct or indirect way of applying our units of measurement either to that stretch of space, or to any object where our measurements would essentially pass through that mentioned stretch. In the absence of a uniform system of geometrical relations, we cannot know in advance how that stretch of space—with its geometry contingently modified by the influences of matter and energy upon it—will in turn affect our attempts at measurement that are being projected upon or through it.

If we had direct access to every relevant point of physical space affecting the stretch in question, we could determine by those direct means the projective relations that would connect, in logical terms, that spatial region with our standards of measurement. We do not have such direct access. We have only barely transited beyond the reaches of our own solar system with a few primitive probes. Our only access to distant space is by purely formal and “a priori” processes of projecting our standards of measurement. Yet, by identifying the contingent factors of physical (notably, gravitational) nature with the geometrical relations of space, Einstein eliminated the uniform and logically necessary relations that would make it possible to thus project our standards.

Once again, according to Einstein the very geometry of space is contingent and variable, its nature at any given point being dependent upon the varying influences of matter and energy throughout the universe upon that point. And here we have the crux of the measurement problem of cosmology. If the structure of space is a contingent aspect of physical influences, then we must first know the nature and distribution of those physical factors before we can know the geometry of any spatial region. But in order to know this distribution of physical factors, we must be able to make accurate and reliable spatial measurements properly to place and relate those contingent, physical influences upon any given point of space. But in order to make accurate and reliable spatial measurements, we must have a robust understanding of the geometry of the spaces in and through which we are measuring. Only with this latter can we understand the effects on our standard unit of measurement of the non-uniform and contingent projective relations of those spaces, and thereby establish a logically meaningful system of conjugacy with the things to be measured. Yet such a robust understanding of the geometry of space is precisely what we do not have, and cannot establish, for it is exactly what GR refuses to grant us. We must know the complete distribution of matter and energy in the universe prior to knowing its geometry. But we must have a comprehensive grasp of this geometry in order to discover this distribution. As Whitehead pointed out, with GR as our theory of space and gravity, we are saddled with a situation where we must first know everything before we can know anything.

The very simplicity of the problem can disguise its profound nature. So permit us to restate the situation from a slightly different angle. When we carry our tape measure from our house to the lumber yard, we are confident that the tape measure continues to mean the same thing at the lumber yard that it meant at the house. Measuring out x-number of square feet of plywood, for instance, possesses all of the necessary functional characteristics at the store that we used at home when we first determined how much wood was required for our project. How is it possible that the tape measure should achieve such a continuity of meaning from the one locale to the other? Well, the tape measure is itself an extended segment of space, and when we carry it from one place to another so as to exploit its characteristics as a measuring instrument, we are asserting that the space itself—at the two locales and as represented in the tape measure—is appropriately comparable. We are asserting that there is a functional uniformity of projective relations that permits a workable conjugacy to occur.

Even if the respective spaces changed in some manner, this alteration would still not be excessively problematic, provided we could actually go to all the relevant points of space and directly determine what our tape measure means at each of these new locales.9 This direct determination would enable us to continue to use our measuring tape, because the rules of its application would nevertheless be knowable, although somewhat more complex, than if the spaces were all uniformly of a kind. But on cosmological scales, even on scales only slightly beyond the boundary of our own solar system, we simply do not have this direct determination option. We cannot directly test such spaces to see what the projective relations are; projective relations that general relativity tells us are no longer uniformly knowable from Earth. We must come up with some reason to believe that our Earth-based measurements can be legitimately projected to these distant spaces in order to have even the hope of a meaningful cosmology. But if the very geometry of space is something we cannot know until after we can confidently engage in measurement, then cosmology as a science teeters on the brink of nonsense. For while we must first measure before we can know, GR requires that we know before we can measure.10

This is our philosophical quandary. GR saddles physics with a general theory of space that renders the possibility of measurement questionable, because the essential requirements for the possibility of spatial measurement are explicitly denied. And yet, GR appears to be successfully employed in formulating and evaluating cosmological measurements all the time.11Indeed, general relativity and quantum mechanics are often held up as the premier examples of the most successful physical theories ever conceived. How are we to reconcile such practical successes with the supposed philosophical issues raised above?

The question almost undoes itself in the asking, for it is a well-known fact that these two theories are mathematically irreconcilable. But it is not just at the small scales of micro-physics that GR runs into problems. At the very large scales of physical cosmology, GR has also proven to be inadequate. In an effort to account for observed phenomena—phenomena of which physicists assume they have meaningful measurements—it has been necessary to reintroduce the idea of the “cosmological constant,” as well as to invent such extravagant new ideas as “dark matter” and “dark energy” in an attempt to account for the evident behavior of the cosmos.

Even at the most mundane levels, GR is problematic. For example, the mathematical theory of general relativity is thoroughly non-linear. This means that GR as it stands is almost useless when it comes to producing numbers which can be compared with actual measurements. Rather, relevant sections of GR must first be approximated with a linear theory, and then this linear approximation is used to calculate theoretical values. Furthermore, this failure of linearity within GR is a significant contributing factor to the irreconcilability of GR with quantum mechanics. This latter theory is linear in important aspects, and as such defies any direct resolution with a macro-physical theory that lacks such linearity. Once again, let us emphasize that there is nothing controversial in the immediately preceding statements regarding general relativity.12





The Logical Problem with Model-driven Cosmology


General relativity offers a conceptual framework for scientific cosmology. However, this framework is shot through with multiple, fundamental logical difficulties. If an alternative framework were to be proposed that avoided and/or minimized some of those difficulties, then surely that framework would merit consideration. And such frameworks are in hand. They include Whitehead’s theory of relativity, first proposed in detail in 1922. But while Whitehead proposed his own applied, scientific theory, of greater significance is that he described an entire family of alternative theories. It is this family of theories which is of interest to us. Let us note that one will search popular discussions of cosmology in vain for any mention of either the logical failures of GR or the well-established and scientifically viable alternatives that can readily be found in the scientific literature on the subject.

Now, Whitehead had no knowledge of the recent troubles with GR that were noted above; his sole reason for criticizing it was the measurement problem of cosmology. It was his observation that if we do not maintain the separation between geometry and physics, then we lose the logical basis of the rules for conjugacy and projection that make spatial measurement possible. Whitehead’s solution is reminiscent of the old joke:

Patient: “Doc! Doc! It hurts every time I do this!”

Doctor: “Well then, stop doing that!”

General relativity collapses geometry and physics together by enveloping both within a single metrical tensor. Whitehead’s argument was that we should stop doing that.

So instead of Einstein’s “mono-metrical” approach, as we have termed it, Whitehead proposed what has now come to be known as a “bimetric” solution. Instead of shoe-horning all of the metrical relations into a single tensor (the “gμν”), collapsing geometry and physics, Whitehead’s theory utilized two metrical tensors: His “J” tensor representing the contingent physical relations of gravity and other forces, and his “G” tensor or the necessary spatial relations of geometry.13 As Whitehead claimed, and Eddington demonstrated, Whitehead’s theory was equivalent to Einstein’s at the limit of special relativity.14 For almost fifty years after the publication of Whitehead’s theory, no one was able to propose an empirical test that could decide matters between Whitehead’s theory and Einstein’s general relativity. Clifford Will finally suggested an effect known as “earth tides,” which gave a hope of a measurable difference between the two theories.15 But Will’s proposal was predicated upon the dubious assumption that all the matter in the galaxy is concentrated at the center, while no account was made for the rest of the matter in the universe. Yet, despite these questionable simplifications, most physicists—or, at least, most physicists who are even aware of Whitehead’s theory—assumed that Will’s argument was conclusive. And this assumption came after several generations of physicists gave no attention of any sort to Whitehead’s theory, despite the fact that there were neither formal nor empirical reasons for its neglect.

All of this is largely moot. Even if Will’s purported ‘refutation’ could be modified so that it was genuinely valid, Whitehead’s own theory was never more than an example of an entire class of theories. There are now many other members of this class than just Whitehead’s, and many of these theories are known to be viable alternatives to GR. Each of these bimetric theories separates the geometrical relations from the contingent facts of physics, and thus they have the required level of uniformity available to them to permit of the projective relations needed for meaningful measurements.

It is a matter of no great philosophical relevance whether Whitehead’s specific scientific proposal still offers a viable alternative to GR. Whitehead himself never viewed this as anything more than an application of his general philosophical principles. What we have instead is much more interesting: a developed system of philosophical ideas that are well vindicated by an entire family of scientific exemplars that are known to be formally and empirically valid. Moreover, these alternative theories are also much more linear in their formulations. This means that testable predictions can be calculated directly from these theories, and that they are far more easily reconciled with quantum mechanics.16

The uniformity criterion that Whitehead argued for, and which can only be achieved by separating the necessary relations of geometry from the contingent ones of physics, lends itself to a precise formulation. Indeed, this uniformity means that the geometrical relations exhibit a high degree of symmetry, such that the formal spatial relations have what is known as “constant curvature.” Euclidean space is a paradigm example of a space with constant curvature—namely, zero curvature. But it is the constancy that is the essential structural feature of Whitehead’s uniformity criterion. Given such constancy, Whitehead is quite explicit that non-Euclidean geometries are fully capable of meeting the necessary level of uniformity to avoid the measurement problem.17 At the time that Whitehead was writing, the formal understanding of spaces of constant curvature was not yet fully developed. However, now, the relations between classes of symmetries and spaces of constant curvature—and hence, Whitehead’s uniformity criterion—are well known. The basis of this symmetry is to be found in the mathematical theory of groups.18

This complex relationship among uniformity criteria, group theory, acts of measurement, and space is an important discovery. As we saw above, the measurement problem is not quarantined within physical cosmology. Rather, Whitehead’s uniformity criterion is a generic requirement of any spatial measurement. While the kinds of relevant uniformities may vary in different situations, the need for stable relations of comparison and conjugacy between the things measured and the standard of units of measurement will always be present (see chapter 8). Even when the act of measurement is as simple as counting, the need for some uniformity is so manifest that we mark it by cautioning against comparing apples to oranges, even though apples and oranges have many common features. One might reasonably long for such common characters when bringing pulsars and background radiation under a common unit of measurement.

Formally, such uniformities will always be exemplified in those structures most appropriately modeled by the mathematical theory of groups. We thus find ourselves in possession of a fully developed, mathematically rigorous, universal logical requirement of all metrical inquiries. Group theoretical structures are astonishingly omnipresent. They are the beating heart of most, if not all, physical laws of nature, and are even of vital importance in understanding perceptual invariances.19 Just how far a study of the logical requirements of uniformity might take us is an open question. But it is one worthy of pursuit, because these self-same formal criteria of measurement are radically empirical facts of experience.

Einstein’s commitment to his “clever” idea (space and gravity are the same thing, as represented by the mono-metric structure of GR) came at the expense of both experience and logic. We again emphasize that “experience” always and everywhere is radical while “logic” is about inquiry and not the merely formal manipulation of symbols. Einstein had no sense of either of these irreducible facts, and as a result he reduced the principle of relativity to a merely formal criterion that disdained experience while making meaningful measurement essentially impossible in principle. These failures have been inherited, largely unquestioned, by the standard model of cosmology.

The standard model of cosmology generally goes by the name “ΛCDM,” where the lamda stands for the “cosmological constant” (a number necessitated by GR as a consequence of the interpretation of the observed red-shift of the spectra of various objects in the universe), while “CDM” stands for “Cold Dark Matter.” This latter is an entirely hypothetical entity—which has consistently defied all attempts at detection or observation—necessary to account for the structure of galaxies, structure which would otherwise serve as a direct falsification of GR. Notice that both key components of ΛCDM are entirely about saving GR from observational failures. These failures are not a matter of cranks or crackpots who have been left behind by the cosmological mainstream. Rather, these failures are artifacts of a cosmological mainstream that is more in love with its formal model—its standard model—than it is with the fundamentals of logic in general and scientific inquiry in particular.20

While we will explore it in more detail in chapter 10, we will preview the core of the problem now: namely, gravitational cosmology has outrun the empirical content of the available observational evidence in its rush to justify its adored standard model. Rather than evidence-driven science, gravitational cosmology has become model-driven speculative mathematics. It has ceased to be science at all; it is “old-school” metaphysics. And by “old-school” we do not mean anything like Whitehead’s return to the pre-Kantian roots of modern thought. We mean the wholesale return to medieval speculation ungrounded by testable consequences and governed only by formal coherence. Gravitational cosmologists have not only lost track of the genuine principle of relativity, but also of their roles as scientists.





The Principle of Relativity


Chapter 1 of Whitehead’s The Principle of Relativity begins with these observations:

The doctrine of relativity affects every branch of natural science, not excluding the biological sciences…. Relativity, in the form of novel formulae relating time and space, first developed in connection with electromagnetism…. Einstein then proceeded to show its bearing on the formulae for gravitation. It so happens therefore that owing to the circumstances of its origin a very general doctrine is linked with two special applications.21



Whitehead uses Principle of Relativity to develop the gravitational form of the application in a direction that was (and is) scientifically robust, avoiding Einstein’s dogmatic commitment to a mono-metric model in favor of a more logically sound bimetric approach. The electromagnetic application was essentially completed by Clerk Maxwell, and was encoded in Special Relativity. Whitehead’s proposal matched Einstein’s at the latter, special limit.

However, the mature statement of the general principle waited for Process and Reality, where it appears as the fourth category of explanation:

(T)he potentiality for being an element in a real concrescence of many entities into one actuality is the one general metaphysical principle attaching to all entities, actual and non-actual; and that every item in its universe is involved in each concrescence. In other words, it belongs to the nature of a ‘being’ that it is a potential for every ‘becoming.’ This is the ‘principle of relativity.’22



In other words, nothing is so cut off from anything else that it at least might exercise some influence on that other entity’s process of coming to be. Being potential is, for Whitehead—and for any radical empiricist—explicitly recognized as a real form of relatedness. So even if an actuality manages to play no definite role in the determination of another actuality, the two are still not cut off from one another in their mutual interconnectedness. It is here that the a-tomic (undivided) character of reality most fully reveals itself. Whitehead states (and we emphasize) that the principle of relativity is “the one general metaphysical principle attaching to all entities, actual and non-actual.” He makes it clear that this principle stands out from the others. The first three Categories of Explanation—that the actual world is a process, that the becoming of an entity is the achievement of real unity, that there are no novel eternal entities—are not more basic than the principle of relativity. Rather, these are “axioms” needed to contextualize the meaning of relativity itself.

Relational atomicity means something categoreally different in a world of substance rather than of process. This categoreal distinction shows itself in three ways, corresponding to each of those categories of explanation that precede relativity. The first category of explanation tells us that the fundamental structure of inquiry has an entirely different logic if one’s focus is upon how things stay the same rather than upon how they change relationally. The second category of explanation tells us that one must understand how relational structures are intrinsically focused upon the method or the process of their achieved unity, rather than upon a merely given “what” of that unity. The third category of explanation emphasizes the fact of the abstract (as opposed to vacuously recondite) “potential” of the relational world as algebraic relational possibilities, which cannot be treated as slipping and sliding about without thereby calling down upon ourselves the revenge of Zeno in a logically unanswerable form. In short, eternal objects cannot change, otherwise, Zeno returns. Together these three categories illustrate how and why we must have certain logical fundamentals in hand before the real force of the principle of relativity can show itself.

Whitehead’s approach is entirely recognizable from the mathematical perspective. The serial order in which the categories are presented is not the same as the logical order of their importance. Central players in a mathematical argument will not be presented in an order that aims at “narrative drama”; they will appear in such a way as to construct the most pedagogically effective logical development. So Whitehead’s highlighting of the principle of relativity as “the one general metaphysical principle” might seem so understated as to diminish the principle’s centrality to the full categoreal scheme. But having highlighted the principle at all is the step that must stand out. Indeed, on only one occasion in all of Process and Reality does Whitehead so much as modify the attribution of “atomic” with an adverb. (That would be “incurably,” of course.) Such cautious rhetoric is standard with mathematicians. The narrative order of presentation, or what we have called the order of exposition, is not to be confused with a hierarchy of logical determinations that characterize the systematic aspects of the philosophy of organism.

Let us respect Whitehead’s rhetorical restraint without trying to limit ourselves to it. The principle of relativity means that everything that is real—not merely “actual,” but real even if only unactualized possibility—exists in an incurable web of relatedness to everything else. Regardless of whether that web immediately expresses itself as the definiteness of actuality or as the determinateness of potentiality, the web is equally real. Steps need to be taken to internalize the central point of relational connectedness—Whitehead’s “relativity.” We cannot cut off any part of reality as though that part—even if “only” potential in its relatedness—were somehow a mere “tomatic” effluvium to the whole. Relativity is the one metaphysical principle that counts everywhere and at all times.

This is the principle that Einstein and his devotees have abandoned: not the mathematical expression of their physical model; that model is itself only an application of what has become standard dogma of orthodox cosmology, with its narrowly defined approach to the interpretation of a truncated representation of experience. Rather, physical cosmology has left behind the full principle of relativity and its unqualified commitment to the incurable relatedness of the real. That abandonment comes in the truncation of experience at the root of their largely unexpressed theory of experience. For one cannot have a universal principle of relativity—applicable to all that is real—unless one takes experience in its real, relational totality. Experience—both actual and potential—is exactly the kind of reality that falls under the principle of relativity. One cannot take the metaphysical principle of relativity seriously unless one is a radical empiricist.

But the approach of Einstein and his followers has been that of traditional empiricism, an approach that takes for granted what Dewey characterized as the “spectator theory of knowledge.”23 This approach was effectively built-into GR with its treatment of time as little more than an adjunct to (and additional dimension of) space. Such an approach is an overt denial of the phenomenological reality of temporal experience. Within GR, time is “already there” in the same way that space is, and the experience of change is an illusion to be “corrected” by our mathematical model. Brian Greene, for example, refers to time as a “frozen river,” and confidently insists that reality is essentially a Parmenidean block.24 “Experience,” in the view of Einstein, Greene, and present scientific orthodoxy, is not a relational participant within the world, but merely an external observer of the world, and a poor one at that! We will explore this topic further in chapter 10.

It is sufficient to notice that when experience in its radical fullness and connectedness is disdained in favor of clever mathematical models, then the resultant medievalism of contemporary physical cosmology is an inevitable result. For what are we left with to test our models, other than the formal and recondite cleverness of those models? What standards might we apply to test our models when our model-centric approach demands that we measure experience by those models, rather than those models by experience? What yardstick shall we apply? Do we achieve anything other than a preordained “fit” with a “reality” that bears no particular relation to experience? Do we just promiscuously add new parameters as needed and convenient? Under such assumptions, experience can offer no meaningful feedback, since it has been shut out of the process of model-centric science when it dared to challenge the models that experience would be called upon to test.

These are not the rhetorical concerns of philosophers but the active criticisms of working physicists, such as Ratcliffe, Eastman and others.25 While such critics remain a minority, they are currently challenging orthodox cosmology and ΛCDM on exactly these grounds. It is sufficient to highlight how the logical problem with model-centric inquiry of any kind leads to the abandonment of its own “relativity” for a position of spectator-like authority by leaving behind the relational reality of experience. Meaningful inquiry cannot proceed in this manner, and we see one manifestation of this in the logical problem with cosmological measurements. Having dismissed experience from any constructive participation in its model-building, cosmology has turned a blind eye to the basic assumptions that make spatial measurements possible.

We have now set the stage with relativity, and it is time to push deeper into Whitehead’s relationalism. The next two chapters will explore some vital aspects of this relationalism, which in turn enable more detailed criticism of the desiccated metaphysics currently underlying contemporary physical science.
