7  Genetic and Coordinate Division and Divisibility


Mickey Mantle: “Hey Yogi, what time is it?”

Yogi Berra: “You mean right now?”

How, then, does the a-tomic (the undivided) come to be divided in Whitehead’s philosophy, and in keeping with what we have just said about the principle of relativity? The concretely indivisible is abstractly divided by two kinds of analysis: coordinate and genetic. We have been using these terms in quite specific ways prior to this point in the book, but here we seek to make that usage explicit. First let us rehearse a bit of history.





Background


From the time he finished volume one of his Universal Algebra, up until about 1913, Whitehead was distracted by the emerging proof-theoretic logics of Dedekind, Peano and Frege, before he realized it was a dead end.1 He returned at that point to the algebraic logic he had been working on before—not the extensional logic of the Principia, but the idea of universal algebra and its associated theory of extension. In short, Whitehead resumed his concern with the problem of space.

Whitehead’s reading of Kant, Bergson, and others, had convinced him that spatialization was an indispensable part of any formal explanation, and to have a philosophical explanation, one needed a description of the ground of our acts of spatialization (more specifically, our “presentation” as if we existed spatially in a variable flux). Whitehead’s theory of extension, which is a non-metrical, axiomatic systematization at the most general level of the structural characteristics of all actual spaces (perceived, prehended, implied, or potential2), is finally offered in Part IV of Process and Reality.

For several of his books, Whitehead adapted a form of mathematical inquiry to the task at hand, which he called genetic and coordinate analysis. Since the time of Plato, and even before, philosophers have been borrowing formalization techniques from mathematics to address philosophical problems. The greatest steps forward in philosophical inquiry are often of such a kind. Descartes’ search for the mathesis universalis, Spinoza’s geometrical method, and Leibniz’s quest for the universal characteristic are well-known examples from the modern period, while Bergson’s qualitative calculus and Cassirer’s use of group theory and projective geometry are less well known efforts in the spirit of making philosophical methods mathematical. Jaakko Hintikka belongs to this line of thinking as well, distinguished by creative philosophizing about adapting formal tools of inquiry to varied purposes.3





Genetic and Coordinate Division vs. Genetic and Coordinate Analysis


We now explain the how and the why of the two major movements in the structure of Whitehead’s method of inquiry in Process and Reality, showing the relation of genetic and coordinate division in the phases of inquiry. There is a difference between the way that the actual entity divides the extensive continuum, and the way that prehensions realize the potential of divisibility in the analysis of actual occasions. The reason for the difference is that the division of the extensive continuum by an actual entity is a realization—it is treated as actually occurring. The division of actual occasions into prehensions is entirely hypothetical or virtual; prehensions are relational entities, relating the actual entity’s transition to its conscrescence, and thus, prehensions cannot really be genetically divided from process except in abstraction. To treat them otherwise invites Zeno’s paradoxes and commits the fallacy of misplaced concreteness (see the previous chapter).4 Here we understand why Whitehead uses the term “merely real” to describe eternal objects (possibilities) and actual entities (the quantum of explanation) when we attempt to consider their independence of one another.5

Genetic and coordinate analyses (as distinct from methods of division), as methods of analysis, are indifferent to whether the entities selected and grouped (or specified, generalized, and coordinated) are divisible, real entities, or actually indivisible components of entities. Rather, we seek only to learn what description is yielded if we examine varying rules and relations that, if specified one way rather than another, point to a unit of explanation (and if that unit be irreducible and necessary, a quantum of explanation) that is exemplified throughout the entire explanandum (which in the case of metaphysics, is our entire cosmic epoch). Whitehead was not alone in using this kind of dual analysis. Cassirer expressed it clearly in 1925, saying “it has become increasingly obvious that genetic problems can never be solved solely by themselves but only in thoroughgoing correlation with structural problems.”6 This latter issue of structure is handled as a coordinate analysis, not only by Cassirer and Whitehead, but also by Bergson, Royce, Dewey, and other process philosophers.

Genetic specifications (or suggested proximal units, relations, or rules) function as what mathematicians call “implicit definitions,”7 which become more explicit as analysis proceeds. They are “axioms,” not formally but in the original sense of that word, i.e., “thoughts worth thinking.”8 Once these genetic specifications are adequately explicit (or “definite” in Whitehead’s language), the principles of their determination, as possibilities (i.e., intelligible structures on their own account) are coordinated to create a model of the whole from which the genetic divisions were taken. The coordinate whole precedes the genetic specifications formally, regardless of whether the whole was developed from a hunch about the parts and then empirically adjusted until the parts and the whole fit together tolerably. That is how a categoreal scheme is created. The coordinate version of the phenomena precedes the genetic specification in the way that the whole precedes its parts, since in order to be “parts,” a whole (to which they belong) must be presupposed, logically (in our peculiarly erotetic sense of that term).9

This modeling can be done in many ways, but first, we would like to offer a very simple example. We will use genetic and coordinate analysis to create a model of an existing physical structure. Be warned that this example over-simplifies and renders overly static the actual way that Whitehead carries out genetic and coordinate analysis, but these deficiencies are heuristically bearable. The most important distortion is that our example is essentially metrical, and the whole point of Whitehead’s theory of extension is that it is non-metrical. However, the metrical nature of our extended analogy below also provides further illustration of how metrical presuppositions can creep into our conceptual schemes and overwhelm our powers of judgment, and so serves as a cautionary tale as well.

We intend to show that Whitehead’s concept of the actual entity (the “quantum of explanation”) is a kind of mereotopological unit, adjusted to the descriptive purposes of metaphysics, that rises to the standard he sets for any such description: adequacy, applicability and universality of exemplification, logical rigor (as a matter of inquiry), and maximal consistency. The outcome of the analysis is the categoreal scheme. Interpreters have taken the categoreal scheme to be a set of conditions for metaphysical method. It is nothing of the kind. The order of exposition is not to be conflated with the order of logical importance, as Whitehead points on numerous occasions. The whole result of Process and Reality is in the categoreal scheme, but it takes the entire book to provide the reasons justifying just that scheme, and offering a comprehensible narrative about it. The categoreal scheme is a model of our cosmic epoch, a non-dogmatic alternative to the received model of General Relativity. A cosmic epoch is a far-flung object of study. Let’s do something simpler first.





Building a Model: Basic Lessons in Genetic and Coordinate Analysis10


If we wanted to create a scale model of a famous sports stadium, say, Fenway Park in Boston, we would need to specify measurements in three dimensions, at least. We could use any unit of measure, but we should choose something that facilitates the coordination of the parts when projected to a different scale, since the purpose of our inquiry is to recreate the structure on a smaller scale. That scale need not be numerical or geometrical—indeed, it could be historical, or even mythic, and projected according to many horizons of meaning, many ontological regions. Yet, all such models would be algebraic in structure. There is some x (our model) such that F (the real Fenway) is x under some projection α. Narratives (whether they be stories or instructions, or programs, etc.) are hardly exempt from “structure” as we explained earlier. Here we will work with numerical and geometrical structures, but we make that choice for the sake of simplicity. Genetic and coordinate analysis can be done without numbers and without geometrical space. One assumes there would be some sort of extensive relatedness and some sort of unit, but that is sufficient for analysis.

Since we are modeling a three-dimensional, physical structure, it is not enough for genetic specification to specify measurements in three spatial dimensions and project them on a different scale. We also need a procedure for classifying the actual measurements into their types—to distinguish x, y, and z axes for height, depth, and width, and group the measurements in ways that will hold constant their relative positions through the course of the analysis, through any series of transformations. With these rules and entities, we have only begun our task. We need not choose an infinitely precise unit of measure, nor do we need an absolutely distinct set of axes. We need enough specification to keep separate what will be separate subsequently, and that is determined by what we plan to do with our analysis, our purpose in inquiring.

If we intend to reproduce a small model of Fenway Park for a shelf at home, in which much detail will be lost, macro-measurements rounded in feet or meters will be adequate. The function is decorative or symbolic and needs to capture only the sorts of stadium features that enable a person to recognize it as a model of Fenway Park. The purpose of the inquiry in this case is determined at a high level of generality because the intended function is easily achieved. That is, Fenway Park is easy to recognize even when quite distorted. The basic geometrical relations may be inexactly reproduced, inexactly specified, and, with the addition of one or two identifying features (e.g., the left field wall and the famous “angle”), the model can be created, and in various materials, for reasons quite independent of any analogy they bear to the original. We can make a model of gold to impress people, or of some material that takes paint for the sake of representational correspondence, and so on. Our coordination and genetic specification can be very sloppy in this instance. It is the aim or purpose that determines the level of precision in the analysis itself. In this case, the purpose allows for great inexactitude.

But if our aim is to build a model of Fenway Park that will be usable by baseball-playing youth, we need much greater specificity in measuring. How can one insure the discovery of the proper scale for that purpose, and choose the right unit of measure and the right level of specificity? One needs to go to experience. We will have to experiment with units and adjust them for functionality before we could fairly characterize the coordinate whole. This can be done in many different ways. We can, for example, compare the height of the average 12-year old youth with that of the average major league baseball player, create a scale of ratios, according to some method of averaging, and treat the resulting ratio as the base unit, call it a “Feneter,” and subdivide or multiply those Feneters as needed for greater specificity. We can tweak the parameters as needed. By this method we would get a stadium that sort of “looks right” when we see the smaller players running around in it. For greater precision (not necessarily greater applicability or adequacy), we can modify the Feneter to include height-weight proportions of 12-year olds and major leaguers to get a more refined unit. But it seems to us that such refinement is unlikely to make the model more functional, and it wouldn’t help us “see” the stadium as being any more like the original—if anything, it might introduce distortions in the visual aspect ratios of the model because youngsters weigh less in proportion to their heights than do adults, especially professional athletes. So we should reject this proposed refinement of our Feneter.

The point is to recognize: (1) refinement of any unit is available along many lines; and (2) not all refinements will be relevant to the given aims and purposes of an individual inquiry. To overlook a refinement that would be of clear value in achieving one’s given aim will lead to a less than optimal model (such as Einstein’s General Relativity, as we explained). In this case we have suggested that a relative scale be developed based on average height, and we need to define what we mean by “12 years old,” what we mean by “height” (e.g., with or without shoes, in centimeters or inches), and most importantly, what we mean by “average.”

But is there any reason to suppose that the simple size (whether average height, or combined height and weight, etc.) will enable us to create a unit (of measure) that allows us to construct a model that performs for small players in just the way the full sized-stadium performs for major league players? Actually, there should be some relation between the two situations, but the method of using height might not work well because we need greater precision than visual congruence to achieve functional modeling. In fact, we may need to sacrifice some visual congruence for the sake of function. The Feneter just isn’t enough. A purely model-centric view could easily disguise this flaw. Finding a single unit, such as the Feneter, and insisting that whatever happens in the park thus constructed must be the true and accurate game itself is the sort of reasoning we find in model-centrism. Einstein’s cosmological model may picture a cosmic Fenway, but no one can play ball there, not even God, and we ought not adjust our ideas about what really happens to fit this block universe of curvilinear space-time. Experience is the measure, not the model. Now we are beginning to grasp where a full genetic and coordinate analysis will be helpful.

The meta-methodology of genetic and coordinate analysis might not even be the best way to treat the problem, but working under the “theory” (in Whitehead’s sense, see chapter 1) that it is possible to create something that functions like Fenway Park, but on a smaller scale for youngsters, we have not yet begun to explore the riches available to us from genetic and coordinate analysis. So far, in the Feneter, we have only an arbitrary set of suggestions, drawn haphazardly from an abduction that the height and/or weight of players may have some relation to the way the game unfolds dynamically in the original stadium. Surely it does. But alone, height, or any purely visual unit, is too crude to guide genetic specification or express coordination (the existence and intelligibility of the real Fenway Park, functioning as the “whole” for this inquiry). We must ask ourselves what we want from our completed model. Only then will we know what the functional “parts” might be, and how they might be genetically specified.

When we said it should be possible to create Fenway Park on a smaller scale, we meant that there probably exists a complex set of relations such that, if we get the right determinations, then we can put these determinations through a series of transformations that preserves the functional features that serve our current purposes. We must pay attention to the adequacy, logical rigor, and applicability of all our reasoning about the problem. We must seek out just those determinations and relations that allow our reasoning to follow the relevant trends of transformation that will, finally, provide us with parts that make up the coordinated model we sought, and also to discover our errors. The model cannot be allowed to trump our experience, both as the experience is had and aimed at. Whitehead is, after all, unapologetically teleological, even if he rejects fixed ends as resolutely as any pragmatist.

We now suggest that the example at hand requires a more complex process of genetic specification to achieve our coordinated model. We think we need to take account not only of the

height (and maybe weight) ratio of the players, but also

of what materials the youngsters’ bats and balls will be made, and how their materials, sizes, and weights relate to the materials, sizes, and weights of the major league analogues;

the exact materials of which the stadium is built (including the type of grass and its average height);

the measurements of the stadium in height, depth, and width according to a degree of absolute measurement in millimeters. By “absolute measurement,” we only mean that the units (millimeters, etc.), have been imported from other problems, not developed for this problem alone, with conventions not adapted in advance to this inquiry. We suppose that the tiny distortions that results from using a metric not developed from the special character of our problem will not have any important effect on the creation of the model—a fallible supposition, but we choose the millimeter instead of the inch because we think the metric system is functional in a way that the older English system is cumbersome; we choose the millimeter rather than the centimeter because, regarding this problem, specifying an external or conventional metric only down to the centimeter might actually create functional problems with the model.



These units are not “eternal objects” in Whitehead’s sense because our problem is a concrete problem, and hence the units are fixed not metaphysically but in relation to a particular inquiry. This is not metaphysics, but a physical analogy. Metaphysics is harder. Thus, let us call this genetic group of four categories the “static” characters. But to these, for a more complete genetic specification, we must also add the “dynamic” characters:

how fast each group of athletes (professionals and youths) runs, on average (this affects distance between the bases);

how far they hit the ball, and how often (watching closely for trends of variation—for example, major league players may hit the ball a great distance more often than youngsters, so it is not enough to set up a scale of relative distances; the proper procedure involves mixing a static with a dynamic measurement, and major leaguers may, on average, get more or fewer hits per times at bat than youngsters. In fact there really is a discrepancy here, so we must adjust the units).



We are very far from the Feneter now. These two genetic groups, the static and dynamic, provide the basic relations we need to know in order to create a model of Fenway that functions roughly as we wished. Some inquirers might want to call this the search for the “true Feneter,” and Grand Unified Feneter Theory, but such people need to become cosmic Cubs fans. There is no true Feneter, any more than there is a single mythic or cosmic reason the Cubs can’t win. Cosmic Cubs fans keep hoping for a String Theory narrative about their problem, but some problems simply cannot be solved by a finite inquiry.11 Good inquirers know this (as indeed do real Cubs fans). We do not need to become Fenway Fundamentalists or Wrigley Writhers when all that is needed is a place to play ball—which is as fair an analogy to honest inquiry as we can imagine.

In the final phase of inquiry, attempting to create the model (in a completed concept) of the coordinate whole with which we began, will integrate these static and dynamic characters; this integration requires some pretty fancy algebra, and some differential geometry, and some calculus to turn the dynamic measures into some units that can be geometrized, since we have assumed that every dynamic variation implies some geometric adjustment, possibly even large adjustments, because ultimately every variable dictates that we adjust the physical structure of the stadium (even where physical adjustments are only aimed at achieving dynamic ends, such as preventing too many or allowing too few homeruns by the youngsters). We must remember how many empirical measurements are required to determine the “average” player, and average the speeds, frequencies of hitting relative distances, and so forth. A serious mistake anywhere could spoil our results. Also, if there is some empirical factor of crucial importance we have missed, it may spoil our applicability, regardless of our logical rigor. Or, perhaps we may omit something crucial but the omission ends up cancelling on either side of the equation in just this one instance, and we succeed in creating our model only by fiat, and the results are unrepeatable. This is just how inquiry goes. Ask any Cubs fan. After all, they could win.

We need not measure everything we can think of. We can reason about our inquiry as we inquire. For example, we do not think we need to take into account how hard the young pitchers throw the ball in comparison to the pitching velocities of their major league counter-parts. Why? Because the hitting distance calculations will already contain the most useful information that might be gleaned from measuring the pitching speeds. We also do not think we need to measure climatic variations between the average air temperature of Boston and the temperature wherever we build the model—unless the model is to be built in a place with wildly different weather. Temperature affects play, certainly, and the ball flies further on cold days. But the differences here would actually be minimized since youngsters play baseball on a smaller scale. The smaller scale model reduces the effect of air temperature, which is barely enough to affect the major league game (although this is sometimes debated).

We might be ready to build our model. But there is crippling news:

The orientation of the model relative to (1) the prevailing wind patterns and (2) the position of the sun are extremely important in our creation of the model.



And here we begin to understand the limitations of genetic specification, even when it takes its direction from a prior coordinate whole. Let us examine these two factors. We can measure the orientation of Fenway Park to the sun very precisely, but we can only recreate that pattern with fair exactness along the same parallel of latitude as Boston when we build the model. That is a very great limitation. Apart from that parallel, we will have to settle for an approximation. The further away from the Boston latitude we place the model, the more we will have to accept a variance in orientation that will certainly affect the way day-time games unfold. After all, what times and which fielders battle the sun matters greatly. Many baseball leagues (e.g., American Legion, Babe Ruth, etc.) even regulate the orientation of the field so that no unfair advantage accrues to one team or another in a home stadium.

We can probably counter these effects to a limited extent by playing the games at different times of day than they would be played in Boston, or better yet, by playing all games at night, with lights situated in precisely analogous positions with the ones at Fenway, but at the same degree of brightness (not an analogous degree, scaled down). Here we discover something that must be designated as invariant in our genetic specifications: the amount of light needed for night games. Young eyes may see more keenly than old eyes, but not among baseball players, all of whom must have excellent vision.12 Always in inquiry, empirical factors arise that need to be treated as invariant, and sometimes those factors are surprising, as in this instance—the light poles could be shorter in the model, but the candlepower needs to be close to the same. (There could be some increased illumination from closer grouping of the poles, but the lighting effect, to remain functional, must be equivalent, not scaled.) We do not say the candlepower factor actually is invariant, only that it must be treated that way in this inquiry. We do not think that Whitehead would allow that we can make sense of the idea of invariance an sich. Invariance is relative to a coordinate whole (see chapter 5).13

We can probably overcome the challenge posed by orientation to the sun, doing so within the acceptable bounds of our original purpose in inquiry. But we are up against factors that no unit of measure can quite capture. It is easy to know very precisely the variation between the original and the intended model, but the variation cannot be scaled and converted into a unit that dictates an exact structural adjustment in the model. We simply turn the entire model to the best approximation of the sun’s position and adjust more by starting the game earlier if we are south of Boston, or later if we are north of it.

These two sorts of calculations, amount of light required for night games and orientation to the sun, do not then affect the development of our “master unit” of measure that governs all transformations (all those that can be captured in a physical alteration of the stadium itself). Instead, genetic specification and reasoning have shown us some limits of our modeling process, and adjusting the unit of measure will not assuage the difficulty. These are non-metrical factors in the model, and analogously, creating a metaphysical model of our cosmic epoch, in words (i.e., a system of philosophy), in a finite set of concepts, is not a wholly metrical, i.e., scaled, representational process, of achieving correspondence. Some relevant factors will be irreducibly metaphorical, but there are better and worse metaphors, and metaphors can be improved upon:

Progress in truth—truth of science and truth of religion—is mainly a progress in the framing of concepts, in discarding artificial abstractions and partial metaphors, and in evolving notions which strike more deeply into the root of reality.14



We learn here that genetic specification encounters obstacles, and some of them can be addressed with straightforward reasoning (e.g., pitching velocity is accounted for in the metric of various hitting measurements), and some characters have to be treated as constants (light needed for night games), and some factors mutually determine others (frequency of night games and game times need to vary with distance from the latitude of Boston), while some may seem to work at cross-purposes to others.

An example of the latter might be the very thing we thought was “straightforward.” In fact, little league baseball fields are not proportional to major league fields, especially regarding the pitcher’s “mound” (it’s really just a rectangular piece of rubber flat on the ground, in Little League ball). The distance and height of the pitcher’s mound to home plate really cannot be adjusted so that the velocity at which youngsters throw the ball results in a proportionate frequency and distance of hits by youngsters.15 Kids hit the ball less frequently than major league players, since, hitting the ball is more difficult to learn than is pitching. Thus, young pitchers with good fastballs dominate among 12-year-olds.

You cannot build a model of Fenway Park with an elevated pitching mound at a proportionate location and expect the functional analogy to hold. Varying the pitcher’s mound by setting it further back and not elevating it will not wholly solve the problem. Pitchers will still dominate Little League baseball. But treating the mound as an independent variable (meaning that this genetic specification is neither dynamic nor static, having its own independent metric developed from actual use of the model and not from the original Fenway) can minimize the problem—we have to vary the pitching rubber and elevation experimentally and not dogmatically (and model-centrically) to keep its geometrical proportions constant with the rest of the model. This is how Little League regulators found a distance of 46 feet to be right for 60-foot bases. Perhaps if they moved the bases to 66 feet, they could get a closer set of ratios. It’s an empirical problem, but it varies with the coordinate model in relation to its genetic specifications. If we move the bases to 66 feet, we must adjust all variables (invariant factors would remain the same). There is probably some improvement available to the Little Leagues. It might bring a revolution in the youth game analogous to that created by Bill James’s method of keeping statistics.16

By the time the players reach 18, the pitchers lose their advantage, but they will be playing at some park by then. Thus, we have learned some creative ways to deal with genetic specification in light of the prior coordination (the real Fenway) and the model we aim to create for our stated purposes. Metaphysics works almost the same way. You might think of Descartes’ and Leibniz’s use of algebraic relations in philosophical method as early attempts at Whitehead’s genetic and coordinate analysis of our cosmic epoch. However, the “whole” with which the Modern philosophers began would not be designated as a “cosmic epoch.” That adjustment is pretty telling, as are the other distinctions introduced in Whitehead’s cosmology that strike “more deeply into the root of reality,” due in no small degree to the progress in physical science and mathematical methods since the Modern period.

But perhaps some problems in recreating Fenway cannot be solved, even with all the tools currently available. An example, in our analogy, is the prevailing wind. If we set our scale model just anywhere, we risk having the actual games proceed nothing like the games in the original scale—because the wind has a huge effect on baseball games at any scale, turning foul balls fair, and home runs into put-outs, and vice-versa. We must know the wind patterns at Fenway, and we have to have a comparable average wind, in velocity and direction, in building our model. So we must add that factor to our list of required genetic specifications above—and this is a dynamic specification.

But what if (1) there is no place with an acceptably close prevailing wind pattern within the region we want to create our model? Or what if (2) our capacity to measure average winds is too crude? It may cease to be a model of Fenway at all in many respects. We may need simply to understand that the wind bloweth where it listeth, and leave the matter at that. Genetic specification here meets a fundamental limitation in our analogy. The coordination of all our wonderful specifications has proceeded without a solution to the problem of the wind. Thus, having begun with the coordinate whole we chose, we also acquired limitations, perhaps unconsciously, and the discovery of the implicit limitations have to do with its relation both to what is actual and what is possible. This is an objective limitation to which our whole inquiry must conform. Everything that is actual is certainly possible, and we chose an actual whole, but no coordinate whole exhausts what is genuinely possible, let alone what is abstractly possible for an inquiry. Failing to note this characteristic limitation of inquiry is the principal failure of model-centric thinking (see chs. 6 and 10). To ignore this characteristic of models (i.e., coordinate wholes and their structural limitations) is to risk failing in our purpose, and perhaps without knowing it.

In this analogy to Whitehead, trying to do metaphysics in natural language is like dealing with the wind at Fenway, unfortunately, which is to say that we are always coping with at least one very important aspect of our analysis that, as far as we have yet learned, cannot be expected to conform suitably to the demands that our goals have placed upon our chosen task—that of modeling the order of the universe (whether moral, or natural, or aesthetic order, or some other); more precisely, modeling the order of experience, that Fenway-of-the-living, in language. But in genetic analysis, the difficulty is creating a set of categories (e.g., entities, obligations, explanations) which can be used to specify along multiple axes (some variant, some static, some dynamic, some invariant, some independently variable), exactly the entities, processes, and relations that will enable us to say in language the presupposed (and coordinate) whole of what is experienced.

The analogy also shows how genetic specification is undertaken for the sake of clarifying a model and making it serve a purpose, although the coordination is presupposed in the process of specification. If we keep firmly in our minds the requirements we will later need in order to model all of these genetic specifications (of the coordinate whole), and if we also manage to keep in our awareness how we will carry out our modeling, we then know something about how to specify them genetically. Failure might leave us with a bunch of genetic specifications that are incommensurable—perhaps even with no clue about our mistake(s). We avoid this result by appealing to a common ground for each inquiry. In Process and Reality this is the idea of how time gives rise to spaces of various kinds.

Do our categories above, Feneters, independent variables, invariants, etc., actually contain the needed information to recreate Fenway Park on a smaller scale? We don’t know, but we probably got some of it right. We could carry out a lot of the measurements and decide intelligently how to average them. Our principle that every significant dynamic and static ratio should be concretized as an adjustment in the structural (in the sense of spatial) characteristics of the park provides us with a clear idea about the common metric that will be used to coordinate all axes. The Feneter will have to use a three-dimensional geometry such as architects commonly use. After all, it is an architectural analogy. The math to carry out this kind of coordination already exists, as do the computer programs that can adjust a huge number of variables in relation to each other. Still, this problem of recreating for 12-year-olds the dynamics of the major league game has surely never been programmed precisely enough to build what we imagined. We will need a good mathematician to reduce these numbers to geometrical proportions, converting Feneters into meters and millimeters. We need a structural engineer to apply the resulting geometry to the problems of constructing the stadium, and a builder who can serialize the engineer’s plans. And we need a clever accountant and some investors who love the Boston Red Sox enough to pay for it all.17 And we suppose children who want to play baseball are easy enough to find, even some willing to wear a Yankees uniform, and to be paid better (for one needs both good and evil to generate the drama, if the drama is to look like our experience of either baseball or the universe). Creating a metaphysical system requires all the analogous components, but it is not nearly so easy.





Of Hasenpfeffer and Toenails


But consider this: There just might be a single unit, for all we know, very simply turned into a metric unit, that would do all that work. For example, it is possible that starting with the ratio of the weight of the bats used by each group (kids and professionals), we could calculate everything we need about how to vary the model we are creating. Maybe there is, then, a “master principle,” if only we could discover it. This is the dream of so many philosophers and scientists. But it is fetishism, we think. The twentieth-century philosophers fetishized language as though we might solve all philosophical problems by analyzing the way we talk about them. But it is superstitious to suppose this approach could work. Our language about the world has only the loosest hold on the world, which is why we value it—its versatility and adaptability. The cost of the promiscuity of language is that it makes a poor tool for understanding our concrete experience with precision. The idea that refining our understanding of language will necessarily make us better at philosophy is akin to believing that paring our toenails will help us run faster. If you aren’t careful, you can spend your life trying to find the perfect length for your toenails and never join the race at all. There surely is a relation between our language and how well we philosophize, just as there is a relation between toenail length and foot-speed, but the relation is loose.

If such a trick worked, if we apparently got faster by trimming our nails just so, or if we got better at philosophy simply by analyzing language, it would be magic and we would not learn anything from our luck. The discovery of the perfect unit would be an accident: luck is not a method and hope is not a plan. We don’t know how to get lucky in metaphysics. Whiteheadian philosophers and radical empiricists do not fetishize language and do not search for a magic master principle that will save us from all that work of genetic and coordinate analysis. We trim our toenails with modesty, study our logic, read our poetry, and proceed with the real business of philosophizing, which is slow and difficult. It requires disciplined thought, not language tricks and duck-rabbits.

Someone (probably with an expensive pedicure) may say that Fenway Park cannot be recreated using the method of genetic and coordinate analysis—in short, our original “theory” may be disputed. We disagree. We think it can be done, adequately, rigorously, and applicably. But in building scale models, the proof would be in the execution. In metaphysics, we don’t get off so easily. That someone (i.e., Whitehead) has created a fantastic genetic specification and coordination of a problem as tough as the order of the universe-as-experienced is difficult to demonstrate to a resolute trimmer of toenails. And how good is this system of Whitehead’s? It does contain distortions. It is not the perfect philosophy, as he well knew. Remaining radical in our empiricism is our best hope of discovering our mistakes, and of avoiding mistakes to begin with. But we certainly will err. Error is the engine of progress according Whitehead, and there is error in every symbolic reference. We don’t know how to avoid all error, but we do know how Whitehead uses genetic and coordinate analysis in his inquiries. Let us err then, and move forward.

We mentioned that the method of genetic and coordinate analysis is indifferent to whether the entities, processes, and relations under discussion can be actually divided in the ways required for the analysis. Genetic and coordinate analysis provides us with ways of thinking about our problem, without telling us anything final about what we can or cannot really do. In the analogy, the truth is that Fenway Park is a fact of the universe and nothing else can be just like it.18 That does not mean that modeling reality in genetic and coordinate analysis is anti-realist. It is emphatically, radically realistic.

This extended analogy of Fenway Park is based on the idea of scalar modeling. Scaling is only one application of modeling and we want to make it very clear that genetic and coordinate analysis is not limited to such applications, and indeed, Whitehead’s cosmology is not an instance of scaling at all. The kind of modeling Whitehead does in Process and Reality is mereotopological, and that is Whitehead’s approach whenever he is dealing with the problem of space. But the other problem that fascinated Whitehead throughout his career, the problem of “the accretion of value,” as we call it, is a dynamic factor in the theory of space that cannot be wholly harnessed.

Thus, Whitehead’s books that take the accretion of value as the coordinate whole, books such as Science and the Modern World, Religion in the Making, and Adventures of Ideas, do not attempt to solve the problem of space. Rather, they assume that presentational spaces capture the growth and decline of forms of valuing, while leaving aside the general problem of space. Genetic and coordinate analysis is just as useful in one sort of inquiry as the other, and Process and Reality comes as close as any of Whitehead’s works to accommodating the dynamics of the accretion of value within the coordinate whole presupposed by the problem of space (and answered with the theory of extension). In the idea of the actual entity, as employed in Process and Reality, Whitehead has, at the same time, a temporal divider of the extensive continuum and an accretion of value. The question is whether a coherent whole can be specified to which an actual entity as a divider and an accretion of value, can belong and whether this whole realistically models both our experience and the physical universe as our science reveals it. Both are requirements of any serious realism. Philosophies mis-labeled “scientific realism” ignore the accretion of value are nowhere close to being genuine realisms. They are atemporal pipedreams. Hilary Putnam did much in his final years to unseat the pretension of such realisms, but even his message is not realistic enough to satisfy us.





Long May You Run


We have not yet learned all we can learn from the activity of constructing models. Scalar modeling is an exercise in projective geometry19 and linear algebra, combined, and with the algebra limited to the greatest extent possible by the aim of converting dynamic problems into geometrical relations in three dimensions. Similarly, we may say that Whitehead’s axiomatizing of his theory of extension is an algebra developed under the limitation of the general theory of value is an effort to model experience.

Another example of scalar modeling, having almost the same features as the Fenway analogy, but with revealing differences, comes from Neil Young, the Canadian singer/songwriter. Young is a serious model train enthusiast and he became a co-owner of the Lionel model train company when it fell into financial trouble. Being a sound engineer (as many rock musicians are), Young began to develop a sound system that would make the trains sound like the trains they were modeling, and this became part of what was called the LEGACY Command and Control system, the development of which Young financed and helped to design. Having taken his project that far, Young writes:

The next thing model trains need to do is abandon modeling sounds by user input [apparently, the controller presses a button to provide the sound] and become real. The effort involved in pulling a load needs to be measured, the algorithms that used to be based on user input need to be newly based on the locomotive’s effort measured to pull the load or perform the task. Then there is little to do but drive the train down the track, allowing it to measure its own efforts and trigger sound and smoke effects and speed changes to reflect the laboring that is being measured. That is the next step, the future of modeling, or at least part of the future. Everything is there now in the Lionel system to make this happen on a basic level, except a good measurement of the effort being put out by the locomotive model to pull its load. Not just some gross measurement like measuring the electric motor effort, but an electromechanical high-resolution capturing of each nuance of the laboring. That will be nirvana and I will be celebrating my ass off when it happens!20



Note how Young presupposes that the geometric projections have all been done in such a way that the “laboring” of the model already captures the laboring of actual engines (which is almost certainly false), and that he has not considered whether, say, the materials from which model tracks are made offer the same resistance to the wheels of the models as steel on steel, gauged as it is, operates in the original. It is not clear that making the new model from the same materials as the original trains would provide the same resistance ratio—gravity doesn’t work that way, and Neil needs the cooperation of gravity here.

Furthermore, it really may not be possible to recreate that resistance ratio without some serious experimentation. Young apparently hasn’t realized that the unit of measure he is seeking is a resistance ratio that varies proportionately with the variations in the full-sized train. For his purposes, it makes no difference at all about the load except as it affects resistance between track and wheel. A little engine pulling 20 pounds on a toy track does not stand to gravity in a relation analogous to a 200-ton locomotive pulling hundreds of thousands of tons of freight. The ratio of loads, effort, and grades cannot be reproduced (due to the gravitational difference in mass) at the smaller scale, but what can be varied to capture those dynamics is the resistance offered by the tracks in various places. A tiny adjustment in the width of the rails themselves increases the amount of contact between wheels and rails and would slow down the train proportional to its load. Using the broader rails where there is a grade to climb can easily become a bit of information a sensor on the train interprets to adjust sound effects. Neil, your nirvana is within your reach, but you haven’t found your unit of measure, your quantum of explanation.

So Young is on the right track, so to speak. But for our purposes, he is struggling with adapting dynamic (effort), relative invariants (gravity), and independent variables (grade, relative load) to a projective geometry that was established experimentally over many decades, as modelers all tried to make the trains more “real” in appearance, without sacrificing too much function. Now Neil wants to bring the function, the algebraic relations, up to the standards set by those fine-tuned geometric projections. He wants it to be “real.” Later, he continues:

There are so many ways to model the actions and sounds of a machine like a locomotive, it is endless—and the complexity involved is like a drug [this is something Neil Young knows about]. For instance, every action has a sound and every sound has variables. Every sound variable needs an algorithm based on an action, and every action needs a variable control mechanism and a sensor to monitor its position or at least predict its position, possibly based on the positions of other related moving parts of the machine’s systems. To me, this is a stimulant [this is what Whitehead called “reason,” which enlivens the body]. I am fascinated by it, by all the possibilities. Every sound needs to be recorded in such a way that it is variable by an algorithm based on the mechanical action or by the controller. You can see how I get hung up.21



Neil Young has discovered, all on his own or with enhanced consciousness, the problem of coordinating dynamic space, and he has seen how a solution has to be organized. But note that he is taking his point of departure from mechanical movement. The fact that all of this behavior in the train could easily just be programmed wouldn’t appeal to Neil because he really wants to drive the train. It would be very, very easy to develop a software application that recreated on a given model track the dynamics of a train negotiating that set of obstacles. Making that software interactive would be a more complicated task, but it could be done. Yet, Neil wouldn’t want it—any more than playing a video game of baseball with variables modeled precisely on Fenway Park would satisfy our analogy above. It is clear that Neil, along with the whole human race, wants something real, gritty and physical, something electromechanical, not a virtual recreation of the appearance of those effects. Neil wants the effects themselves. Otherwise, it isn’t “real.”

In many ways, Neil Young’s brand of realism is a lot like Whitehead’s. The cosmological model created by the narrativizing of a genetic and coordinate analysis must capture, in its proportions, the cosmic epoch, its structure and its story, and it needs to create in us a model of an experience of that epoch. That is what cosmology does. As Neil says “It’s cosmic, dude.”22

The analyses aim at a macro level description of our situation, a whole, and at developing a unit, analogous to a metric, and a procedure for generalizing and parsing the unit, all of which results in a model of the whole. The whole is presupposed as a whole with a purpose for us, and for our inquiry, and thus limits the modeling. In Process and Reality, the whole is the extensive continuum and the unit is the actual entity. The actual procedure is division, and the extensive continuum’s patience before the activity of division (called “decision” by Whitehead when it is being realized).

The concept of the actual entity is not the stipulation that makes cosmological analysis possible, and it is not a mere tool of analysis. The concept of the actual entity is the unit Whitehead suggests for cosmology. This relation was illustrated above with the Feneter, or with the Youngian loco-metric Nirvana, but in metaphysics it is the quantum of explanation. Its definition and limitations are what make it function analogously to a unit of measure (it doesn’t measure anything numerically, of course, it is more of a logical unit; but to divide with a unit is to differentiate part from whole). Some of these aspects of the concept of the actual entity, e.g., that it is actually only one place actually and potentially must be everywhere, provide structural limits upon how we use it for modeling. Some aspects, such as its phases of concrescence show us how it may be used in genetic specification.





From Extension to Space (Space … Space … Space)


We argued above that Whitehead’s concept of “extension” is an irreducible aspect of his metaphysical system, and this concept is the very source of organicity in the philosophy of organism. Whitehead says:

Extension, apart from its spatialization and temporalization [in the present cosmic epoch], is that general scheme of relationships providing the capacity that many objects can be welded into the real unity of one experience. Thus, an act of experience has an objective scheme of extensive order by reason of the double fact that its own perspective standpoint has extensive content, and that the other actual entities are objectified with the retention of their extensive relationships. These extensive relationships are more fundamental than their more special spatial and temporal relationships. Extension is the most general scheme of real potentiality, providing the background for all other organic relations. The potential scheme does not determine its own atomization by actual entities. It is divisible; but its real division by actual entities depends upon more particular characteristics of the actual entities constituting the antecedent environment.23



The “more particular characteristics” to which Whitehead refers are, most importantly, the temporal and spatial standpoint of a given actual entity.24 It is easy to lose sight of the repeated claim that time and spaces (as experienced) are particular to the present cosmic epoch (by hypothesis), and that they supply only one way in which a divisible but undivided extensive continuum can be divided. There is no necessity—either logical or metaphysical—that the extensive continuum be divided according to the determinate orders of time and space, but once this type of order is actual, further conditions are imposed upon all other actual divisions within their scope (i.e., the present cosmic epoch). If the first division of the extensive continuum is temporal, then all spaces will be under the limits imposed by temporalization.

This point establishes the priority and extreme generality of extension for this inquiry, and almost by itself refutes the claim that Whitehead’s mature metaphysics gives priority to what Ford calls Whitehead’s “discovery” of “temporal atomicity,” as we have discussed earlier in this book.25 But an actual entity simply is a contingent temporal division of the extensive continuum in our own cosmic epoch. The actual entity is a unit (a quantum) that Whitehead has devised for bringing genetic and coordinate analysis together in categoreal and narrative language. All temporality, so far as it concerns the metaphysics of the present cosmic epoch, is a contingent specification of a maximally general extensive continuum. This is a position Whitehead articulated as early as 1898, restated in explicit terms in the triptych, and never abandoned. The idea of an extensive continuum as a coordinate concept of the whole, while variously described in different inquiries, is a constant feature of Whitehead’s philosophy.

In Process and Reality, time is a contingent specification of extension, and extension is not “space”; extension is undivided divisibility (this is a functional definition, not a localizable existential assertion)—which is to say that extension is logical, not ontological. What other modes of division, apart from time, and then space, might be brought to bear on the extensive continuum? This is a question we are not in a position to answer, at least in the domain of cosmology—we have no experience of any non-temporal mode of genetic division beyond our cosmic epoch. But that lack of experience on our part is precisely the reason that time and space should be treated as contingent rather than necessary modes of division. For a radical empiricist such as Whitehead, where evidence is lacking, the very last thing we should do is declare the evidence we have to be universal, utterly exceptionless, or “ontologically necessary.” That would indulge the ultimate argumentum ad ignorantium (see chapter 10). However, the limits of experience are not identical with the limits of imagination. Hence, we find Whitehead carefully offering conjectures about what might hold of other cosmic epochs. This process of offering conjectures is familiar to mathematicians, and it does carry a certain weight of expectation, but its principal function is to remind us that the present inquiry exists in a context wider than we can encompass with our hypotheses. Are there other cosmic epochs than our own? What right have we to suppose there are not?

Knowledge comes by contrast, and lack of contrast implies lack of knowledge. To insist upon the necessity of whatever we have or have not yet learned to see in a contrast indulges the dogmatism Whitehead criticizes in the Introduction to Process and Reality. The absence from our experience of other equally primary modes of dividing the extensive continuum is not evidence for the necessity of time and then space as its dividers (that is, ultimately, actual entities); it is rather the best reason to treat them as contingent, and to hold open the possibility of other (as yet unknown) modalities of division. It is not an accident that Whitehead moves directly from the above passage to a long citation from William James, his favorite radical empiricist.

The issue to be treated presently is not the irreducible generality of the undivided-but-divisible extensive continuum, but the sense in which time and then space, as the modes of division in our cosmic epoch, impose further conditions upon the metaphysical description of the present as experienced. The extensive continuum does not determine the structure of time and then space; rather, time and space, that is, actual occasions as described in the theory of transition and concrescence, divide the continuum in two successive modalities:26 first, temporal determinations, yielding causal efficacy in perception, and then the spatial division of past from future, which is the space of presentation (or presentational space), and the only conditions under which “contemporaries” can be perceived from any single perspective (there are no true contemporaries; rather, contemporaneity is the illusion created by presentational space). Hence time and then space, i.e., actual entities in transition and concrescence, divide the extensive continuum and thereby constitute all the relations among the entities they condition in our cosmic epoch.27 That is why the actual entity functions as a quantum of explanation.

Yet, time and space divide the extensive continuum in two different ways, genetically and coordinately. It is easy to become confused about what divisibility (that which is susceptible to division) and actual division are. Consider again this passage from Process and Reality:

(P)hysical time or physical space … are notions which presuppose the more general relationship of extension…. The extensiveness of space is really the spatialization of extension; and the extensiveness of time is really the temporalization of extension. Physical time expresses the reflection of genetic divisibility into coordinate divisibility.28



In what follows, we will treat in some detail the senses in which genetic divisibility provides a basis for coordinate divisibility. Divisibility is not division itself, but a susceptibility of possible division. Note that in our long analogy of Fenway Park, no stadiums were actually divided. It wasn’t necessary for our purposes to divide anything, although it was very important that the stadium be divisible in various ways, in multiple modalities, and under discoverable limitations. Similarly, Neil Young’s loco-metric Nirvana requires divisibility in thought, not actual division of existing trains, but these distinctions are in no way a sacrifice of cosmological realism.





A Prehensile Tale


Divisibility is a mode of determinate order (the order of constellations of possibilities in their mutual determinations29) which can also be made definite in innumerable ways. Genetic divisibility in the present cosmic epoch is the “theory of prehension,” for Whitehead; when we consider prehension we have arrived at the sense in which all things in the cosmic epoch are concretely selected and related, whether negatively or positively, totally and without remainder. It is the relation of relations, crossing all actual and possible divisions. Nothing is left out of an account of prehension, no actuality, no possibility. That kind of completeness cannot be expected where actual division is the basis of the whole analysis, as would be operative in any “atomistic” philosophy.

But prehensions are not the unit of measure for the universe, and the reason they aren’t is because they are not actual dividers of the extensive continuum. A unit of measure has to correspond to a concrete act of measuring, not just relating (which is too embedded in experience to correspond to a single act). To recreate a model of Fenway Park, we have to be able to get at Fenway Park actually. A set of blueprints might be substituted, but then we would be making a model of a model, not of Fenway. In the same way, actual division is the task of the actual entity, which is a prehending subject-superject, a contextual actor. It leaves un-done (not enacted) what it does not actually divide, and what is un-done is eliminated from its actual world. Prehensions, on the other hand, as a collection (which Whitehead infelicitously calls a “group”30), include all the possible modes of division and the genetic structure of division itself. There are infinitely many ways of prehending, although most are not productive of greater intensity. A theory of prehensions models the whole and makes possible the coordination of every actual division.

Prehension itself, as a totality of relations, is a substitute for the common sense notion of “space,” as we would normally understand it in thinking about cosmology: a total scheme of possible relations of everything that exists to everything else that exists simultaneously, in every modality, with nothing left out. The totality of prehension then becomes a concrete model of the entire extensive continuum. It has the full relational character of the original, as ordered according to the purpose for which we created the model (in this case to use the basic ideas of Modern philosophy to build an adequate, logically necessary, and applicable model of our experience of the universe). The model retains the appropriate functional structure of the original and its dynamism: it is the little Fenway Park, executed mereotopologically. So, applying the analogy, the original Fenway for Process and Reality was the extensive continuum, a characterization of our cosmic epoch for the original problem we posed in the analogy.

Therefore, the theory of prehension can be used to coordinate all of the more abstract levels of actual division. But prehensions do not actually divide the extensive continuum; rather, the actual entity does that. It is the master unit of the cosmology, the Feneter, the Youngian loco-metric, the quantum of explanation. In the Fenway analogy, we proposed a master principle, corresponding to Whitehead’s ontological principle. We said that every factor, in every modality, should be converted into a geometrical adjustment in the physical model. We then discovered a few things that had to be investigated empirically, and at least one thing (light for night games) that was invariant, and one feature we couldn’t make into a geometrical adjustment (the wind), but rather would simply have to seek favorable conditions and hope for the best. Metaphysics has the same sorts of slippage. These limits apply as surely in metaphysics as in baseball or physical science (see chapter 10).

Thus, prehensions are the relational entities we discover when we analyze the actual entity in its actual world, and the theory of prehensions then describes how prehensions, which are relations, “concrete facts of relatedness”31 demonstrate that each actual entity is a complex unity,32 even though no actual entity can actually be divided; prehensions virtually divide and coordinate the actual entity in its actual world (not the extensive continuum). In Whitehead’s words (bracketed interpolations are our clarifications):

The selection of a subordinate prehension from the satisfaction [actual occasion] … involves a hypothetical, propositional point of view. The fact is the satisfaction as one. There is some arbitrariness in taking a component from the datum [the actual world for the actual entity] with a component from the subjective form [which is indivisible], and in considering them, on the ground of congruity, as forming a subordinate prehension. The justification is that the genetic process can thereby be analyzed.33



The sentence immediately preceding this passage is one of the places where Whitehead uses the phrase “incurable atomicity,” and it is undoubtedly one of the places that misled Ford. The passage in context reads:

The prehensions in disjunction [such as genetic division creates] are abstractions: each of them is a subject viewed in that abstract objectification…. There are an indefinite number of prehensions, overlapping, subdividing, and supplementary to each other. The principle, according to which a prehension can be discovered, is to take any component in the objective datum of the satisfaction; in the complex pattern of the subjective form of the satisfaction there will be a component with direct relevance to this element in the datum. Then in the satisfaction, there is a prehension of this component of the objective datum with that component of the total subjective form as its subjective form.

The genetic growth of this prehension can then be traced by considering the transmission of the various elements of the datum from the actual world, and—in the case of eternal objects—their origination in the conceptual prehensions [this shows the dependence of prehensions on functionally coordinated transition]. There is then a growth of prehensions, with integrations, eliminations, and determination of subjective forms. But the determination of successive phases of subjective forms, whereby the integrations have the characters that they do have, depends on the unity of the subject imposing a mutual sensitivity upon the prehensions [i.e., they are not actually disjoined because the subjective form determines them, which shows the functionally coordinated dependence of prehensions on concrescence]. Thus a prehension, considered genetically, can never free itself from the incurable atomicity of the actual entity to which it belongs.34



Far from saying that the theory of prehensions has somehow replaced the theory of transition, this passage says that individual prehensions are found or discovered by following a principle: we take a bit from the macroscopic transition of the actual entity (some part of its datum) and a bit from concrescence (some portion of the subjective form), where they seem congruent, that is, we consider them genetically, and then, importantly, we repeat the passage from the main text:

The selection of a subordinate prehension from the satisfaction [indivisible actual entity]—as described above—involves a hypothetical, propositional point of view [because an actual entity cannot really be genetically divided]. The fact is the satisfaction as one [because actual entities actually divide the extensive continuum, but nothing actually divides actual entities; this is the finality or incurable atomicity of the actual entity.]. There is some arbitrariness in taking a component from the datum [the actual world for the actual entity, a part of its transition] with a component from the subjective form [which is what is actually indivisible in the actual entity], and in considering them, on the ground of congruity, as forming a subordinate prehension. The justification is that the genetic process can thereby be analyzed.35



Hence, we see that the theory of prehension obliges us to treat as divisible what is actually indivisible. The theory of prehension aims to get at what is most concrete in our cosmic epoch, but discovering a prehension requires us to postulate, for the sake of analysis, as separate, on the basis of “congruence,” that which is indivisible. This postulation creates some arbitrariness, but without it we can carry out no analysis.

The analyses made possible by this way of considering prehensions are of two kinds (see the end of the passage). These are genetic and coordinate analyses, which Whitehead calls the two “descriptions” in the Categories of Explanation:

(viii) That two descriptions are required for an actual entity: (a) one which is analytical of its potentiality for ‘objectification’ in the becoming of other actual entities; and (b) another which is analytical of the process which constitutes its own becoming.    The term ‘objectification’ refers to the particular mode in which the potentiality of one actual entity is realized in another actual entity.



(ix) That how an actual entity becomes constitutes what that actual entity is; so that the two descriptions of an actual entity are not independent. Its ‘being’ is constituted by its ‘becoming.’ This is the ‘principle of process.’



Genetic and coordinate analyses are explanations in complementary but different senses. The genetic explanation presupposes a coordinated whatness or constitution, while coordinate analysis presupposes a procedure of division even if that procedure is virtual rather than actual. Explanation depends equally upon both descriptions.

The actual division of the extensive continuum in our cosmic epoch (time and then space) conditions the further division of the actual entity, the entity that is itself a basic spatio-temporal division of that extensive continuum. To be clear, we are asserting that prehensions do not do anything, they are entities of possible doings, while actual entities, each in its own actual world, which do divide the extensive continuum, are exemplifications of those possibilities of doing. Thus, a theory of prehensions is both a genetic specification of the types of things that can be done by an actual entity in our own cosmic epoch, and a coordination of what prehensions actually do in relation to what they did not do, but might have done.

The theory of prehensions is, in the first place, a theory of divisibility, not of actual division, and only in coordination does the theory of prehensions move from the possible to the actual. Feelings, which are the content of prehensions, are concrete relational beings, constitutive of actual entities, and not the sorts of things that float around in empty space. But the theory of prehensions takes aspects of feeling genetically and coordinates them in both inclusion and elimination, as a model of the actual entity that can be generalized, without committing fallacies, back to the fullness of the extensive continuum. In coordinating a transitional aspect of feeling with a concrescing aspect of feeling, according to certain criteria (relevance, intensity, width, etc.), the theory of prehensions abstracts them, but the distortions are minimal.

The limits upon effected division in the extensive continuum, as found in the prehending actual entity, further determine and condition coordinate divisibility. This is to say, in simpler language, that the space of the actual world in our own cosmic epoch just is the highly mediated space of a prehending actual entity. This idea of space is lively compared to the dead geometries of the Euclideans and relativity dogmatists like Einstein. Whitehead’s space is organic. It is the space of lived experience, not of recondite measurement. Thus, the most concrete entity, the prehension, is the appropriate entity for the coordination of the cosmic epoch itself—whatever order is imposed upon a prehension should be reliably discoverable in all intermediate entities throughout the cosmic epoch (which is another way of saying that an actual entity must be actually somewhere and potentially everywhere in a cosmic epoch). Such mediated space is highly ordered, at numerous levels, and thoroughly determinate. Of all the things it might possibly have been, the actual entity realizes just one collection of those possibilities.36 The limits encountered by prehending actual entities in achieving their satisfactions (and there are many such limits) are conditioning factors upon the organic space of the actual world of any given actual entity. Each actual entity is, of course, hypothesized to be one standpoint (not perspective) on the cosmic epoch, although this cannot be fully demonstrated; it is assumed. Thus, “extension” is rich in potentiality and “space” (for all its liveliness) is impoverished by comparison. In Whitehead’s terms:

The satisfaction of each actual entity is an element in the givenness of the universe: it limits boundless abstract possibility into the particular real potentiality from which each novel concrescence originates. The ‘boundless abstract possibility’ means creativity considered solely in reference to the possibilities of the intervention of eternal objects, and in abstraction from the objective intervention of actual entities [actual division] belonging to any definite actual world, including God among the actualities abstracted from.37



On the other hand, space is rich in determination and order, while extension is “chaotic” by comparison, in Whitehead’s sense of the term “chaos.”38 The possible intervention of eternal objects upon creativity, considered in abstraction from the objective intervention of actual entities, has a more familiar name: it is called “logic.” We will take this up in the next chapter.

The key transition between the extensive continuum and space is genetic division (and note that genetic division is not genetic divisibility—we will explain the difference shortly), and the most concrete analysis of genetic division is the theory of prehension. The theory of prehension follows a logic that is common to all levels of generality in Process and Reality, but that logic is given its exposition in the theory of prehension. Our strategy is to assess the ways in which genetic division comes to be reflected in coordinate division by examining the limits exerted by “contrast” and “comparison” (in Whitehead’s sense), which is the final stage in the theory of judgment, or propositions, with which the theory of prehensions is completed (Process and Reality, Part III), and the way opened for the theory of extension.

The transition (from attained value to value in attainment) between the extensive continuum and its eventual spatialization is genetic division of the continuum by an actual entity, and the analysis of genetic division is the theory of prehension.39 A significant part of the secondary literature has confused the tool (the theory of prehension) with what is to be analyzed (experience as related to transition). We want to examine the conditioning limits exerted by temporality (or, the temporal determination of the extensive continuum) on the prehending actual entity. If we could come up with a form of initial division apart from time-determinations, then surely the tool of analysis would also be different. But we have no experience beyond our own cosmic epoch with which to contrast the temporal mode of determination. We can feel relatively confident that the universality of time in experience points to its importance in our cosmology, but we cannot conclude its exceptionless necessity. Thus, other modes of determination of the extensive continuum may exist, and if they do, the tools of analysis adopted by those who analyze such determinations will need to conform to their purposes in inquiry.

The apparently universal conditioning role of temporality in our cosmic epoch is a matter that can operate only contingently in our cosmology precisely because we lack contrast. Here we work with the instruments of analysis that Whitehead developed, but those tools must be seen in their contingency, as selected instruments, as well as in the relational necessity of their modes of effectiveness. The limits have to do with the ways in which eternal objects ingress, and how the subjective form of a prehending actual entity constitutes an indivisible unity conditioning subsequent spatial division. In short, by grasping what, in principle, the actual entity can take in macroscopically, from “attained actuality into actuality in attainment”40 (its transition), and what it must eliminate, we learn both how any actual entity hangs together, and about the determinate structure of the space of our cosmic epoch.





A Pretty Tough Page


Actually, there are two pages in the corrected edition of Process and Reality that have to be visited, pages 283–284. It is Section I of chapter I of Part IV, entitled “Coordinate Division.” This passage says that an explanation of an actual entity requires two descriptions, one of its transition and one of its concrescence. That distinction has been partly explained earlier in Process and Reality.41 The theory of prehensions enables us to consider together the results of both of these descriptions, by using the tools of genetic and coordinate analysis (not to be confused with genetic and coordinate division). We may understand the actual entity genetically in both descriptions, wherever we find a congruence of subjective form and objective datum, and then we may coordinate those hypothetical entities—the prehensions are real, but their virtual division, which we will discuss the coming pages, for the sake of analysis introduces arbitrariness.

Whitehead has spoken of genetic and coordinate division prior to this point, but he has not indicated their full relation. Few students of Whiteheadian thought have ventured into these waters, most of them skipping from page 280 to page 337.42 We must grasp where in the course of the inquiry the logic of prehension lies, and why it is situated just there and not elsewhere. At the end of Part III, Whitehead has achieved an outcome, which is a functionally complete description of how an actual entity, in achieving satisfaction, divides the extensive continuum. Thus, the satisfaction is the entire or completed “part” or particular, and it exemplifies a full set of relations (which is the same as to say that it is a unity) to the whole of our cosmic epoch, exhibited at every level of generality, as Part III ends. Thus, as Part IV begins, Whitehead says (please forgive our interpolations in brackets):

There are two distinct ways of ‘dividing’ the satisfaction of an actual entity into component feelings, genetically and coordinately. Genetic division is division of the concrescence; coordinate division is division of the concrete. In the ‘genetic’ mode, the prehensions are exhibited in their genetic relationship to each other. The actual entity is seen as a process; there is growth from phase to phase; there are processes of integration and reintegration [at various levels of generality, such as perception and judgment]. At length a complex unity of objective datum is obtained [that is, the satisfaction], in the guise of a [generic] contrast of actual entities, eternal objects and propositions, felt with corresponding complex unity of subjective form [that is, the actual entity is a unified togetherness of all these other entities].43



Note that the satisfied actual entity, genetically described, comes as an appearance of contrasts between what it actually did in unifying and contributing itself to the world, and the world to which it has contributed itself. The contrast is not ultimate precisely because it is and can only be generic. There is no ultimate or final atomization of the whole by the parts, which is to say that we are never in any way raising the question whether the whole is equal to or greater than the sum of its parts. None of us exists concretely in a completely atomized condition (in the sense of self-sufficient, independent existence). Our contrast with our actual world is concrete, but generic. We are genuine parts of a genuine whole. We are simply observing some of the ways in which parts entail, in appearance, the wholes to which they belong, while wholes really do contain their parts. For now the point is only that the contrast of whole and part we achieve in the theory of prehensions is a generic rather than an ultimate contrast.44 Whitehead continues (and again, our interpolations are in brackets):

The genetic passage from phase to phase is not in physical time: the exactly converse point of view [that physical time is in the genetic passage from phase to phase] expresses the relationship of concrescence to physical time. It can be put shortly by saying, that physical time expresses some features of the growth, but not the growth of the features. The final complete feeling is the ‘satisfaction.’45



This passage further elucidates the cryptic statement, so often quoted by the defenders of the “temporal atomism” that there is a becoming of continuity, but no continuity of becoming.46 Note that physical time is in genetic passage, not the other way around. It is in the genetic passage that one finds the “atomism” or “undividedness.” Whitehead goes on:

Physical time makes its appearance in the ‘coordinate’ analysis of the ‘satisfaction.’ The actual entity is the enjoyment of a certain quantum of physical time. But the genetic process is not the temporal succession: such a view is exactly what is denied by the epochal theory of time.47



Interpreters have taken these lines as confirmation of the primacy of temporal atomism, but they have done so without working through the methodological relation between genetic and coordinate division.48 The very next line provides the needed clue for working through that difficult relationship. The key term is “subjective unity”:

Each phase of the genetic process presupposes the entire quantum, and so does each feeling in each phase. The subjective unity dominating the process forbids the division of that extensive quantum which originates with the primary phase of the subjective aim. The problem dominating the concrescence is the actualization of the quantum in solido.49



Why does “subjective unity” forbid the division of the quantum, and why is the quantum here referred to as “extensive”? Recalling that extensiveness can be divided either temporally or, subsequently and conditionally, spatially, we have arrived again at the hypothesized irreducible extension of our cosmic epoch (see chapter 5). Lest there be any doubt, Whitehead immediately reminds us that the quantum in question is not only a temporal quantum but also a spatial quantum: “There is a spatial element in the quantum as well as a temporal element. Thus the quantum is an extensive region.”50

The spatio-temporal quantum, which is another name for the satisfied actual entity, will now be treated as a “region” in the final coordinate division. Whitehead further says that the “region is the determinate basis which the concrescence presupposes.”51 The forbidding of the concrete division of this quantum by its own subjective unity (which would be a kind of negation or total elimination of possibilities), for the sake of maintaining the solidarity of the actual entity with its actual world, is obligatory in genetic division, in conformity with subjective unity;52 that forbidden division would render hopelessly abstract what it seeks to discover concretely. The prohibition is neither temporal nor spatial in character, it is categoreal (i.e., hypothetically presupposed by the terms of this inquiry, and confirmed in the results of the inquiry). This is another way of saying that the satisfied actual entity is in every sense a sufficient “part” of the whole to which it belongs, regardless of how we treat it in our analysis (not division). To imagine the actual genetic division of a satisfaction would be the same as to say that what is finished is not finished, that it is only an abstract, but never a wholly concrete, part of the whole to which it belongs, its actual world. This violates Whitehead’s solidarity thesis. For now, it is enough to note that something is being forbidden by the requirement of subjective unity, which is a categoreal obligation of genetic division.

But coordinate division (which depends upon the character of coordinate divisibility) proceeds without regard for the categoreal obligations of genetic division:

The coordinate divisibility of the satisfaction is the ‘satisfaction’ considered in its relationship to the divisibility of this region. The concrescence presupposes its basic region, and not the region its concrescence. Thus the subjective unity of the concrescence is irrelevant to the divisibility of the region. In dividing the region we are ignoring the subjective unity which is inconsistent with such division.53



This is why, for instance, we can discuss, intelligently and realistically, frog parts without harming any frogs. The region, in such a case, coordinates a frog-process that is a genuine feature of the region, a concrescence. There is no deeper division of that concrescence which does not presuppose the coordinate region. Is the frog just a temporal event, or string of events? No to both, because there is a subjective unity that is the frog’s experience which not only presupposes the temporal process (and coordinate region), but also admits of a genetic division, and together these divide the extensive continuum, to the extent it is divided. In short, we do not deal with satisfactions qua satisfied when we engage in coordinate division, and coordinate divisibility (not division) was the presupposition of our earlier genetic divisions and their exposition (from perception to judgment). If it were not possible to treat an actual entity as if it were potentially divisible in ways it actually is not divisible, there could be no genetic division.

In plainer English, if we could not suppose hypothetically what is actually impossible to do, we could not get an understanding of any concrete part-whole relationship. This is not like trying to create a model of Fenway Park. We are now dealing with organically related space. Everything is now not just a mix of static and dynamic characters, etc., but functionally alive, as indeed our perception and judgment are, and we are not permitted to kill the organicity to study it. We want access to the character of this living space, and it is too complex to model with statics and dynamics.

Coordinate division is more like dissecting our friend the frog, except without harming it—one takes the frog whole, but supposes a dissect-able living frog. Then one provides a description of the main phases of its life, at multiple levels of abstraction, from its evolution, environmental requirements, physiology, major systems, anatomy, cell structure, etc., and longitudinally, one describes its linear and cyclical process from conception (origination) to death (satisfaction), and then one says “now I have a complete frog.” But one actually does not have a complete frog because one has supposed a divisible frog whose subjective unity forbids such division as our genetic account has carried out—in words rather than with sharp knives.

Thus, the coordinate hypothesis behind the entire inquiry in Process and Reality, the philosophy of organism, is a regionalization into extensa of the entities we will exhibit genetically as satisfied actual entities in solidarity with their corresponding actual world. We then further specify those extensa until we have an adequate, applicable, and logically rigorous account of their relations, from whole to part (transition) and from part to whole (concrescence). The result is a pre-metrical topologization of experience.

The ground of this initial move in inquiry, the hypothesis or “as if” character of inquiry, is the willingness to take the possible as prior to the actual—not in fact, but in our thinking. Coordinate divisibility is a presupposition of our thinking, not of our concrete existence, and genetic division is what provides us with the materials for coordinate division (logically, not ontologically), imaginative dissection along multiple planes of experience. We ignore the concrete unity of whatever is actual when we coordinately divide, but we already treated the actual entity as divisible when we entered upon the inquiry. As Whitehead says, “the region is, after all, divisible, although in the genetic growth it is undivided.”54 You can dissect the frog and you can actually divide organic spaces, but not while maintaining the organicity. It is often overlooked that perception and judgment have the same sort of organicity at a different level of generality. In short, meaning genuinely exists, but its type of presentational space doesn’t survive actual division into subjective and objective sides. Value accrues organically as well, although consideration of that topic would take us away from the problem of space (and extension).

One of the main points of interest in this complex relationship of genetic and coordinate analysis is the role played by possibility. Whitehead continues: “So this divisible [possibility] character of the [actually] undivided region is reflected into the character of the satisfaction.”55 In short, the fully realized part with which we ended our genetic account, the satisfied actual entity, is shot through with possibility already—not metaphysically, but because it was treated as a coordinately divisible extensum from the start. We don’t as yet know whether the possibility we find in the satisfied actual entity is a function of the inquiry or of the character of the actual entity in solidarity with its actual world. In other language, we don’t yet know whether it must be what it is or whether it simply appears to us as it does as a function of the conditions of inquiry. Thus, as we proceed into coordinate division itself, we must be careful how we understand the results of our efforts. As Whitehead says:

When we divide the satisfaction coordinately, we do not find feelings which are separate, but feelings which might be separate. In the same way, the divisions of the region [we presupposed at the outset of inquiry] are not divisions which are; they are divisions which might be. Each such mode of division of the extensive region yields ‘extensive quanta’: also an ‘extensive quantum’ can be termed a standpoint.56



What follows this passage is a rehearsal of a set of logical relations. For our purposes, enough has been said if we now grasp the priority of coordinate divisibility, the intervening task of genetic specification, and then our carrying-out-in-analysis of coordinate division itself. We wish to learn something about the relation of possibility to actuality, and we wish to find it not only presupposed but also exemplified in the most general way in our metaphysical descriptions. Only if the exemplification comes up to the level of what we presupposed—in adequacy, applicability, and logical rigor—will we have met the demands of our own inquiry. There must be a genetic description of possibility, as it enters into the actual entity’s transition and concrescence, providing a complete picture of the actual entity in solidarity with its actual world, the world it unifies and enriches.

What of this possibility? How can we get at it? Consider now the following from earlier in Process and Reality, while Whitehead is working his way toward a completed description of a satisfied actual entity: “The novel actual entity, which is the effect [of conformal feelings of the present to the past], is the reproduction of the many actual entities of the past. But in this reproduction there is abstraction from their various totalities of feeling.”57 That is, we take actual entities out of their own actual worlds and coordinate them as elements in the actual world of the actual entity we are analyzing into prehensions. He continues:

This abstraction is required by the categoreal conditions for compatible synthesis in the novel unity [in other words, the solidarity thesis]. This abstractive ‘objectification’ is rendered possible by reason of the ‘divisible’ character of the satisfactions of actual entities. By reason of this ‘divisible’ character causation is the transfer of a feeling, and not of a total satisfaction. The other feelings are dismissed by negative prehensions owing to their lack of compliance with categoreal demands.58



Negative prehension (the principal topic of the next chapter) in the sense mentioned here is the process by which an actual entity eliminates or dismisses (Whitehead uses both terms) those aspects of its actual world which it cannot possibly unify in its satisfaction. The actual entity is under a kind of compulsion here, but the limitations are logical, not ontological. These limits have to do not with what an actual entity is in its actual world, but rather with the presuppositions we have made in order to analyze an actual entity in its actual world, and to bring a genetic description to completion.

Furthermore, if the use of the terms “cause” and “effect” is confusing here, bear in mind that just one page earlier Whitehead said: “The reason why the cause is objectively in the effect is that the cause’s feeling cannot, as a feeling, be abstracted from its subject which is the cause. This passage of cause into effect is the cumulative character of time. The irreversibility of time depends on this character.”59 In other words, concretely speaking, we cannot prioritize actual relations in which we are interested in over the merely possible relations we are studying without denying time’s arrow.

More can be (and should be) said, but if we have adequately stressed the complexity of the relations between coordinate and genetic division—how each falsifies experience in an effort to model it, and then offers its resultant model as a clarified version of experience, adapted to purposes we choose—then enough will have been done for the present. Yet, we have come upon the issue of the elimination of those possibilities that cannot be brought into conformity with the subjective-objective categoreal demands of the actual entity. While it is true that these eliminations are logical rather than ontological, it is also crucial that we understand the logical function of the elimination of possibilities in order to grasp the full logic of the quantum of explanation. Hence, we move to a consideration of possibility in its determinate forms, both negative and constructive.
