8  The Problem of Possibility


The subjective form lies in the twilight zone between pure physical feeling and the clear consciousness which apprehends the contrast between physical and imagined possibility.

—Whitehead, Process and Reality (263)1



By “eternal objects,” Whitehead means possibilities. We will use the terms “possibility” and “eternal object” interchangeably (as indeed we have been doing up to this point), but we favor the term “possibility.” There are those among Whitehead’s interpreters who are misled by the name Whitehead chose for this category of entities. Some seem to think that Whitehead must be “naturalized,” and that eternal objects are somehow non-natural or even unnatural. The term “possibility” is much less confusing on this point. Anyone who wants to rid Whitehead’s philosophy of eternal objects is actually attempting to cut out the category of possibility. It is neither necessary nor possible to do that while preserving any semblance of the philosophy of organism. Taking possibility seriously is a requirement of all process philosophy.

We begin with Whitehead’s statement in Part III of Process and Reality that “all the actual entities [in the actual world of a prehending actual entity] are positively prehended, but only a selection of the eternal objects.”2 This statement may make it appear that in excluding some eternal objects, some possibilities, the actual entity renders them irrelevant to its subjective form, but that does not follow, and is emphatically wrong. Negative determination is a variety of relevance, especially when we are speaking of prehension. Just prior to the sentence quoted above, Whitehead has limited the entire theory of prehension to the genetic account of what he terms the “cell-theory of actuality,” while promising that the “morphological theory [of these cells] is considered in Part IV, under the title of the ‘extensive analysis’ of an actual entity.”3 One can see that prehension divides in analysis what, for Whitehead, cannot be divided in experience, as we have emphasized in the previous chapter.

Many Whitehead scholars have not given appropriate weight to the idea that Parts III and IV of Process and Reality are complementaries in the philosophy of organism. The theory of prehension genetically divides and specifies what will be treated morphologically in Part IV. This morphology is what we have been calling, and indeed, what Whitehead presupposed as his “coordinate” account. We emphasize that the genetic account presupposes the coordinate account, but the order of exposition may be different, as noted earlier. In fleshing out the idea of a morphology of the actual entity in its actual world, or what we call the quantum of explanation, Whitehead argues that the objective character of the actual entity is pragmatic, since this objective perspective allows the world of the actual entity to be plural and diverse just to the extent that this world remains a real potential for the concrescence of that actual entity—its real consequences. On the other side is a series of transformations that must maintain the formal (i.e., subjective) unity of that same actual entity. This is the aspect of temporal passage he calls concrescence. When we consider the objective and subjective perspectives of concrescence in its solidarity with its actual world, we have the actual entity as transition. That is a “standpoint.” It is all one process. Only when these objective and subjective requirements are considered together do we have a “standpoint.” A standpoint is definite only in light both of what it has incorporated and what it is has eliminated in its morphology so as to maintain solidarity with its actual world. Whitehead says:

The satisfaction of each actual entity is an element in the givenness of the universe: it limits boundless, abstract possibility into the particular real potentiality from which each novel concrescence originates. The open ‘boundless, abstract possibility,’ means the creativity considered solely in reference to the possibilities of the intervention of eternal objects and in abstraction from the objective intervention of actual entities belonging to any definite actual world, including God among the actualities abstracted from.4



We have italicized the term “definite” in this passage. The distinction between definite and determinate order has not been understood by Whitehead’s interpreters. We will explain it in detail below. For now simply note that the term used here is “definite.” We are abstracting from the actual world of any given actual entity in Part IV in order to consider boundless, abstract possibility. This is coordinate division. In other words, we really are dividing what is a solidarity in actuality so as to consider the possible in its relation to the actual, and not vice versa. But that is not what Whitehead is doing in Part III.

Why is the morphology of the actual entity, coordinately divided, in Part IV, not simply an example of misplaced concreteness? After all, we will be considering actual entities as if they could occupy a common space (not space in the physical sense, but in the logical sense, at least). Yet, Whitehead says this account of extension is about limits, in the logical sense, placed upon relations of inclusion and exclusion, and proceeding from a regionalization of standpoint, not from an ontological consideration of perspective, whether objective or subjective (i.e., together as concrescence). Limitation of possibilities as such (i.e., logical), then, requires us to consider the relation of the possible modes of order, and as mutually determining (not defining), without losing sight of their function as real potentials for some actual entity. We are not here required to say which actual entity we are considering because the theory of prehension has been completed at this point. We have the genetic account of the actual entity as concrescence in Part III. We are now in a position to consider actual entities as relational and not as atoms in Part IV, without risking fallacies of simple location or misplaced concreteness. We already know what sort of relational entity a prehension is, and we know how to find a prehension, in any actual world.5

In short, we sum the functions of Parts I-III and carry on, with our results confined to their proper places. We will not violate the principle of relativity by over-stressing atomicity, and we won’t violate the ontological principle by asserting ontological simultaneity of actual entities in Part IV, but that is because those categories have already done their work. What we are now interested in is how the structural features that have been demonstrated in Parts I-III can be used for purposes other than maintaining their own integrity and solidarity in genetic analysis. We now use the results to get at some features of extension that are pre-spatial. It was for just this purpose that the account in Parts I-III was set out, and it is not easy to explain why the genetic account reads as it does unless one realizes that the theory of extension was conceived and worked out ahead of the genetic account.6 The genetic account can be used for other purposes, but it will be distorted if pieces are removed from the coordinate analysis and thus, coordinate division for which they were constructed. There are many ways to detach the actual from the possible, but most lead down the wrong roads; this coordinate division of possible and actual is limited in ways that prevent our getting lost in our abstractions. The ideas in Parts I-III simply are not independent of that coordinate division. To treat the ideas as having a sufficiency independent of their coordinate analysis, to treat them as if they could be lifted from the philosophy of organism and employed in other service, is like thinking you could pull a heart out of an organism and all systems would go on functioning.

We do not, with the theory of extension, attempt to divide the extensive continuum; we now consider its parts in relation, both as determinate and as definite. All definite relations are determinate, but not all determinate relations are definite. Thus, we are not considering in Part IV the whole of Whitehead’s account of the actual entity. We are considering only the ways in which the actual entity “is exhibited as appropriating for the foundation of its own existence, the various elements of the universe out of which it arises.”7 Those elements are God, eternal objects, and the act of valuation that constitutes the actual entity as a definite existence. Therefore, “each process of appropriation of a particular element is termed a prehension.”8

A prehension is a genetic version of the universe from the standpoint of a given actual entity (not actual entities in general). We do not, when thinking about prehensions, consider anything like “actuality as such,” or “possibility as such.” The genetic account proceeds under the limitation that it shall be complemented by a morphological analysis of the actual entity in Part IV. The latter is of a very different character, but its function is to integrate feeling as felt (prehension, traced all the way through to final generic contrasts) along with and as conformable to the extensiveness of the determinate orders of nature, their law-like character, as required by our experience of nature. The aim in Process and Reality is to provide a full description of experience, not of nature, but where all finite experience, so far as we know, is experience of nature, clearly some account of nature in experience should accompany the description of the nature of experience, as felt. (See chapters 10 and 11.)

Here we see the importance of the idea that we feel all actual occasions in our actual world, but only a selection of the possibilities is felt, as we quoted above. It does not follow that the unfelt possibilities do not exist, or exist only in a Platonic realm of forms, as the caricature of Whitehead maintains. Such views trade in the obligation to account for the reality of determinate modes of order in our cosmic epoch for a crypto-determinism in which possibility has no role in limiting real potentiality. To dump the eternal objects is the same as reductionism, and many of the so-called naturalists are committed to the materialism Whitehead criticized in Science and the Modern World. That was not their intent, but eternal objects are indispensable to Whitehead’s cosmology, and they are not “Platonic forms” or “universals,” if by that one means that they are non-natural.

Regarding our experience of nature, we cannot say with any great assurance what definitely will happen, but we have a better hold on what is not going to happen, i.e., is excluded from possibility, by comparing the ways in which competing selections or constellations of determinate order exclude one another from the standpoint of a prehending actual entity. Our account must explain why some possibilities are felt and are not. How is the “felt selection” accounted for while the unselected possibilities are, genetically speaking, absent? And how can we situate unselected possibilities relative to the extensive continuum, as a part of extensive order? This is the “problem of possibility.” How can we understand the exclusion of some possibilities from feeling such that this exclusion may have a bearing on the order exhibited in our cosmic epoch?

We must venture a terminological innovation to supplement Whitehead, although we would rather not. We are contrasting the word “constellation” with “collection” in order to capture the distinction Whitehead articulates as follows, with our modifications in brackets:

In “presentational objectification” the relational eternal objects fall into two sets [we will not use the term “set” for obvious reasons; we use “clusters”], one set [cluster] contributed by the “extensive” perspective of the perceived from the position of the perceiver [which we call a constellation], and the other set [cluster] by the antecedent concrescent phases of the perceiver [which we call a collection].9



Considered as collections, possibilities will be just those included (ingressing); but an eliminated constellation is as absent as any reality can be in the actual world of an actual entity. It is unfelt. An eliminated constellation has no real potentiality ever after. (see chapter 9) The act of eliminating a constellation is experienced, however. Whitehead continues:

What is ordinarily termed “perception” is consciousness of presentational objectification. But according to the philosophy of organism there can be consciousness of both types of objectification [causal and presentational]. There can be such consciousness of both types because, according to this philosophy, the knowable is the complete nature of the knower, at least such phases of it as are antecedent to that operation of knowing.10



Whitehead has defined causal objectification as “what is felt subjectively by the objectified actual entity transmitted objectively to the concrescent actualities which supersede it…. In this type of objectification, the eternal objects, relational between object and subject, express the formal constitution of the objectified actual entity.”11 In short, the collections of possibilities belonging to the actual world of an actual entity, as a result of their contributions to the forms of all that is actual in that world, are subjectively felt causally, regardless of whether they are objectified presentationally. Whitehead’s sense of the term “perception” is unusual because he includes unpresented experience under the term. This is part of what distinguishes him from Kant and post-Kantian philosophy (making this an exercise in modern cosmology).

Thus, collections of possibilities can be experienced both causally and presentationally, while “mere” constellations (determinate modes of order, i.e., clusters, that are experienced in their extensive connectedness only) can be presented, and objectified thus, but have no causal efficacy. But to deny that these constellations are indeed knowable is to deny that “the knowable is the complete nature of the knower.” Thus cluster of presentational objectifications called “constellation(s)” is distinguished from the cluster that has both presentational and causal objectification, i.e., “collection(s).”





Possibility in Modern Cosmology


Leibniz’s struggles with possibility are well known, but the problem of possibility and its relation to necessity and eternity was general in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In re-connecting cosmology to these Modern roots (so as to avoid Kant’s transformation of the problem of space into the problem of the transcendental conditions governing the space of presentation [Vorstellung]), Whitehead is obliged to revisit this problem and to bring possibility under a new kind of scrutiny with new tools.12 Readers should not conclude prematurely that the idea of possibility was a monolithic problem for the Moderns. In fact, the problem was rich with nuance in the discussions of the best Modern thinkers.13 One thing that has crippled Whitehead scholarship is the erroneous notion that somehow Process and Reality belongs to the post-Kantian discussion in philosophy. But both cosmology and finally logic went off the rails after Kant. The Moderns were still working on the problem of the togetherness of the world, and still seeking a logic that would tie extension and intension into a single calculus or algebra.14 The moderns had something right, in Whitehead’s estimation.

Whitehead delved back into the foundational texts that treated the problems of space and time, both from the point of view of “natural philosophy” and from that of the most influential theories of perception (Descartes, Locke, Leibniz, Hume, Kant). He teased out of these texts the portions of those theories that would withstand scrutiny those who had learned the math, logic, and empirical studies of perception during the time elapsed since Hume’s Treatise. Especially important to these considerations were Leibniz’s recently published ideas. Whitehead’s readings of these figures are at first baffling to those of us who learned their thought as part of a narrative about rationalism and empiricism in the Enlightenment. He notices all sorts of passages that our interpretive tradition ignores He is a good reader, but Whitehead frequently also confesses to “reading in” the meanings he finds. His purpose is not to provide a pristine, historical account of the Modern figures. He wants them to join with him in tackling the same problems anew, with better tools.

The question we now confront is what must we do with the issue of possibility in light of how we might now (in 1929 and beyond) handle a reformulated cosmology. The major developments affecting our efforts to naturalize possibility have to do with advances in mathematical thinking, especially the implications of universal algebra as an idea, as a way of handling the ordering of possibilities as series of transformations, in short a morphology of the coordinate relations of parts and wholes (now called mereotopology, also recognizable as the general algebraic theory of Categories).

Leibniz planted within possibilities a striving or dynamis, a sort of longing to be actual, with final realization made actual under the sufficiency of reason and final sorting carried out according to a principle of the “best possible.” Whitehead made possibilities (eternal objects) relatively independent of actuality in the philosophy of organism, although he retained a teleological structure in his theory of concrescence and transition. He replaced the striving possibilities with an ultimate category of creativity, and a trinity of entities that are together exhaustive of actuality and possibility. The category of the Ultimate presupposes this triad of formative elements in the universe, actual entities, God, and possibilities. These formative elements achieve the purpose of the universe by mutual limitation, but the “striving” is God’s exclusive contribution, a purpose for the world, imparted to everything actual, but not to the possibilities, qua possible, which have no actuality but do exist. This latter is the distinction between existence and actuality of which Hartshorne later made so much (see chapters 12 and 13).

Leaving aside medieval universals here, clearly we do come hard up against the same problems when the metaphysical chores are differently parsed by Whitehead. The Moderns had several strategies for working their way out of that old discussion, but it wouldn’t be accurate to say that they solved the problems surrounding universals, real relation, individuals, and names. Much of what we will have to say in the final two chapters will depend upon how the medieval theories of universals are variously treated by the original thinkers of the twentieth century, and such discussions assume the appropriateness of Modern cosmology tacitly.

Here it will be sufficient to say that Whitehead is a conceptualist with respect to these issues, but of an unusual sort—he holds that universals exist as the conceptual feeling in everything actual. That is an original way to approach the issue, since it insists upon the ubiquity of the concept, but sees concepts as part of primary relations (the special meaning of the term “feeling” for Whitehead).15

Situating Whitehead in the Modern framework as a conceptualist focuses for us the issue of possibility. We might ask: what would Leibniz’s “striving possibles” look like if they didn’t strive? Would there still be order among them? Whitehead’s answer to that question is an emphatic affirmative. The order among possibilities qua possible allows for infinitely many modes of formal relatedness, and our imaginations fail when we press the question very far. But there is reason to think that the mathematical modes of order we are able to create have a positive relation to those infinitely diverse modes of mutually determining connection.16 The geometrical and the algebraic modes of order are the two most important, and they are not wholly commensurable. There is no point in imagining that there is only one master mathematics, the mathesis universalis Descartes sought, or the elusive universal characteristic of Leibniz, but make no mistake: the quantum of explanation, i.e., the idea of the actual entity, plays an analogous role in Whitehead’s philosophy.

This is a mathematical philosophy, but mathematical order never has been and never will be reduced to a single principle. The problem of the One and the Many is solved only by learning to live with the sense of both the Parmenidean and the Heraclitean insights into being as process. The many become one and are increased by one. The question is not how this category of the Ultimate constitutes order, but rather what modes of order does it presuppose and how are those modes best described?

In hitting upon the idea of extension, Descartes separated the problem of internal dynamis, or concrescence, from the problem of the order of possibility. Descartes did not know he had accomplished this.17 There was still an effort in his thinking to make mathematical order the sole explanation of the order of nature. In the twentieth century it became clear that there was no such thing as a univocal order in mathematics, let alone in nature. There were hints earlier—Hamilton’s quaternions, the development of non-Euclidean geometries, and so on. But the real lessons of these developments were not driven home until the final failure of univocity, as manifested in the Principia Mathematica, became indisputable. Subsequent interpreters have focused on our failure to reconcile the mathematical order, which seems shot through with genuine possibility, with the mechanical order to which mathematics must be subordinated in the act of measuring. This problem is, if anything, worse for Newton.18 Whitehead says:

[T]he classical theory also assumed … that any actual occasion only lies in one duration; so that if N lies in the duration including M’s immediate present, then M lies in the duration including N’s immediate present. The philosophy of organism, in agreement with recent physics, rejects this … though it holds that such rejection is based on scientific examination of our cosmic epoch and not on any more general metaphysical principle.19



Here we see why the measurement problem in twentieth-century cosmology was so crippling. The growing significance of the idea of a “cosmic epoch” is becoming clear in the passage above, more of which shortly. But the Modern insight that extension is the essence of body, if it is not conflated with the meaning and existence of physical space, becomes the central insight in Whitehead’s cosmology. In a very real sense both Spinoza and Leibniz recognized, in different ways, how this move to extension liberated mathematics from being nothing more than a tool for measuring physical objects in relation. Mathematical thinking allows human imagination to approach the question of order in a more general, nay, universal way (in the sense of “universal” in which it is used in “universal algebra,” having to do with the coordinate whole presupposed by a genetic description).

But what, then, are we studying when we are considering mathematical modes of order? The answer is simple. We are considering formal possibilities as modes of determinate order in abstraction from merely physical laws (in the sense that seventeenth-century philosophers thought of this—limitations from which twenty-first-century physicists and metaphysicians are scarcely immune; see chapter 10). But how can that study be carried out by creatures (this word is chosen deliberately) who cannot genuinely remove from their thinking the assumption of a physical world the reality of which conditions every act of thinking about the possible?20 The answer Whitehead gives is that in the idea of extension, undivided divisibility, we have a whole to which all the possibilities, including unrealized possibilities, belong, under the condition that we not speak of cosmic epochs beyond our own, except conjecturally.

Whatever possibility as such may be, possibility as it belongs to our own cosmic epoch, even though it is wholly non-actual, is describable according to principles of inclusion, exclusion, and selection so long as something is actual. We will take up the relation between actuality such as it belongs to the divine (as distinct from the finite creature) in the final chapters. For now it is enough to consider the idea of the cosmic epoch as a way of designating the whole to which eternal objects, that is, the possibilities that belong to our cosmic epoch, can be described using the mathematical tools we currently possess (especially genetic and coordinate analysis, or mereotopology).





Cosmic Epochs and Natural Philosophy


The idea of the cosmic epoch as an empirical limit is one of the most important and least discussed ideas in Whitehead’s philosophy. The modifier “cosmic,” apart from its etymological nod to the idea of order, is a significant marker regarding the limits of the inquiry Whitehead is pursuing in Process and Reality, an essay in cosmology. The subtitle of the book intentionally limits this book to what was called “natural philosophy” during the modern period. That form of study, in which the theories of the natural universe and the theory of the measurement of the natural universe were still in reciprocal conversation, has passed away. Pursuant to Newton’s discoveries, physical science gradually eschewed all ideas about causality except efficient cause and reduced its sphere of concern to the quantifiable modes of measure. This is to say that “natural philosophy” no longer existed by the time Whitehead wrote Process and Reality.21

Today we distinguish cosmology as it is pursued by astrophysicists from metaphysics as a subdivision of philosophy, an a prioristic pastime of philosophers with no serious effort to hold its assumptions within the boundaries of nature as humans experience it.22 Philosophical naturalism in the present day tends to be an uncritical and uncriticized starting place for philosophizing,23 where the main thing we know is that there certainly isn’t a God, and the investigation of possibility belongs exclusively to wackiest philosophers.24 This futile exercise includes a realism/anti-realism debate, which is a cartoon re-enactment of the Medieval problem of universals, now carried out by the intellectual peers of Elmer Fudd (realist) and Bugs Bunny (anti-realist) instead of true giants of human thought like Aquinas and Duns Scotus. If this cartoon is philosophical naturalism, then it needs a better concept of nature, one that cannot be so easily and completely discredited by the likes Richard Rorty (Daffy Duck?), who did little more than to make some hasenpfeffer.

We take up philosophical naturalism in detail later. Presently, we say again that Whitehead’s naturalism is radically empirical. He understands very well that anyone’s current concept of nature is surely inadequate to comprise nature in any determinate way, and is in fact (whether we are conscious of it or not) a kind of metaphor we use in the present, and which we replace in the future with an improved one, to express the outer bounds of our experience as it is had. And Whitehead is very clear that there is “no reason to identify it [Nature] with the boundless totality of actual things”—a mistake made by many interpreters.25 If we are to have a genuine cosmology, that is, if we are to return to natural philosophy, there must be some determinate idea of the whole to which both the actual and the possible belong, and yet, the act of specifying any determinate whole will occlude at least some aspects of experience unless its boundary is intellectually permeable. But “Nature suggests for our observation gaps, and then as it were withdraws them upon challenge.”26 Thus, we cannot make unqualified assertions about that “boundless totality of actual things.” There must be a whole, but it is not to be identified with actuality as such. This idea of the whole to which our experience belongs is the cosmic epoch. It includes a concept of nature of precisely the sort Whitehead sets out in his book of that name, but the concept of nature presupposes that we aim to have a scientific understanding of the physical universe qua physical (see chapter 9).

Thus, in the cosmic epoch we have an idea of the whole to which the actual and the possible belong, but we are not entitled to assume either that we will not have to revise the description of the “idea” we may offer at any given time, or that our imagined determinate whole is to be identified with the universe itself (whatever that may be). Hence, when introducing the idea of a cosmic epoch and providing an initial sense of it, Whitehead is careful to make us aware that the cosmic epoch in which our percipient actual entity temporally divides the extensive continuum, that is, our cosmic epoch, is not the only cosmic epoch. We have interpolated in the famous passage below reminders of the topic sentence of the paragraph, which considers only the physical universe. If this seems adventitious now, please withhold judgment until the end of this section, when we will have justified our emphasis upon the physical limitation presupposed by the entire paragraph. Whitehead says:

[T]he extensive continuity of the physical universe has usually been construed to mean that there is a continuity of becoming. But if we admit that ‘something becomes,’ [in the physical sense,] it is easy, by employing Zeno’s method, to prove that there can be no continuity of becoming. [Where we are speaking exclusively of the way that actual entities, considered physically rather than logically, divide the extensive continuum t]here is a becoming of continuity, but no continuity of becoming. [Under those assumptions, t]he actual occasions are the creatures which become, and [to that same extent, in the physical sense only] they constitute a continuously extensive world. In other words, [physically speaking,] extensiveness becomes, but ‘becoming’ is not itself extensive.27



Whitehead never asserts that the physical universe is the whole universe. He explicitly denies that, and those who read the paragraph above in forgetfulness of the topic sentence are misled as to the character of Whitehead’s naturalism, which includes a mental pole (and that means possibilities as well as actualities and potentialities). The paragraph above considers the physical pole in abstraction from the mental pole, and hence, refers to the causal and mechanistic order only. The “possible” (eternal objects) and God, the other categories of existence that are irreducible in the philosophy of organism, are not here under consideration. That helps us understand what follows: “Thus, the ultimate metaphysical truth is atomism.” Recall, “a-tomos” means undivided. This is the assertion of the quantum of explanation, not just in the physical but also in the metaphysical sense. The temporalization of the cosmic epoch is the act of the actual entity; it divides, and it does so physically. The logical status of that act is another question. The physical aspect of the act cannot be reduced to a logical or mathematical relation, and, incidentally, it also cannot be measured exhaustively, since all acts of measurement presuppose it. No act is exclusively physical, but every act is irreducibly at least physical. Whitehead is a realist, not an idealist.28 He continues:

The creatures are atomic [i.e., undivided]. In the present cosmic epoch there is a creation of continuity. Perhaps such creation is an ultimate metaphysical truth holding of all cosmic epochs, but this does not seem to be a necessary conclusion. The more likely opinion is that extensive continuity is a special condition arising from the society of creatures which constitute our immediate epoch.29



Note, Whitehead is speaking of extensive continuity as a characteristic of a-tomism, i.e., undividedness. If the “temporal atomism” asserted by Ford and his followers were an ultimate metaphysical principle for Whitehead, it is very hard to understand why he would say “perhaps” here. Even more mysterious is the question of why he would follow it with the conjecture that the view of extensive continuity (not to be confused with extensive connection) he has just mentioned is probably a function of the way the universe is presenting itself to us now. In other words, there is society of actual entities that constitutes our immediate epoch—i.e., not the whole cosmic epoch, but the way in which the causal order is operating now, in the form of natural laws which condition our experience of the cosmic epoch, and oblige us to adopt a quantum principle to explain it. The order of nature can change even within our cosmic epoch, but it would be difficult to learn about it from the standpoint of the immediate epoch. As Sherburne rightly says, “one interesting implication of this [cosmic epochs] doctrine is that Whitehead holds that the laws of nature evolve.”30

Hence, the quantum of explanation, that is, the idea of the actual entity, is the universal characteristic for our cosmology, as a type of study, but we are not entitled to assume it would be of any use in other cosmic epoch(s), although we are also in no position to deny that it might be. Perhaps in every cosmic epoch worthy of the name, there will be a divider or extensive continuity that we might call “the act,” or the “quantum of explanation,” but what is far more likely is that our tendency to think that way is a function of the immediate order of creatures within which we presently find ourselves. We therefore need this “quantum,” understood as irreducibly physical (even if its mode of existing is more than just physical).





Determinate Wholes and Local Quanta


Why? The very next thing Whitehead says is: “The proper balance between atomism and continuity is of importance to physical science. For example, the doctrine, here explained, conciliates Newton’s corpuscular theory of light with the wave theory.”31 This is an astonishing claim: Wave-particle duality overcome in the quantum of explanation? Yes. Also overcome is the measurement problem of cosmology, along with the paradoxes associated with General Relativity and the need for any kind of universal constant to find a grand unified theory of the physical universe.32 Whitehead’s theory of cosmic epochs, taken in conjunction with the quantum of explanation, or the theory of the actual entity, as it were, dissolves these issues. It really does.33 Therefore, one cannot exaggerate the importance of the theory of cosmic epochs, as the determinate whole to which cosmology, i.e., natural philosophy, belongs.

What, then, is this determinate whole with which natural philosophy is concerned? In attempting to interpret the passages we have just examined, we think Sherburne understates it. He says that “the notion of our cosmic epoch is the notion of a vast society establishing relations that are admittedly not universal, not perfectly general.”34 The cosmic epoch is not a mere “notion” for Whitehead, it is a limit idea that plays a tremendously important role both logically and scientifically (empirically) in his cosmology. The cosmic epoch is the fact of the possibility of a frame in which intelligibility genuinely occurs. Sherburne is also confusing Whitehead’s conjecture of the way the immediate epoch is probably conditioning our sense of the whole (and leading us to suppose that the act of the actual entity is metaphysically necessary), with the fact it merely seems so from the vantage of our immediate epoch. Sherburne says that the cosmic epoch “establishes” relations, which is a confusion of the extensive continuum with the cosmic epoch; it is the extensive relations which establish the cosmic epoch, not vice-versa.35

Returning to the claim Whitehead makes for reviving natural philosophy, that “for example” it solves the wave-particle paradox, we should follow that example through to the end. Then we may appreciate the kind of determinate whole that this idea (not notion) of the cosmic epoch portends. Whitehead continues:

A corpuscle is in fact an ‘enduring object.’ The notion of an enduring object [and this is a “notion”] is, however, capable of more or less completeness of realization. Thus, in different stages of its career, a wave of light may be more or less corpuscular.36



This example would be utter nonsense unless there were a difference between the immediate epoch, including the ways it appears to be law-like as experienced by us, on one side, and the determinate order of our cosmic epoch as a whole, on the other side. Apart from comprising a larger temporal span than any single enduring object, our immediate epoch also includes the order of what is possible and non-actual (eternal objects), and what is actual and non-temporal (God). In short, the cosmic epoch has a mental pole, and natural philosophy must consider it in order to have any complete contrast of what is actual in experience with what is possible and non-actual. Thus, the elimination of possibilities in prehension (that is, negative prehension) does not render them merely subsistent, or merely ideal, or in any other way less than fully real.37

We can now make sense of the following:

The arbitrary, as it were ‘given,’ elements in the laws of nature warn us that we are in a special cosmic epoch. Here the phrase ‘cosmic epoch’ is used to mean that widest society of actual entities whose immediate relevance to ourselves is traceable. This epoch is characterized by electronic and protonic actual entities, and by yet more ultimate actual entities which can be dimly discerned in the quanta of energy.38



Here we find the same contrast of the immediate epoch with the cosmic epoch, but the former is traceable in the latter, by way of the quantum of explanation, those yet “more ultimate actual entities” which need not be electronic and protonic exclusively, although we expect them to be physical in some sense, since they do belong to the determinate order of our cosmic epoch. Whitehead calls the laws of nature “arbitrary” givens because our access to the ultimate actual entities that divide the extensive continuum in our cosmic epoch is mediated by these laws, as well as by the categories that limit us to the consideration of one actual entity in its actual world, except and until we abstract from that limit (with the associated costs of rendering our account partial and to the same extent, literally false). The laws are real, but they can change, entirely within the determinate order of our cosmic epoch. Thus, to seek the ultimate physical laws of the universe in physics is a patent waste of time, since whatever we say will reflect some arbitrariness drawn from the ways in which those patterns of order are manifest to us in our immediate epoch, which is only a part of our cosmic epoch. The proper study of natural philosophy presupposes a determinate order that contains our immediate epoch, and every other immediate epoch (those beyond our experiential reach), in our cosmic epoch.

Whitehead could not have known that we would find evidence of the ground-level development of the electronic and protonic order in our subsequent study of the development of the physical world, but surely he would have objected to the claim that the Big Bang was the beginning of our cosmic epoch; at most it was the physical beginning of our immediate epoch, and if its laws appear necessary, given the protonic and electronic physical character of actual occasions, then we must be careful not to assume that there is no arbitrariness implied in the way we are situated within the cosmic epoch as a whole. To deny the arbitrariness in our standpoint is to see contingency as necessity. Exaggerating the Big Bang is a model-centric habit of the literal minded among contemporary physicists (see chapter 10 and our Introduction). We are confident that the physical character of the actual occasions in our immediate epoch is at least partly arbitrary, as a bit of cosmology, even if not as a bit of physics, because it is reasonable to think that physical laws evolve within our cosmic epoch. Cosmology presupposes a whole to which the immediate epoch belongs, and relative to which the immediate epoch exemplifies a stage in the career of that cosmic epoch. We are not entitled to suppose that the career path the cosmic epoch has followed up to our standpoint is the only one possible, given the way that the more ultimate actual entities, traceable by us when we aren’t too literal minded, divide it.

This idea of the cosmic epoch, apart from nicely restoring the study of natural philosophy to our discipline, and holding physicists within the honest bounds of their special science, is the coordinate whole that is analyzed into, but not actually divided by, prehensions. The theory of prehensions gives us access to the determinate order of our cosmic epoch beyond the limits (and ameliorating the arbitrariness) of the physical laws which dominate the immediate epoch. The theory of prehension is the tracing of what is presented in a standpoint through to the “more ultimate actual entities” suggested by our limited experience. Understanding, therefore, what it means for a constellation of possibilities to be negatively prehended requires that we grasp how prehension, or fundamental feeling, relation, etc., is comprised by the cosmic epoch. Thus, we see what is, as it were, interior to our cosmic epoch. But what of its limits, or boundaries, or what is beyond our cosmic epoch?

Whitehead is quite tentative whenever this question arises, but he does say some things that help us understand the outer limits of the whole to which our determinate order belongs. In his discussion of genetic and coordinate divisibility in Part IV (and hence, the context is the theory of extension, which aspires to be universal for all cosmic epochs, even if only conjecturally), he says:

[W]hen we examine the characteristics considered in the next chapter [(Part IV ch. II], it is difficult to draw the line distinguishing characteristics so general that we cannot conceive of any alternatives, from characteristics so special that we imagine them to belong merely to our cosmic epoch. Such an epoch may be, relatively to our powers, of immeasurable extent, temporally and spatially. But in reference to the ultimate nature of things, it is a limited nexus. Beyond that nexus, entities with new relationships, unrealized in our experiences and unforeseen by our imaginations, will make their appearance, introducing into the universe new types of order.39



The “universe,” here, includes all cosmic epochs, not “merely” ours. Within our cosmic epoch, it is easy (for Whitehead) to imagine that the photon is a coagulation in the career of a wave, seeming necessary to us in its collapse only due to conditions that are transient characteristics of our immediate epoch. The immediate epoch will be called our “environment” in Whitehead’s terms, when we consider it in light of the idea of “relevance,” which we will take up shortly. But there is something beyond the nexus which is our cosmic epoch. Whitehead continues:

But, for our epoch, extensive connection with its various characteristics is the fundamental organic relationship whereby the physical world is properly described as a community. There are no important physical relationships outside the extensive scheme. To be an actual occasion in the physical world means that the entity in question is a relatum in this scheme of extensive connection. In this epoch, the scheme defines what is physically actual.40



This passage renders “temporal atomicity” a nonsensical idea. To exist physically in our cosmic epoch is to exist within the extensive scheme. There are no important physical relationships beyond it. In fact, the scheme defines (not just determines) what is physically actual. Our emphasis on the term “physical” at the beginning of this section may have seemed forced, but please consider those interpolations in light of what Whitehead says here. He is speaking of the physical world in relation to the extensive scheme of this cosmic epoch, but as a piece of natural philosophy and not of “physics” as we understand it today. The prehensive analysis of the actual entity is designed to exhibit characters of the actual entity’s relation to the extensive scheme in such a way as to leave intact its full physical reality, but without insisting that the physical character is the existential ground for all order. The reason for this qualification is that we cannot be certain that the most general characters of the physical order as we experience it are even remotely necessitated by the order of the universe, or even by the determinate order of our own cosmic epoch. This is a strategy for preserving a full-bodied realism while avoiding adventitious reductionism. It is also radical empiricism, bent upon preserving relations that are experienced along with relations that might be experienced.

The extensive scheme relative to the determinate physical order of our cosmic epoch yields a total collection of (algebraic, i.e., coordinate and genetic) relations, and that collection is axiomatized as a kind of geometry in Part IV of Process and Reality. Such an approach is motivated, for Whitehead, by an interpretation of Maxwell’s electromagnetism theory:

The whole theory of the physical field [i.e., Maxwell] is the interweaving of the individual peculiarities of actual occasions upon the background of systematic geometry. This systematic geometry expresses the most ‘substantial form’ inherited throughout the vast cosmic society that constitutes the primary real potentiality conditioning concrescence. In this doctrine, the organic philosophy is very near to the philosophy of Descartes.41



The last sentence seems shocking unless one has properly understood the sense of “Modern cosmology” involved in this inquiry. What if Descartes had known about Maxwell’s field equations? What would he have said about “substantial forms” in relation to his theory of extension? The question of substantial form is generally ignored by readers of Descartes, assumed to be a part of his medieval hangover, while the theory of extension is too quickly conflated with the theory of “bodies in space.” But Whitehead simply read Descartes on his own and noticed what is so easy to overlook. Whitehead wouldn’t have been aware of the standard lines on Descartes, and such a person, simply reading Descartes, and looking at Maxwell’s field equations could say “hmmm, Descartes almost had this.” Whitehead says:

For Descartes the primary attribute of physical bodies is extension; for the philosophy of organism, the primary relationship of physical occasions is extensive connection. This ultimate relationship is sui generis, and cannot be defined or explained. But its formal properties can be stated. [Maxwell is part of that.] Also, in view of these formal properties, there are definable derivative notions which are of importance in expressing the morphological structure. [These are given in Part IV.] Some general character of coordinate divisibility is probably an ultimate metaphysical character, persistent in every cosmic epoch of physical occasions. Thus some of the simpler characteristics of extensive connection, as here stated, are probably such ultimate metaphysical necessities.42



Here the theory of extension does strive to be universal, i.e., to apply to all cosmic epochs. Substantial form, as Descartes understood it, now means for Whitehead an ultimate metaphysical character (probably) necessary in every cosmic epoch, which is exactly what both Descartes and the medievals were seeking. The physical aspect would be a part of that, but not as an attribute, which could hardly be the explanation of the whole in any case. Now the physical is a relation primary to extensive connection. Descartes and his peers would not have imagined that this physical aspect of reality could be described in the equations of the electromagnetic field, nor axiomatized in a non-metrical theory of extensive connection, but that does not mean Descartes and his successors (e.g., Leibniz) had no notion of the physical character of what they were doing. Many examples could be given, but one should suffice. Wolfgang Smith says:

As is well known, it was René Descartes who provided the philosophical basis of “classical” or pre-quantum physics by enunciating the distinction between res cogitans and res extensa. One generally perceives this Cartesian dichotomy as nothing more than the mind/body duality, forgetting that Descartes has not only distinguished between matter and mind, but has, at the same time, imposed a very peculiar and problematic conception on the former element. He supposes, namely, that res extensa is bereft of all sensible qualities, which obviously implies that it is imperceptible. The red apple which we do perceive must consequently be relegated to res cogitans; it has become a private phantasm, a mental as distinguished from a real entity. This postulate, moreover, demands another: one is now forced—on pain of radical subjectivism—to assume that the red apple is causally related to the real apple, which, however, is not perceptible. What from a pre-Cartesian perspective was one object has become two; as Whitehead puts it: “One is the conjecture, and the other is the dream.”43



Smith calls this the “bifurcation postulate,” and then says:

What vitiates the customary interpretation of physics and prevents that science from being ‘integrated with higher orders of knowledge’ is none other than the bifurcation postulate. This is the one hidden premise one unfailingly assumes in the explication of a scientific discovery. It is true that this postulate has been uncovered and attacked by some of the leading philosophers of our [20th] century—from Edmund Husserl to Alfred North Whitehead, Nicolai Hartmann, and Karl Jaspers, to mention a few names—and yet that problematic tenet remains to this day unexamined and unopposed by men of science even in the sophisticated arena of the quantum debate, where just about everything has been “put on the table.” However … the premise can indeed be jettisoned, which is to say that nothing prevents us from interpreting physics on a non-bifurcationist basis.44



Smith then argues convincingly that everything relevant to the idea of a physical quantum relation, of the sort currently studied and theorized in quantum mechanics and electrodynamics, was already clearly set out in the physical philosophy of Aquinas, in his idea of the signata quantitate, that mode of existence through which every perceptible entity passes, leaving its trace or signature at just the point where it becomes measurable. If this sounds vaguely like the collapse of the wave function, it is, at the level of ideas about physical reality, about the same thing. Smith says:

I have conceived of the signata quantitate, in light of contemporary physics as a mathematical structure; but is this exactly what St. Thomas Aquinas had in mind? Whatever the Angelic Doctor may have been thinking, it could hardly have been Hilbert spaces and Lie groups of Hermitian operators with which contemporary physics is concerned. I must not, however, judge too hastily…. The crucial question is whether these mathematical structures are yet “quantitative” in an appropriate sense; and if that be the case, then the signata quantitate admits—by transposition if need be—the interpretation I have given.45



Smith is not a religious Thomist, he is physicist and mathematician who happens to know more about the history of his discipline than is common. Expressing such views is more than enough to get a person blackballed from the elite clubs of the “respectable physicists,” the ones wedded to the Cartesian paradox, their beloved bifurcation, which they are inclined to whip out whenever the public wants them to philosophize—something they are untrained to do, but fortunately for them, the public is unable to tell the difference between snake oil and an actual snake. To use a bifurcation as the foundation of a pure dogma about the progress of science is a shameful way for scientists to behave, as Whitehead made pretty clear in Science and the Modern World.

It makes no difference to us whether Smith has Aquinas right in this matter, only that he rightly identifies a trajectory and momentum to classical physics based on a problem with Descartes which, when corrected, provides a Modern cosmology of our cosmic epoch based on demystified extensive relations. It is amazing how much of ancient and medieval cosmology comes back into consideration when Descartes’ bifurcation has been set aside and the problem of cosmology restated. It inspires one to see the human effort to know the natural world characterized as a common project, not a series of revolutions in which the history of science is one of silly errors, caught and corrected by later inquirers who simply make different, but equally crippling errors.

Whitehead saw the problem very clearly, his interpreters seem not to grasp that solving it is what Process and Reality is actually about. His other books are about other problems. The reason that Process and Reality is his most important book is because this problem of bifurcation is the most crippling problem we currently have (unfortunately we still have it) in our quest to understand our universe. It is also important because his proposed solution, the quantum of explanation in the orientation of radical empiricism, is the best solution anyone has yet imagined and expounded. In light of Whitehead’s solution, we are in a position now to assess the progress made in physical science as a result of our improvements in mathematics, technology, and logic since Kant. The improvements in tools for study have been stunning, but our philosophical command of our own advances remains stunted, given that the medievals and the ancients could better articulate than we can how the world, in the largest sense of the word, hangs together, in the largest sense of the word. We have more pieces, but they had a better grasp of the whole. They were not distracted by a concept of the physical that pointed them to philosophical dead ends.

The fact that it has not usually occurred to Whitehead’s interpreters to ask themselves why he speaks of cosmic epochs is partly his fault, for over-estimating his readers, and for taking it as obvious that anyone who studies these problems seriously would at least learn the basic history of the debate before pronouncing Whitehead right or wrong. He also naïvely believed that people would take him at his word when he stated plainly what he was and was not doing.

But the responsibility lies only partly with Whitehead. Students of the sociology of knowledge have well documented the processes by which succeeding generations of inquirers come to be habituated into taking as beyond questioning matters that were merely suggestions when first made. Today’s practice of cosmology is the normal science of yesterday’s conjecture. The configurations of today’s problems have been built upon the presuppositions and expectations of an ossifying tradition. Whitehead stepped outside of that stream. Many people recognized he was saying something important, even if they couldn’t say what it was.

The theory of cosmic epochs in Process and Reality provides the backdrop for a new interpretation of the relation of the physical world with all the real modes of existence that cannot be reduced to (or accounted for within) any current concept of the physical, given the limitations of our immediate epoch. The failure of interpreters to grasp the theory of cosmic epochs also accounts for the inability to understand Whitehead’s use of the term “quantum” in Process and Reality. Whitehead says:

This section [Part III, ch. 2, Section 1] on simple physical feelings lays the foundation of the treatment of cosmology in the philosophy of organism. It contains the discussion of the ultimate elements from which a more complete philosophical discussion of the physical world—that is to say, of nature—must be derived. In the first place an endeavor has been made to do justice alike to the aspect of the world emphasized by Descartes and to the atomism of the modern quantum theory. Descartes saw the natural world as an extensive spatial plenum, enduring through time. Modern physicists see energy transferred in definite quanta.46



Whitehead wouldn’t give equal weight to the contemporary quantum physics and to the Cartesian plenum if he were a “temporal atomist” (see chapter 4). But note the way that the philosophy of the physical is at the root of the analysis.47 This is about the quantum principle, not about quantum physics. The same distinction applies to the difference between the principle of relativity and its application in Einstein’s general relativity theory, wherein the principle was empirically discovered (although it had been theorized for a long time). Whether the quantum principle would apply to other cosmic epochs than our own is uncertain. Whitehead said, cited earlier, that “we may assume there is a lower limit within [a finite] region [of the extensive continuum]…. it follows that the relevant objectifications, forming the relevant data for any one occasion, refer to a finite sample of actual occasions in the environment.”48 That “lower limit” may apply to other cosmic epochs, but its role in physical occasions is the only thing Whitehead feels secure about.

It should be clear now why Whitehead sees his view in the Modern context, and what he intends to do in providing it with a systematic geometry in Part IV. By systematic geometry, Whitehead means universal algebra—his “geometry” is an algebraized geometry, and it is a kind of solution to the problem of physical space as conditioned by the theory of cosmic epochs.





Definite Order and Determinate Order


The forgoing account of cosmic epochs casts our categoreal “entities” in a clearer light. The entities that stand out with an “extreme finality,” i.e., actual entities and eternal objects, become the indispensable tools for interpreting our cosmic epoch, and any cosmic epoch we can conceive. The other categoreal entities, prehensions, nexūs, subjective forms, propositions, multiplicities, generic contrasts, “have a certain intermediate character.”49 They assist us in the interpretation of our cosmic epoch, but only as particular (“certain”) paths from the center (a percipient actual occasion) to the periphery (all that is possible in a cosmic epoch from that standpoint), called concrescence, and from the periphery to the center, all that becomes actual in a cosmic epoch, called transition. The actual entity, considered as concrescence and transition, is concrete and provides us with what we know of the “definite order” of the actual world. This definite order does not exhaust order as such, since it belongs to the topic of cosmology, but it must serve as the clue to all other modes of order. (When one speaks of order as such, cosmology is but one of the topics one needs to address.) This insight of Whitehead’s is a great advance in philosophy.

As Whitehead says, “the group of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philosophers practically made a discovery, which, although it lies on the surface of their writings, they only half-realized.” He continues:

The discovery is that there are two kinds of fluency. One kind is the concrescence which, in Locke’s language, is ‘the real internal constitution of a particular existent.’ The other kind is the transition from particular existent to particular existent. This transition, again in Locke’s language, is the ‘perpetually perishing’ which is one aspect of the notion of time; and in another aspect the transition is the origination of the present in conformity with the ‘power’ of the past.50



What the Moderns discovered but did not quite grasp was that the relationship between possibility and actuality was describable in two fluencies—we prefer the terms internal dynamis (concrescence in the microcosmic order) and external dynamis (macroscopic transition), but the names we may choose matter very little. What matters is that concrescence and transition provide us with two different orders of actual-possible relations. The difference is that the concrescing actual entity, while it bears a real relation to everything in its actual world, objectifies only a finite sample of the occasions (in its region) in its satisfaction, and hence, not everything possible for it becomes a part of its achievement, only one collection of possibilities is included. The entire physical world has been positively prehended but only a sample of that world is objectified. The outcome of concrescence is a definite actuality. In a very real sense, all that was physically possible for that concrescence has been actualized, which is to say that no ingressing eternal objects that played a part in the constitution of the actual world of that actual entity have failed to find objectification from the combined subjective and objective perspectives in the standpoint of the actual occasion. Elimination (or dismissal) has done its physical work, but this kind of elimination functions on a scale of relevance. We will discuss this in the next section (on concrescence).

Alternatively, the transition that is the origination of a given actual entity has a quite different relationship to possibility (eternal objects).51 From this aspect of the process, the actual entity is not all it could have been because infinitely many determinate constellations of eternal objects might have ingressed, but only a selection of eternal objects, one collection, is exemplified in the achievement of the actual occasion. Those unselected possibilities are as real as the selected collection, and both the selected collection and the unselected constellations are utterly indifferent to actuality. Here is a non-causal, non-local, and indeed non-physical theory of possibility, characterized by what Whitehead calls “determinate order.” To get a handle on determinate order, we must look at definite order. Whitehead says:

The ‘objective lure’ [as distinguished from the ‘lure for feeling’] is that discrimination among eternal objects introduced into the universe by the real internal constitutions of the actual occasions forming the datum of the concrescence under review [i.e., this is its originating principal actual entity in its actual world as transition, but as dependent on prior concrescence]. This discrimination also involves eternal objects excluded from value in the temporal occasions of that datum, in addition to involving eternal objects included for such occasions.52



The relationship between dismissed physical occasions and unselected eternal objects is complicated.53 In a sense the unselected possibilities that contribute negatively to the achievements of the actual occasions in the actual world of the actual entity “under review” will also be unselected by the latter. They are not possibilities for the entity under review, not because they aren’t real, but because their unselected status in the origination of the entity under review, as a characteristic of its transition, is a fact of its actual world. Whitehead follows the passage quoted above with a telling example, in which Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo has become a factor in the constitution of our actual world. “But the abstract notions, expressing the possibilities of another course of history which would have followed upon his victory, are relevant to facts which actually happened.” This is the structure of determinate order and a statement of its relevance to definite actualities. Whitehead continues:

We may not think it of practical importance that imaginative historians should dwell upon hypothetical alternatives. But we confess their relevance in thinking about them at all, even to the extent of dismissing them…. Thus, in our actual world of today, there is the penumbra of eternal objects, constituted by relevance to the Battle of Waterloo…. The elements of this penumbra are propositional prehensions, and not pure conceptual prehension…. Thus an element in the penumbral complex is what is termed a ‘proposition.’ A proposition is a new kind of entity. It is a hybrid between pure potentialities [i.e., possibilities qua possible] and actualities. A ‘singular’ proposition is the potentiality of an actual world including a definite set of actual entities in a nexus of reactions involving the hypothetical ingression of a definite set of eternal objects.54



The reason these eternal objects are described as “definite” (as opposed to “determinate”) in our actual world is due to their status as being conditioned by their relation to actuality. The might-have-been, insofar as we can think about it or have emotions relating to it, is conditioned by actuality. We experience the lure of possibility in the actual world in that modality, as propositions. This is the mark of definite order, and the logic of this kind of order is our best clue to learning about the kinds of order that characterize eternal objects as such (possibility qua possible, in abstraction from actuality). The logic of definite order is a theory of inclusion, but without “membership,” and hence a mereology rather than a set theory with primitive membership. Whitehead says:

A ‘general’ proposition differs from a ‘singular’ proposition by the generalization of ‘one definite set of actual entities’ into ‘any set belonging to a certain sort of sets.’ If the sort of sets includes all sets with potentiality for that nexus of reactions, the proposition is called ‘universal.’ … The definite set of actual entities involved [in a singular proposition, and, with slight elaboration, general and universal propositions also] are called the ‘logical subjects’ of the proposition; the definite set of eternal objects involved are called the ‘predicates of the proposition.’ The predicates define a potentiality of relatedness for the subjects. The predicates form one complex eternal object: this is the complex predicate.55



Note, the complex predicate of the actual entity as concrescence and transition is one eternal object, but as such, is a “set” (collection) of predicates that have been unified by the activity of the actual entity under review. This activity is a unification relative to which the eternal objects are patient. Definite order, then, is conditioned not by the structure of possibility as such, but by the logic governing the activity of the actual entity as transition and concrescence. Yet, what we can learn from hybrid entities, such as propositions and nexūs is our only clue to the structure of determinate order.

The analysis of the unification of eternal objects, i.e., possibilities, as a collection that preserves both their unifiability under the condition of real potentiality, along with their plurality as a constellation, provides us with an abstraction which shows, in one direction, their existence as a multiplicity, and, in the other direction, their unifiability under some condition of agency. Whitehead calls this complex order, taken in its relative independence, “merely real,” but even determinate order cannot be actually divided from the actual.56 Thus, if we abstract from their given unity as a predicate for the logical subject that is the actual entity, we find ourselves able to consider possibilities individually as candidates for association as constellations. If we consider the complex unity of the predicate in abstraction from the elements that constitute it as a collection, we get the notion of an agent who, in principle, could unify some constellations of eternal objects that are beyond the agency of actual entities as our cosmic epoch characterizes them (see chapter 12). This topic of determinate order is raised wherever definite order is treated in abstraction, and indeed, extensive abstraction is the relevant act.

Determinate order, therefore, is a characteristic of the cosmic epoch considered as transition in abstraction from concrescence, while definiteness is a characteristic of the cosmic epoch considered from the standpoint of a concrescing actual entity.57 Real potentiality is the idea in the philosophy of organism where these meet.58 There is no perch from which to view possibility as such, or qua possible, or as “pure potentiality,” in Whitehead’s terms, but this limitation does not imply that we can provide no account of determinate order in abstraction from any given actual entity. The study of determinate order can be undertaken in many ways.59 But logic, because it exhibits algebraic characteristics, and because it traverses the spatialization process (by which causal efficacy becomes a presentational space, or “perception” for Whitehead), while retaining some of the structural characteristics of temporal passage (the theory of symbolic reference), and because logic captures at least some of what we experience in the intentional structure of spatialized experience, is a likely tool for the analysis of determinate order. Determinate order includes, at a minimum, the way in which possibilities ingress in “groups,”60 and the way in which the structural features of those “groupings” give rise to generalizations regarding the character of possibility qua possible for our cosmic epoch.

The principal logical function/operator in this analysis is a form of negation. We here distinguish between “function,” which is negation considered as concrescence, and “operation.” We introduce this terminology to clarify a real distinction in Whitehead’s account of concrescence and transition.61“Operation,” which we use exclusively with reference to transition, is negation considered abstractly, as the fully developed negative prehension that excludes wholly from the subjective form of the actual entity all constellations of possibilities except those consistent with the ingressing constellation, i.e., the collection relevant to concrescence. This operational negation is indistinguishable from that subjective form considered as an example of what is possible. This latter is what survives of the idea of “substantial form” in Whitehead’s cosmology, and it is intended to offer a solution to the problem of universals. We will take up that issue a few pages hence.

The type of negation that is “functional,” rather than merely “an operator,” is more basic to our analysis here. This kind of negation is a perpetual perishing that we can infer from the comparing the variable relevance of prehended actual entities in the subjective form of our principal actual entity.62 This function is a simultaneous includer-and-excluder. It is the evaluation of its actual world by A (see below), but within the constraints of subjective form generally, and its own subjective unity as a singular existent.63 When we consider things functionally, inclusion is prior to and defines exclusion, and the conjunction of inclusion-exclusion is not commutative. The inclusion process (grading for relevance) is best understood in the mode of concrescence, while the exclusion process (by which we can approach determinate order) is best described in the mode of transition. These are, of course, the same process. We may represent the physical process as follows, showing how inclusion functions (and inferring exclusion from the result).

“Elimination” (or sometimes “dismissal”) is the term Whitehead uses when considering negative prehension in the mode of concrescence, where the mediation of overlapping actual worlds in the physical background of the various prehended actual entities (B, C, and D above) belongs to the actual world of a concrescing actual entity (A above). The point is that wherever D is part of the actual worlds of B and C, respectively, D will be a part of A’s subjectivity both as directly prehended by A and as mediated (and perhaps amplified) by its presence in B and C.64

Figure 8.1 The structure of physical prehension



There is no one-to-one mapping of other actual entities in the subjective form of A because there is no full independence of D (or any other actual entity) in A’s actual world. D is only an actual occasion in A’s actual world, even if it is also an actual entity in its own actual world. (There is no formula for demonstrating its identity from its presence in A to its singular status in its own world, but there is no empirical hypothesis advanced by denying that identity.) So the presence of D in the subjective form of A is not “causing,” in part or in whole, A’s form to be as it is. (In fact, causation is irrelevant to prehension altogether.) Rather, it is the requirement that the subjective form of A be a unity that accounts for the way in which D is both relevant to A’s concrescence and to the limits of that concrescence, wherein neither the determinate whole of D (nor of any other actual entity) is present in A’s subjective form. We refer to the “whole of D” as a determinate rather than definite order because there is no concrete standpoint from which D as a whole would be available to any concrescing actual entity, least of all to D itself. To speak of any actual entity in the actual world of A as “a whole” requires abstraction. Hence, so far as we may speak of the order that characterizes D in its actual world, from the standpoint of A, we must encounter the possible qua possible, or, in short, determinate order.

Whatever D is, as a determinate whole, its definite role in A’s actual world involves at least elimination and a great deal of mediation. The elimination is not merely the result of A’s act of grading its world for relevance to its aim, but is also a function of how other actual occasions in A’s actual world have objectified D. No complete criterion will be available in the analysis of A’s subjective form to identify D in itself, but we can be assured that D’s relative insistence in other actual occasions provides reason, if not wholly sufficient reason, for the way that D comes to be objectified in A’s achievement. The most insistent actual occasion in A’s actual world, the one most widely distributed in and mediated by the other actual occasions in A’s actual world is A’s immediate predecessor, and is, apart from A, the most definite fact of A’s actual world. However, there is no basis for claiming that even A’s immediate predecessor has not suffered elimination. As Whitehead memorably writes, “a feeling bears on itself the scars of its birth; it recollects as a subjective emotion its struggle for existence; it retains the impress of what it might have been but is not.”65 The scars are evident upon analysis in every actual occasion felt by A, but if its immediate predecessor is the least battered, it is nevertheless bowed by the impossibility of finding its way into its successor without suffering elimination. D is the favorite stepchild of A, but a stepchild all the same. The immediate predecessor of A is not, therefore, wholly definite, but is the closest thing to definite for A.66

It is important to remember here that D does not explain A; rather, A explains D.67 The question, for Whitehead, is not what accounts for A, but how A can be analyzed to provide an explanation of the way in which D is in A. No other kind of explanation is available to finite creatures working within the limits of a cosmic epoch like our own. Thus, the proper way to understand D’s influence on A,68 as A feels D, is to use a kind of algebra to get at what of D is absent in A. This is extensive abstraction. Even though we cannot know D in its definiteness by analyzing A, we can understand D as an example of determinate order in which the way D is in A is an instance of how it might be in A, and avoiding any assertions that would commit us to how D must be in A (which is beyond our ken).

The study of determinate order as it affects concrescence gives us half of the story of negative prehension, which is elimination by perpetual perishing, discoverable in the analysis of the actual entity by comparing the relevance of the various actual occasions in A’s actual world, and extrapolating from the immediate predecessor (the most pervasive actual occasion, which we have supposed to be D in this case), to the actual occasion just below D in relevance (let us imagine it is C in this example), and so on until we have a sense of the physical route that leads to A. We will not learn much about A’s relation to eternal objects by examining concrescence alone, but we will never learn anything about determinate order without carrying out this painstaking examination of the physical world.

We do not learn about possibility in our cosmology by beginning with, for example, mathematical or logical relations and then hoping they apply to whatever we are trying to understand. There are ways to study determinate order (as in a given instance of mathematical structure) in abstraction from cosmology, but the only way to learn the scope of the application of such modes of order to physical reality is to study relevance in a single actual entity in its actual world. This limitation, otherwise known as the Ontological Principle, is required by the category of subjective unity—a complex unity that cannot be explained but is presupposed in the quantum of explanation, i.e., the idea of the actual entity.

The full study of the workings of relevance in the philosophy of organism would take us too far from our present subject, but some attention must be given to it.69 In cosmology we learn about determinate order very slowly and carefully, by examining the relationship between the actual entity in concrescence and in transition, and recalling that the actual entity as data will not violate the requirements of subjective unity and will also provide a datum for all other actual entities, a datum that is both identical to itself in their objectifications of the datum, and different from every other datum in the actual worlds of every subsequent actual entity (Whitehead calls these the categories of “objective identity” and “objective diversity”).70 The demand that the data become a datum provides the definition, in the most literal sense, of the actual entity A. It is the most complete account of any percipient actual entity that a finite mind can achieve empirically. A more determinate account can be given of the prehending actual entity, but it is abstract.





Eternal Objects in Concrescence: Relevance (Part IV, ch. 1, sect. VI)


In the previous section, we laid great stress upon the idea of relevance in moving toward a clear understanding of what is eliminated (dismissed) in the actual entity considered as transition and concrescence. However, there is no way to avoid the relationship between the actual entity as percipient (which is one aspect of transition and concrescence) and the actual entity as prehending its actual world.71 For Whitehead, the latter, a prehending actual entity, is indivisible in concreto, but analyzable in abstracto. We must tread carefully here, avoiding any discussion that blurs this important distinction between perception (which presupposes an actual dividing of the extensive continuum into transition and concrescence) and prehension (the concrete and actually indivisible modes of relatedness, or “feeling” that are characters of everything actual). But the relation of transition and concrescence entails both the act of dividing and the indivisible actual entity. Later Whitehead says that genetic division is the division of the concrescence while coordinate division is the division of the concrete.72 We will explain what this means in subsequent discussion. Our question here is what we may learn from the idea of “relevance” when we see the actual entity as concrescence. Relevance crosses the border of perception and prehension.73

That which is physically absent (negatively prehended in the sense provided by the diagram above) in the achievement of a concrescence has been felt, but is of negligible importance to the concrescing actual entity. The eliminated characters contribute so little influence as to have greater relevance in their absence than in their presence. That which is wholly unfelt by an actual entity in transition belongs to the cosmic epoch as among the unselected eternal objects, but that is a feature of the coordinate division and must be inferred from the functional definition of the concrescing actual entity as genetically divided, as if it were a temporal unfolding.74 This is the correct relationship even though the genetic division presupposed the coordinate division and is a derivative. But in exposition, the genetic derivatives are offered as pieces of a puzzle that has been cut beforehand. Proximately, in the immediate epoch (and with the limitations discussed), there is a sense of negative prehension that belongs to the genetic specification of the definite order exemplified by the prehending actual entity, most generally contained in the theory of concrescence, but exhaustively analyzed in the theory of prehension, taken as a whole.

That which fails to appear in the objectifications of the prehending actual entity lacks relevance to that entity, but is still a part of the physical universe (and the physical universe is an all-pervading character of the actual world of that actual entity). That “failing to appear” has this meaning in spite of Whitehead’s statement later, in discussing the coordinate whole, that all physical actualities are positively prehended. This is certainly true in coordinate division as well, but in considering the genetic account of a percipient actual entity (as distinct from the prehending actual entity), we cannot find the whole universe in its objectifications, notwithstanding the principle of relativity. In short, irrelevancies are functionally eliminated in the physical pole, and more completely than they can be eliminated in the mental pole, i.e., incurable unity of the mental pole75 in the subjective form of a percipient actual entity, and as distinct from the subjective unity of the prehending actual entity as concrescence. The prehending actual entity, qua prehending subject, is neither an actual division of the extensive continuum, nor is it actually divided by its prehensions. The prehending actual entity is a concrescence (genetically) and a concrete relation (coordinately), not a divider. When itself virtually divided (whether genetically or coordinately), the prehending actual entity suffers a distortion for the sake of analysis. This restriction—that dividing the actual entity for the sake of analysis, although it cannot be divided actually—is the final sense in which the idea of the actual entity is a-tomos, an undivided unity, and the quantum of explanation.

Whitehead did not possess all of the formal tools needed to accomplish the task he set for himself (see chapter 9). Yet, his discipline as a mathematician and his imagination as a philosopher were closely attuned to each other, and he would not allow his imagination to be strangled by the comparatively crude proof-theoretic tools that were current in his time but which are demonstrably inadequate to the task of reconciling calculus and physics.76 The model theoretic approach developed by logicians from Tarski to Hintikka provides vastly superior tools. We will discuss this in subsequent chapters, but here we beg anachronistic license to sort out Whitehead’s insights about the relations between definite and determinate order.

The key idea for Whitehead is that the definite order does not exhaust the conceptual feelings available for concrescence in an actual entity. More simply, the order of nature does not exactly determine physical reality. Whitehead rejects physical determinism even though he is a scientific realist. The association of scientific realism with mechanistic physics is an unfortunate episode in the history of science and the philosophy of science. Many think this view was overcome in Einstein’s General Relativity, but that theory is thoroughly necessitarian, even Spinozistic; it metaphysicalizes necessity. We say, more accurately, that the quantum revolution problematized the necessitarianism of General Relativity, and that controversy continues into the present.

Whitehead criticizes “old school” scientific realism, and that realism survives and pervades current scientific journalism, popular science, and even some serious science. We discuss this problem later, but for now it suffices to point out that, like Peirce, Whitehead rejected the types of necessity presupposed by mechanistic and model-centric scientific realism. Both Peirce and Whitehead held that physical laws change. This view means that the determinate order of the immediate epoch, if we can learn anything about it, cannot be identified either with the definite order exemplified in the satisfaction of an actual entity or with the order of eternal objects in the cosmic epoch. And in terms of prehension, it means that the determinate order of possibility as such also cannot be deduced from the definite order of a satisfaction. A different kind of inquiry is needed.

Henceforth we use the term “constellation” instead of “group” (Whitehead’s word) for relations among possibilities as exhibiting determinate order. A constellation of possibilities ingressing as the mental pole of a prehending actual entity is a selection of the eternal objects (possibilities) available to that actual entity. The ingressing (i.e. selected) eternal objects is a “collection.” Thus, every collection is also a constellation, but not every constellation is a collection. The unselected eternal objects are negatively prehended, eliminated altogether from the definite achievement. But we may infer from the logical order pervading the ingressing constellation of the collection that there is also intelligible order in the constellations of unselected eternal objects.

That order of unselected eternal objects is important for our understanding of science, since it is our only clue to the relationship between the immediate epoch and the cosmic epoch, and more generally, to what is possible for our cosmic epoch. What is possible for us is certainly possible as such, and the determinate order (if we can learn what it is) in the constellation of eternal objects possible for us is modeled as an emergent structure we infer. The difference between the immediate epoch and the cosmic epoch is also a matter of relevance, but our grasp of it is very abstract guesswork and conjecture. In moving from a discussion of the prehending actual entity in its definiteness to a discussion of its implications for determinate order, we move from our designations above as “A” and “D in A” to an abstract version of the entity “A.” That entity, insofar as it exemplifies a determinate order of eternal objects (and we emphasize that this requires an abstraction) will be designated in lower case Greek letters. Hence, A above becomes α. The lower case Greek characters are abstractions.

From the standpoint of transition, if the natural laws that characterize the cosmic epoch change, then their changes should follow a pattern that leaves a trace of its history in what remains functionally recognizable (in analysis) through a series of transformations. This is a conjecture and we will discuss it further, but the order we are supposing here is an evolution, a growth of some kind, even if that growth is sometimes, from the perspective of physics, what would be called an entropic decay. If this is a warranted conjecture, then it should be possible in principle to trace the outlines of that order by looking for variations of least degree in the definite order of a satisfaction and abstracting from it a constellation of eternal objects. We may then look at the route by which the actual entity came to be what it is by contrasting it with its immediate predecessor. In other words, if we can learn which actual entity is the immediate physical predecessor of the prehending actual entity we are studying, and learn also the immediate predecessor of that predecessor, and so forth, then it should be possible to contrast the order evident in the mental poles of those predecessors with one another to discover instances of elimination in the successive constellations of eternal objects we have abstracted from this sequence of actual entities. This is “the egress of possibility,” to be treated in a later work. This contrast of constellations of eternal objects is part of “coordinate division.”77

Genetic and coordinate division are delicate intellectual operations. The first requires us to separate a constellation of eternal objects from a concrescence for the sake of analysis, treating the constellation of eternal objects in our principal actual entity as analyzable in abstraction from the physical route. That move has to be kept in mind in evaluating the veracity of any result we may get. We are modeling the route for the sake of creating a contrast that will be quite abstract but highly informative. We can only infer the immediate predecessor of our prehending actual entity, but the inference is very clear on the basis of relevance; it becomes less certain as we move backward in history.78

Coordinate division, on the other hand, treats the world in its solidarity, but as exemplifying many contrasting determinate orders of eternal objects. The contrast of the constellations of eternal objects from the prehending actual entity to its immediate predecessor will usually be slight, and indeed, that contrast will be the closest we can ever come to saying “x is a possibility” in any univocal sense. The eliminated eternal object in the contrast of the earlier and the later is the limit of that possibility “x,” insofar as it has a limit. To define something requires the specification of its limits, and insofar as possibilities have boundaries, they are found in the sorts of contrasts we have described.

Considering only the eternal objects involved in the world as a solidarity, or as concrete, is the operation Whitehead calls “coordinate division.” We will discuss below what sorts of limitations apply to this analysis, but for now it is enough to note that certain further distortions of the concrete actual entity are levied upon it by coordinate division. Whitehead says, “Coordinate division of the actual entity produces feelings whose subjective forms are partially eliminated and partially inexplicable. But this mode of division preserves undistorted the elements of definiteness introduced by eternal objects of the objective species.”79 We will cover the three species of eternal objects below, but for now, this way of analyzing the actual entity has a name, coordinate division, and the distortions brought on by our abstractions do preserve the structure of the possibilities involved in the concrescence as genetically divided.

Unfortunately, the “possibility” or “possibilities” we discover through these kinds of analysis can be predicated only as “might-have-beens,” something unselected by the prehending actual entity that is a characteristic of its immediate predecessor. We should not be surprised, however, that the bare-bones account of a possibility is essentially negative. The bane of contemporary modal logics is confusion about the status of counterfactual predicates. The limitations introduced by Whitehead’s distinction between genetic and coordinate division prevent us from assuming that the necessity (types of negation involved in abstraction) invoked in comparing determinate with definite possibilities is the same sort of necessity. There can be a difference between a possibility seen as unselected as opposed to being negated through neglect. In both instances, the possibility is taken account of, but in the former case the possibility belonged to the route being analyzed but not to the actual entity as a concrescence. After all, we start from what we do have, actually, not from what we don’t have when we are analyzing the actual entity as concrescence. Other possibilities are real but do not belong to the route being analyzed, and those will be handled when we consider the actual entity as transition.

The reality of non-identical constellations of possibilities in a prehending actual entity (considered as concrescence) and its immediate predecessor, whether considered as genetically or coordinately divided, suggests all by itself the inadequacy of mechanistic philosophies of nature and science, including mechanical interpretations of quantized energy. We can push this operation of contrast-by-relevance back further in the history of the prehending actual entity, but we do so with increasingly tentative acts of abstraction. The differences among the constellations of eternal objects in a given route can then be generalized into an abstract model of transformation and functional stability. That series of transformations will show that there is a real sense to the idea of evolution.80 Keeping our contrasts in contact with the physical route of predecessors holds us within the limits of genetic division. We continue asking only what the eternal objects have contributed to the definiteness of the prehending actual entity as a concrescence. It is a story about the disappearance of certain possibilities based on their prior inclusion in the same physical route. Evolution, to the extent that it can be studied scientifically, is about this kind of “extinction.”

We do not have a good basis for assessing the positive inclusions of eternal objects that seem not to have been included before (i.e., by other actual occasions in the actual world of the prehending actual entity)—it is impossible, apparently, to tell whether the presence of an eternal object in a collection is novel or was latent in an earlier collection, and it is impossible to separate the real potentiality of that character from its possibility as such. The telling difference among collections resides in what has been eliminated, what we don’t find later as characteristic that we did find earlier. Things that were potential for an actual entity earlier in its route come to be no longer possible. This is another way of saying that physical time and change describe an arrow that, so far as we know, is irreversible. But we must not make physical time the ground of genetic division. As Whitehead says, “The genetic passage from phase to phase is not in physical time: the exactly converse point of view expresses the relationship of concrescence to physical time. It can be put shortly by saying, that physical time expresses some features of the growth, but not the growth of the features.”81

Our tendency of thinking about time as something that contains all physical routes is the bad habit of thought we must break. It is not accurate to say that all becoming is a reduction of potentiality to actuality; this old-fashioned characterization is insensitive to the distinction between definite and determinate order, which is to say it is necessitarian. Physical time isn’t the medium, the container, or the cause of growth, evolution, or the transition of physical forms. Physical time is an expression of some of the features of that larger process we are modeling with genetic division.

The study of modeling by the elimination of possibilities is the study of the determinate order of the cosmic epoch insofar as it contributes to the definite order of the actual entity as a concrescence. It is formalizable. In a paper on Peirce’s very similar view of nature, David R. Crawford formalized essentially the same process, which we will draw on and modify here. But there is a crucial difference between Crawford’s Peirce and our Whitehead. The process we have explained above, by which we learn about the immediate predecessor of an actual entity, is not like Peirce’s account, and neither does Peirce have the theory of extension, nor clear distinctions among the levels of generality (cosmic epochs, transition-concrescence, perception, and prehension) that make Whitehead’s theory so much more applicable and detailed. Peirce also does not have quite the same distinction between determinate and definite order, and nothing like the relation between genetic and coordinate division, but he does reject necessitarianism for the same reasons as Whitehead, and he does have a formalization of relevance that operates (in our sense of that word) well for Whitehead.

The common threads that hold Peirce’s and Whitehead’s accounts together is that both are realists, both reject physical necessity, and both philosophers were aware that the challenge of defending such a realism is to find a way to model change such that natural laws themselves change according to an evolutionary principle.82 Whitehead thinks we won’t ever know that principle with much clarity, whereas Peirce is optimistic, but they agree that we have to try to get at it. Genetic division provides a basis for that study without confusing the determinate order of possibility with the ways in which possibilities contribute to the definiteness of the actual world we are studying.

The idea of concrescence, then, enables us to study of the immanent order of the actual entity, and to use insistent relevance to infer immediate predecessors. When we consider the contrasts among collections of eternal objects in the prehending actual entity as concrescence, and those collections contained in its immediate predecessors, and when we carry that contrast back into its history, we study relevance itself. The study of relevance is the study of growth by elimination. This work of modeling tells us all we will ever really know about the conservation and transformations of energy in our cosmic epoch. We use the word “evolution” almost with a wry smile, since it seems to express our hope that entropy does not reign supreme. But perhaps the ending of a cosmic epoch is no tragedy. Who knows?
