9 The Algebra of Negative Prehension


Necessity requires accident and accident requires necessity. Thus the algebraic method is our best approach to the expression of necessity, by reason of its reduction of accident to the ghost-like character of the real variable.

—Whitehead, Essays in Science and Philosophy (97)





Looking Forward by Looking Back: Leibniz and Modality


Before proceeding with our discussion of David Crawford’s advances on Peirce’s logic of possibility, as well as our own extended proposals for approaching such a formal analysis, we need to take a moment and cast an eye back at the beginnings of contemporary logic in the modern period, and to suggest some of the ways this return to the modern—that Whitehead insisted upon—might aid in our look forward at potential advances upon the current state of the philosophical logic of modality. Merely naming Leibniz as the inventor of the idea of a “universal characteristic” is not enough. We must make a true return to the moderns, not to worship or damn them, but to tease out a few ideas that they may have entertained but rejected or left aside. While Descartes introduced the idea of extension, and Locke reminded us of the inexpressible fundamentum of experience, it is Leibniz who wrestled most explicitly and interestingly with the issue of intensionality in logic, and who gave rise to the further treatment of it in Holland and Lambert, and in Castillon (who succeeded to a significant degree in formalizing reasoning in intension without sacrificing extensive applicability).1

Over a period of years, Leibniz devised a way of looking at what we would now call class membership that depended on the idea that one could assign unique numbers to irreducible concepts and gather those irreducibles together into a fundamental class of simple concepts. We might then build more complex concepts from the simples by some sort of recursive operation, captured in a calculus or an algebra. This was his effort to discover the discipline of Universal Characteristic. He made some progress on this mapping system, but, as C.I. Lewis observes, he hit a number of recalcitrant problems, especially with combinations of concepts that have no existential instantiations in the world.2 One could use his numeric maps to find and calculate both combinations of concepts that are instantiated in the world, and ones that don’t exist at all, such as “invertebrate humans.” Part of the problem was that the numeric mapping applied only to substances and not to relations, and the single relation Leibniz was considering at that time was genus-species—that species were complexes of logically simpler and irreducible genuses, not simply regarding animal, but a generic concept should take in (in both intension and extension) more complex specific concepts that have been built from the simpler.

We can see here the principles of Cartesian analysis, along with the conviction that all genuine knowledge is necessary, grounded in a universal and an analytic concept of truth and meaning. These assumptions would take a beating at the hands of Hume and Kant, but Whitehead looked to find a way to reconnect with a kind of thinking that, without the reductionism, seeks an intelligible relation between intension and extension that, if not ontologically necessary, still preserves logical necessity. The important logical writings of Leibniz most relevant to this quest first became available to scholars in the 1850s through the 1870s, so there was no history of scholarship in Whitehead’s time.3

Of particular importance in this analysis of possibility and intensionality is Whitehead’s idea of division: There is something about division as an operation that corresponds to irreducibility. If one divides to get to the irreducibles, then one has not only metaphysical simples that yield to actual division, but also an operation that has some flexibility. So Whitehead’s sense of division is interesting. But there is division, and then there is divisibility in analysis in abstraction of real dividing. In the actual world, the actual entity is a real cut, but it can be analyzed in abstracto along with entities that cannot be cut, such as prehensions and generic contrasts. So the actual world has both divisible and non-divisible actualities, and the principle of divisibility may be separated into actual and in abstracto based on the relation to possibility. Possibilities ingress in collections and are not divisible in actuality—i.e., not separable from the actualities whose mental pole they constitute. Perhaps possibilities taken as constellations would yield to some kind of abstract division, if we mapped them. Our discussion of Crawford’s scheme below is such an attempt. Crawford’s model will open up into what we are calling the “continuum of possibility.” However, the concept of “continuum” here entails more subtlety than just brute-force set theory with the dogmatic assertion of the (set theoretic) continuum hypothesis.

Leibniz saw that he could carry out such mapping by using primes because one creates irreducible combinations that have unique quotients (and enable one to follow a thread to any given constellation of possibilities) by assigning a prime to collections. This approach failed for Leibniz because unlike the situation with Gödel and arithmetic, the analysis of possibilities does not proceed in a fixed and narrowly limited universe of discourse composed of purely extensional entities, which in Gödel’s case were simple numbers. (“Extensional” here means the traditional, logical form of extension, not Whiteheadian extensa.) When dealing with possibilities, one needs tools with which to navigate an intensional universe, and as such cannot take meanings as analytically fixed in advance.





A Formalization of Concrescence under Relevance: From Genetic to Coordinate Division


Rather than operating as Leibniz did, starting with fixed meanings and attempting to map these onto the world, the Crawford method starts with the world and analyzes possibilities until meanings are discovered in division. In this way, Crawford’s analysis of Peirce helps us understand what Whitehead is doing with constellations of possibilities as they exhibit determinate order. Crawford says:

In “On the Number of Forms of Sets”4 Peirce defines the diversity of a set (or ‘collection’) of objects as the number of object types it contains. This is distinct (in quality, but perhaps not in quantity) from the plurality of a set, which is equal to the number of object tokens it contains. An object type is uniquely identified by some set of properties which tokens of that type possess (here, β and not-β are equally good properties). An ordered set (or sequence) is one in which the place for each object is numerically individuated.5



Here the distinction between the “diversity” of a collection and the “plurality” of a “collection” (we prefer this to “set” since this is not set theory) corresponds closely to what we would call the determinate as opposed to definite order.6 We do not need the type-token distinction, however, since we have replaced it with a procedure for finding the immediate predecessor of a prehending actual entity as a concrescence; we do not need an overarching type-token abstraction for sorting properties, qualitative or quantitative.7 Thus, for us, not-β (and this use of lower case Greek letters we already adopted above and will use below) is an operational contrast of eternal objects in two collections, between a prehending actual entity and its immediate predecessor, and likewise back into the past.

Crawford points out that carrying out an analysis of these “diverse” collections or, as we call them, constellations, includes “positional properties,” which are postulates, or, as we would say, possibilities/eternal objects: “Peirce’s inclusion of positional properties of objects in his analysis … is important not only because it captures a more complete account of diversity, but also because it is integral to Peirce’s treatment of causal independence.”8

We would distinguish the “causal” independence in Crawford’s summary from our account, since the independence we are investigating is logical, or logico-mathematical. We believe that Peirce thought the right “model,” if we can get it, would be internally related to the truth itself in the infinitely distant future. Whitehead does not see the creation of mathematical models that way. He sees them as metaphors we replace with better ones, and logical rigor, adequacy, and applicability are the standards by which we assess the model.

Peirce handles the successive transformations of constellations of growing entities as analyzable in the distribution of characters, including positional properties. Crawford formalizes it this way:

Given the set of objects Γ = (γ1, γ2, γ3, …) and the property α where A is the distribution of α in Γ, the distribution of α in Γ is uniform if there is some property β, where B is the distribution of β in Γ, such that A is dependent on B.





Crawford defines dependence (for Peirce) differently from our earlier account of dependence as successor to the prehending actual entity, but for our purposes, the dependence relation that is shown in the structure of the immediate predecessor of the prehending actual entity, as concrescence, will suffice.

With Crawford’s algorithm, one follows a path until there is a variation. When there is a variation, one assigns a prime for the constellation “completed” and then “forces” the variation back into conformity with the sequence that presents actual divisions (in analysis, in abstracto). So the actual world is being used as the model and the constellations of possibilities are being discovered by the deviations from the actual and mapped as constellations with primes, to be rediscovered by means of this kind of division. Each deviation is to be taken as marking a limit and all the pairs entailed are to be treated as an actually indivisible whole. This is the definition, then, of a constellation of possibilities.

The last act which broke the pair defines both the limit of the whole and its simple constitution, because the Constellation minus that act is a map of the physical world with its actual conceptual feelings, i.e., its mental pole—so these are possibilities genuinely exemplified in the actual world of some actual entity. The collection becomes only a “mere” constellation by the agency of that relational “failure” or “deviation,” and the inclusion of it as a part of the whole. Without that deviation, the collection has some actually divisible elements, but with the inclusion, it has none. Thus, there is an asymmetry of division/divisibility between the possibilities and the actualities. This may be stated in the negative by saying that no possibilities are actually divisible; they exist (intelligibly) only in indivisible constellations. One can state the law positively as constellations of possibilities are indivisible wholes (of varying complexity) and derive their unity from their limit—i.e., the last member of the sequence. This provides a way of formalizing minimal deviation from the actual world without presuming that possibilities and actualities can be genuinely separated, apart from analysis. It is a realistic model that treats the difference relation of the last element (and elements only come in pairs, i.e., a physical feeling with its conceptual feeling or its mental pole), and it privileges the physical. But the deviation is considered a real asymmetry between the actual and the possible that exists as a possibility, but is actual as a limit to the physical description of the world.

The constellation, so defined, may also be seen, from the standpoint of the eternal objects as a “thought.” From the standpoint of the collection defined by “constellation minus that last pair” this is what Whitehead calls a “concept.” From the standpoint of perception, the concept is a presentational space, and the difference between that space and the Fact of the World (i.e., the failed pairing that limits it), is the error inherent in all symbolic reference. Meanwhile, the Crawford technique restores our attention to the causal efficacy of the physical world. It isn’t an arbitrary imposition of meanings; rather, it is a rejoining of the possible to the actual, “spacelessly.” This rejoining has no effect on extension (in the Whiteheadian sense). But extensive connection is the relation between the members of every pairing. The “failure” of extensive connection isn’t physical, but it is real—i.e., it is a real deviation or novelty introduced by a difference we can discover in the structure of possibility. It is slow work to discover the “structure” of possibility, but it depends upon operations that analyze patterns appearing in the primes and in their relationship to the continuum.

When we have enough primes, we will need to learn what operations can be carried out on the patterns in the primes. Projected patterns of these “cuts” onto a series of virtual plane would likely reveal some patterns, especially if the projections are done carefully (surely involving some conjecture/abduction). The alternative to producing patterns would be the denial that there is an intelligible relationship between possibility and genuine temporal flow, which seems unlikely. We should be able to make some sense of possibility-structures without falling into vicious abstractions.

There is some kind of relationship between division and divisibility and the realities in the physical world. A prehension (divisible only in analysis), and what can be actually divided are related, but prehension and possibility share the characteristic of being divisible only in analysis and thus, our thinking about them is always intensional—we cannot do a logic of possibility that sets individual possibilities into an atomic and mobile class of universals that then pick out particulars. The logic of possibility cannot be extensional.





Additional Tools


We have noted that when taking on a project that is formal in character, the choice of analytical tools is driven by considerations that go beyond formal capacities. Recall that in standard first order logic, Hilbert-style techniques can formally prove everything that can be proven by other approaches such as the tableau methods derived from Gentzen’s work. However, there are significant practical differences in these methods that appear most dramatically when one attempts to automate formal proof. Hilbert techniques are nearly unusable, creating infinite loops on even the simplest proofs, whereas methods of the sequent calculi enable automatic methods to progress in a direct manner.9 Pedagogical and intuitive issues are differently addressed by various analytical instruments, so the tools we choose outrun merely formal issues. How we analyze the structure of negative prehension requires care.

We need to set out some heuristic principles to clarify what we are doing and why. These principles can be summarized:

The analysis of possibility is nonmonotonic

The analysis of possibility is intensional

The analysis of possibility is perspectival



The comprehensive explication of these heuristic principles must wait for another work. But we can gloss here a “story” that will lend credibility to these choices, unavoidable in any attempt to deal seriously with Whitehead’s approach to possibility.

First, please note the emphasis upon analysis. The structural claims we make here with respect to possibility fall within the purview of the quantum of explanation, and do not embrace ontological extravagances.

The analysis of possibility must be nonmonotonic, because inquiry is nonmonotonic. Even though eternal objects are neither created nor destroyed, their ingression and egress creates relevance as a reality that must be described. We argue that the analysis of possibility is intensional because possibilities are relations, and not set-theoretic points patiently awaiting our notice in some set-theoretic caricature of a “possible world.” The requirement that the analysis of possibility be perspectival is explicitly built into the actual entity, and the fact that it has its world only from a perspective.

On the basis of 1–3, the necessetarianism governing most modal systems of the past 100+ years is illegitimately ontological; logically justifiable “necessity”—that is, “necessity” that falls within a logically intelligible quantum of explanation—is short-hand for the local requirements (as expressed in numbers 1 and 3 above) of particular inquiries (numbers 2 and 3 above). Also on the basis of 1–3, we can see that a rough handling of possibility “itself”—as a thing-in-itself—is a gratuitously ontological idea that invites necessitarian concepts which serve only to block the road of inquiry and explanation.

Our concrete suggestions for the formal tools for such an analysis might be approached are also three in number: model theory, non-standard analysis, and modal logic. The most important of these is model theory, as the instrument within which the other two operate. Model theory enables one to characterize the relations among structures that are “almost the same,” and weigh that “almost” along a variety of gradations. Moreover, there are model-theoretic tools, such as Paul Cohen’s technique of “forcing,” (and non-standard analysis itself) that make it possible to develop subtleties of structure that set theory is unable to represent.10

A caution about the term “model”: we have repeatedly appealed to “models”—Neil Young’s railroad, representations of Fenway Park—as essential aspects of our narrative. The appeal now to model-theory is the type of move that a non-expert might find perfectly acceptable. But certain experts with strong backgrounds in science or mathematics might find this segue suspicious. As the experts are well aware, the use of the concept of “model” in empirical science is radically different from the uses of that term in mathematics and formal logic. We are cognizant of those differences. However, these are differences of degree, and not of kind. While the differences are certainly real, the similarities are what are most profoundly salient here.

In any inquiry, of any kind—abstract or concrete, scientific or logical—there are important commonalities which may be abstractly represented. There will be (1) the thing inquired into (the “universe of discourse”); (2) the tools used to characterize that universe (the “language”) and (3) the relations between these two (the “semantics,” or that which makes things said in the language about the universe “true,” or “false,” or something else11). In a purely abstract setting, the range of choices in establishing 1–3 is significant, which has led to fascinating results in formal logic. Within more concrete inquiries (including empirical science) the arrangement of 1–3 is more constrained. Yet, as we will see in chapter 10, there are areas of contemporary physical science where the failure to respect such constraints is troubling. Our use of models and model-theory is neither arbitrary nor unconsidered. We insist that the connections between the two are the formal basis for characterizing logic—in line with Peirce, Dewey, and Hintikka—as the theory of inquiry.

The next formal instrument that provides some purchase on the complexities of possibility is non-standard analysis. Regarding the notion of “almost the same,” non-standard analysis is the formal study of the concept of the infinitesimal, in its various guises. The idea of the infinitesimal, so central to the development of the calculus and Newton’s revolution in physics, was long thought to be self-contradictory. Almost a century after Cauchy and Weierstrass had “eliminated” the infinitesimal from any further discussion, the logician Abraham Robinson demonstrated—using model theory—that the infinitesimal was a consistent and formally respectable notion.12 Non-standard analysis will provide us with the tool for modeling differences that are too small to matter and yet grow to dominate a relational structure.

Finally, the appeal to modal logic is different from the “orthodox” philosophical conceptions of necessity and possibility The concept of “intensional” that C. I. Lewis brought to bear on the subject in 1918 is much too desiccated to play the role in the analysis of possibility that Lewis intended. The failures of Lewis’s “strict implication” to capture the concept of “implies” are well known, and need not be rehearsed here. No small part of the problems dogging the analysis of possibility in the last century are due to the move away from the rich notion of intensionality found in Leibniz, for extensionally based (in the “bad,” non-Whiteheadian sense of “extension”) concepts. It is understandable why Lewis went this direction: he thought the formal development of intensional concepts was a failure. Philosophical logic has followed in Lewis’s footsteps.13 We believe that contemporary developments—constructions and discoveries that occurred after Lewis’s day—permit us to gain at least a toehold on a genuinely intensional formulation of possibility within a functional quantum of explanation.

Thus, regarding modal logics, we reject as pointless such ontological notions as “possible worlds.” We embrace formal machinery such as accessibility relations and frames, enabling us to represent models that differ in a real, albeit infinitesimal degree, and which function within a perspectivally framed system. Additionally, tools of modal logic have been used to model the paraconsistent overlapping of otherwise contradictory models, recently given concrete form by Bryson Brown and Graham Priest.14

Model theory is by far the most “strategic” choice of the three tools mentioned above. The techniques of model theory open the door to the study of quantifiers in ways that proof-theoretic methods cannot.15How things are collected into a totality tells us much about what kind of totality we are working with. This “how” of the collection is where the strategic character of the inquiry expresses itself in the particular form and content of the quantifiers. Also, model theory is directly rooted in algebraic approaches to formalization, as opposed to the proof-theoretic methods, more common amongst philosophers.16 Algebraic approaches examine collections (even constellations) of functionally equivalent structures, instead of listing proof transformations in a sequence.

The application of model-theoretic tools enables one to formalize conditions of truth highlighting the role of negation. For example, the collection of propositions within the theory of a model designated (i.e. “true”) and anti-designated (“false”) need not form a complete, non-intersecting partition of the constellation of all propositions in the theory. Thus, there can be gaps and/or overlaps amongst the designated and anti-designated propositions, different ways in which “true,” “false,” “not-true” and “not-false” manifest within the model.17

The idea of truth/falsity gaps is of interest in the case of negative prehension. In one sense a negatively prehended actuality “p” will “positively” present itself as “not-p,” but under certain circumstances it can physically disappear from relevance to the extent that it is presented as neither “p” nor “not-p.” Yet there remains a kind of “thereness” to the actuality in question, even when all that is left is the shadow of the “scars of its birth,” such that it is never quite no longer there.

Model theory also allows us to engage the shifting strangeness of the negatively prehended—at least metaphorically—targets of “non-standard analysis.” This is the technical term for the “infinitely small yet somehow still meaningful.” In this case, “infinitely small” means that no collection of infinitesimals (either finite or infinite) is capable of having an effect at the macroscopic level. Yet (according to the theory), infinitesimals manage to have just such effects. This is a curious state of affairs. Yet, Abraham Robinson demonstrated that the idea of the infinitesimal is perfectly intelligible, i.e., a logically consistent model (in the explicitly model-theoretic sense) can be built, successfully fulfilling all the requisite assumptions of the theory.

This concept of the infinitesimal gives us insight into the way that objects in relational systems might have considerable structure of their own, but that structure might be invisible for some purposes of the over-arching model and hence disregarded in those instances. Thus, for the purposes of some model M, object α is a single “thing,” yet when viewed on its own account α might be “infinitely” nuanced in ways that M is incapable of showing.

Next, recall the distribution diagram that Crawford built based on Peirce’s discussion. Multiple objects α1, α2, … in structure A and β1, β2, … in structure B are assigned a “1” or a “0” depending on whether they are properly characterized by feature Γ.18 This assignment is provided by what is now known as the “characteristic function” of Γ. The characteristic function is typically written with the Greek “χ”; thus, if Γ assigns “1” to α1, we would write this as, “χ(Γ[α1]) = 1.”

Let us change the perspective: rather than looking at the characteristic function of a single feature Γ on lists of objects in multiple structures, let us examine the long list of features—call these features “eternal objects”—on some single entity α in a single model M. Bear in mind that this “list” of eternal objects (call it “Γi”) will be uncountably infinite in length.19 Consequently, the list generated by the characteristic functions of all those eternal objects will itself be unboundedly long.

Thus we assert: {χ(Γi[α])}. The braces indicate that this is now an entire collection; the content of our assertion will be something like {1,0,1,1,1, 0,0,0,0,0,1,1, …}. The resemblance to Crawford’s diagram is evident, especially once we consider comparing not every entity in two different models according to a single eternal object, but two entities in a single model according to their respective characteristic functions of every eternal object. Whitehead calls this difference in the models a “diversity of status.”20 In fact, Whitehead has this entire argument laid out informally:

This diversity of status, combined with the real unity of the components, means that the real synthesis of two component elements in the objective datum of feeling must be infected with the individual particularities of each of the relata. Thus, the synthesis in its completeness expresses the joint particularities of that pair of relata, and can relate no others. A complex entity with this individual definiteness, arising out of determinateness of eternal objects will be termed a contrast. A contrast cannot be abstracted from the contrasted relata.21



It is now clear why we distinguished definite from determinate order. If we were less careful, we could be deceived about whether our account of the contrasts, achieved in the elimination of eternal objects, was based on illicit abstractions. The kinds of contrasts that help us grasp determinate order among constellations of possibilities cannot be further abstracted than the formalization above allows. We can extrapolate, but we must be aware that our suppositions are only educated guesses. The possible qua possible is pretty elusive, but not wholly beyond our reach. Exploiting concepts such as the infinitesimal opens the door to seeing how differences too small to make a difference in any given M are still operative at a structural level as contrasts. Real synthesis is our clue to the elimination of possibilities, but possibilities are relational through and through. One remains uncertain as to their status except within the context of their “diversity of status.”

The ordered model we are now considering essentially represents the historical route of an actual entity. However, the preceding formalization is still not quite nuanced enough. Recalling that in physical prehension an eternal object can be either actively negated valuated downwards or just passively dropped from relevance,22 our list above must now be expanded to include these latter cases into something like this:

{1,0,_,_,1,1,_,1,0,0,0,_,_,0,0,1,1, . . .}



where the underscore “_” is a placeholder for some Γi that has gone beyond simple negative prehension and physically vanished from relevance. Again, keep in mind that the characteristics in the braces refer to a single entity.23

What does it mean for some entity α to make the transition (not concrescence) into its successor entity α1? It means that for some Γj ⊂ Γi, χ(Γj[α]) ≠ χ(Γj[α1]). Notice first that Γj will always be a proper sub-collection of Γi, since it is unimaginable that an entity should change in every possible characteristic in its immediately succeeding concrescence.24 Also, even if Γj is an infinite collection, it can still be vanishingly small with respect to Γi. Indeed, Γj might be so inconsequential compared to Γi that the differences between Γj[α] and Γi[α1] are effectively non-existent, especially when considered by finite minds. “Effectively non-existent” is a longer way of saying “infinitesimal”; hence, the tools of non-standard analysis provide us with viable purchase on this issue. One must still wonder how infinitesimal differences can translate into macroscopic realities for finite minds to discover and utilize.

The puzzle of the infinitesimal originally presented itself to Newton and Leibniz, and their followers. But they did not have a thoroughly worked out theory of infinitesimals at hand to explain their own ideas. They had to fumble their way through and tolerate the apparently contradictory notions of infinitesimal differences with no possible macroscopic effects on the one hand, that led to exactly such macroscopic effects, with their validating consequences for Newtonian physics, on the other. Physicists and mathematicians somehow survived for 150 years with this active, self-contradictory position.

Even with the inconsistency removed in the nineteenth century by the Cauchy-Weierstrass’s ε/δ techniques, puzzles about the infinitesimal remained. Robinson’s work from 1959 (expanded in 1970) showed that the idea of the infinitesimal was internally consistent, but left contradictory the matter of how it could work effectively with external ideas. This last step—providing formal validity for the operational fact of human inquirers working with on outward contradiction—is the content of the paper by Brown and Priest (cited earlier). What is of immediate interest for us is that among the tools employed by those authors was a technique exploiting the model-theoretic character of “possible worlds” modal logic.

The “possible worlds” modal logic is fraught with problematic metaphysical assumptions. A better way of framing the subject would be as “alternative models,” particularly since the latter has the advantage of being actually true. Modal “possible worlds” are nothing more than formal models. These models, in addition to their internal consistency, exhibit certain external relations to one another which are of substantive formal interest. The most important of these is the “accessibility relation,” more of which momentarily.

One of the tools used by Brown and Priest was first presented in 1979 by Nicholas Rescher and Robert Brandom in The Logic of Inconsistency.25 Using “possible world” subscripts, Rescher and Brandom indicated how contradictory propositions could be “bracketed” or, in their terminology, “quarantined” so that those propositions could be held within multiple “worlds” as true without ramifications beyond their brackets into the entire models/worlds, where the propositions could exist individually and unproblematically. Thus, one would have a schema such as /⋄[pw1 & ~pw2]w3/ = True, which is to say, “the truth value of possibly [p-(in w1) and not-p-(in w2)] overlapping in world w3 is True.” Rather than the existence of actual worlds, one should view this formula as capturing the overlapping (hence, accessibility) of functional models. As metaphysics, the formal conditions of physical succession in actual entities is complex enough to satisfy any logic nerd. In short, an actual entity in Whitehead’s sense, i.e., the quantum of explanation, is all “the world” one needs, or can ever get, by way of explanation. Again, “model” would be better than “world.” But since Rescher and Brandom used “possible-world” terminology, we use it here. It is this quarantined overlap that interests us, both for its formal qualities and its general interpretation, placing ideas in manageable conflict.

The Rescher-Brandom technique provides an abstract schema indicating how a contradictory pair can be managed while quarantined against wider consequences (in the formal sense). More importantly, this technique indicates how the accessibility relation can exceed conventional boundaries, including possibilities—as connected possibilities—that might not otherwise seem available. There are numerous acceptable treatments of modal logic that cover the basic notions, so we set that aside here.26

Here, the approach to modal logics found in computer science interests us. The accessibility relation remains a primary concept, but it is treated as the transition function from one state to another. Each “state” is a model with its own internal structure and complexities. In the computer science approach that there are the kinds and degrees of complexities that can emerge relating to the ways different models can be accessible to one another. These issues of complexity and accessibility set formal limits on the knowability of formal connections within the context of finite minds (which must deal with computably accessible relations).

Finally let us repeat that the uses of modal logic that are presented in the above eschew any connection to the standard interpretations and biases regarding necessity and possibility one finds in the philosophical literature. The tools we are drawing on have to do with “stitching together” models of actualities. Our account of the structure of the possible emerges from no such simple a pattern as ~⎕~.27

These topics of computability and complexity arise because of the problematic issues regarding what is real, what is formalizable, and what is effectively possible for a mind with only finite resources. In particular, tracing out the accessible—but infinitesimal—changes in state from one actual entity to its immediate successor, in the context of not merely what is actual but what is possible, raises staggeringly difficult practical problems. Whitehead recognizes these differences and provides the path to the real accessibility criteria in his idea of “feeling.” The evident contradiction between the infinitesimal and the effective is due to the “disastrous confusion, more especially by Hume, of conceptual feelings with perceptual feelings.”28 The concepts of infinitesimal and macroscopically effective are resolved by the felt reality of the distinctions. “Our perceptual feelings feel particular existence; that is to say, a physical feeling, belonging to the percipient, feels the nexus between two other actualities, A and B.”29 We are not attempting to explain how the infinitesimal and the effective are resolved, but merely formalizing a resolution that is already achieved in experience. We explain the abstract with the concrete. Perception is more abstract than prehension, but far less abstract than concrescence and transition. Thus, the percipient actual entity, which is, after all, a genuine division of the extensive continuum, is too abstract to get at feeling, or fundamental relation, but is a fair unit for modeling concrescence and transition. Perceptual feelings are genuine relations, even if not fully concrete (as are prehensions).

These practical problems can be abstractly represented and schematized. Making sense of such schemata in a rigorously developed model-theoretic framework is more than a mere exercise in clever symbol manipulation. It illuminates the nature of science itself within a realist framework (see chapter 10); it makes explicable the notion of continuity as an emergent property of actuality in infinitesimal changes; it opens the door to a formalization of the concept of the “gestalt” as precisely such a cumulative realization of individually infinitesimal concrescences below the level of effectiveness that nevertheless concretize in a “sudden” novelty; and so on. Formal systems of relations are not shackles to the imagination, but are stepping stones to previously unimaginable universes of possibilities.

We are aware that we’ve made scarcely any real steps toward developing any such a formalism. Our gloss is only a proposal for a research program we will take up in the next book. For the purposes of this argument, it suffices to show that there are instruments at hand that suggest promising insights into the structure not only of negative prehension, but of possibility itself. Bringing these instruments into play involves no mean feat: while model theory has been variously applied to the concepts of infinitesimal and alethic modality, combining these pieces has (as far as we know) never been done. Consequently, the most we can achieve here is to crack the door, a little, upon an as yet undiscovered territory and suggest that there are credible reasons to believe that ingress to that territory can be made using those tools.





Eternal Objects in Transition


In the two previous sections we explained how eternal objects are functionally related to the actual entity as a concrescence. Having a procedure for discovering the immediate predecessor of an actual entity, as a concrescence, enabled us to extrapolate from a definite order some of the features of the determinate modes of order which contributed to that definite achievement (and hence could be abstracted from it in coordinate division). From a comparison and contrast of the determinate order exemplified in a concrescence with the determinate order inferred in its immediate predecessor, and so on, back through a physical route, we were able to infer some emergent structures of collections of determinate order. This functional analysis worked with the concrescence.

We noted that “other possibilities are real but do not belong to the route being analyzed,” and these belong to the actual entity as transition. Whitehead says:

An eternal object can only function in the concrescence of an actual entity in one of three ways: (i) it can be an element in the definiteness of some objectified nexus, or of some single actual entity, which is the datum of the feeling; (ii) it can be an element in the subjective form of some feeling; or (iii) it can be an element in the datum of a conceptual, or propositional feeling. All other modes of ingression arise from integrations which presuppose these modes.30



These three modes of ingression taken together are exhaustive of the role of eternal objects (possibilities) in the coordinate whole presupposed by the genetic account in Process and Reality. When one combines the role of the eternal object as concrescence with its role as transition, they exhaust what we can expect to learn about possibility, i.e., determinate order (including definite order), in our immediate epoch. Our analysis above shows in some detail how the first and second of Whitehead’s functions can be more thoroughly presented. One reason we have held so closely to concrescence (as distinct from transition) is because we are not yet in a position to identify what was eliminated in concrescence with the determinate order of transition. We move into different territory, however, when we consider the third function of eternal objects in concrescence. Whitehead says that “the third mode is merely the conceptual valuation of the potential ingression in one of the other two modes.”31 This an ingression of constellations that might or might not be exemplified in the satisfaction, depending upon the conceptual valuation of the eternal objects by the concrescence.

We do not know in coordinate division whether the ingression has “occurred” (in the sense of exemplification), and if so, whether it owes its relevance to the objective or subjective mode of ingression. What we do know in coordinate division is that any difference that appears between the determinate order of a concrescence and that of its immediate predecessor, as inferred, will be inexplicable except by reference to some pattern of determinate order which is uncertain, perhaps even conjectural. But there must be a determinate order, and there is no reason to think it will be unintelligible to us, so long as we don’t stray too far from the relevance functions we have discussed above.32

However, we will never be in a position to assert a final identity between the concrescence and the transition of the “same” actual entity on the weight of a coordinate division. Thus, to the extent that the genetic division presupposes the coordinate division, the distortions introduced by the negations involved in abstracting will affect the assertibility of the results. In a word, this isn’t pure guesswork, but it isn’t science either. The most we could achieve is a plausible assertion of the functional equivalence of an actual entity as transition with its concrescence. We will assert this equivalence until and unless we can be shown some empirical hypothesis that is advanced by denying it.

Whitehead continues: “It [the third mode of ingression] is a real ingression into actuality; but it is a restricted ingression with mere potentiality, withholding the immediate realization of its function of conferring definiteness.”33 In more ordinary language, we (and all other actual things) experience possibility as such, but only as a determinate order of possibilities left over from withheld potentiality, not as anything definite. We call this “the egress of possibility.” It is as if one has made room for the feeling of what almost happened but at the last moment withheld itself. This is a kind of conceptual feeling. It reminds us of the “ever not quite” of William James. The real potentiality of this “ever not quite” is relinquished into the might-have-been in the moment of transition—it becomes, as Whitehead says, “mere potentiality.”

That feeling of the might-have-been comes pretty close to the whole of what we know about the actual entity as transition. Might-have-beens are like an ontological “event horizon,” immanent in the valuation of the definite order as a contrast—no longer a contrast with a predecessor, but with a contemporary that will never become a percipient actual entity. Only as a present becomes a past does a reason emerge as a connecting sinew with what has come to be on the one hand, what has just barely failed to be on the other hand. We feel the latter conceptually, but not physically. It becomes what Whitehead calls in the higher phases of experience an “intuitive judgment.”34

If we had no such conceptual feeling, it would be impossible to explain things like sudden insights and inspirations that seem to come from the pure blue.35 Without this sort of structure associated with possibility, everything actual would be wholly necessary—i.e., could not possibly have been otherwise. We mentioned earlier that Whitehead’s theory of negative prehension does much the same work for him that Peirce’s notion of abduction does. But Whitehead is bolder, theorizing the possible qua possible as conceptually felt and evaluated.

The difference between the first and second modes of ingression of eternal objects, on one hand, and the third mode, on the other hand, is that the former two are “unrestricted”; both have a traceable relationship to the definiteness of the concrescence. The variance in the two unrestricted modes of ingression is that one is objective and the other is subjective. If a constellation of eternal objects is “inherited,” so to speak, from the act of the immediate predecessor or from the achievement of any other actual occasion or nexus in the actual world of the concrescence, the eternal objects in that constellation are objective, which is to say that they are felt by the concrescence as part of its data and will therefore be exemplified in the definite datum achieved by the concrescence. Whitehead says that “the solidarity of the world rests upon the incurable objectivity of this species of eternal objects.”36

In short, once a constellation (including the ingressing collection physically felt in concrescence) of eternal objects has been incorporated into the achievement of an actual entity, those possibilities are “mere” possibilities no longer. Everything actual must deal with them, and were it not so, there would be no fact that is the world. If there were no such objective demand in concrescence, possibilities might disappear even though they had been realized, and if that could happen, no ground could be given for the togetherness of the world as a fact. In such a situation, any explanation for experience, as had, would be as good as any other; the absence of even a single ingressing eternal object in the actual world of an actual entity indicates that temporal passage has only a contingent effect on actuality. In such a situation, where the capricious disappearance of possibilities shatters experience of the world as solidarity, there can be no such thing as a quantum of explanation. Possibilities as felt by the actual entity, as transition, cannot have a merely arbitrary arrangement. What belongs to determinate order, insofar as we know it (and even though it has not and will not contribute to the definiteness of any actual entity) is nevertheless bounded by a kind of logic of possibility, the limits of which we learn, in part, from the way(s) that certain possibilities fall just short of being realized.

There is a clear difference between what you can see, and what you could have seen, had it come to pass. One might assert: “you never did that; if you had, I should have seen it.” Such statements come very close to being either simply true or false, although the criteria that would enable us to evaluate them in the way we would evaluate claims based on the actual entity as concrescence are unavailable. To make such an assertion, we need to draw upon the order of transition, particularly the way that the elimination of unselected eternal objects still belongs to the determinate order of the immediate epoch. If our assertion is compelling, that is due to our common recognition that what does conform to the requirements of definite fact has a strong relationship with what conforms with but does not contribute to definite fact.

Hence, the study of the prehending actual entity, as transition, is the study of how we appropriately generalize the order immanent in those possibilities that just barely failed to contribute to the definiteness of the satisfaction of the actual entity as concrescence. This is an abstract study. But it enables us, for example, to imagine worlds in which slight variations of natural law give rise to different experiential values, such as those we find in science fiction writing, and in contrast to which we come to understand our own experience as an example of possible experience rather than as a necessitated total order.37

What does Whitehead mean when he says that the third mode of ingression is “restricted,” while the objective and subjective modes of ingression are “unrestricted”? We understand it by comparing the objective and subjective modes. The objective constellations of eternal objects can make no contribution to the subjective form of the concrescence, Whitehead says. Those objective constellations are mathematical Platonic forms. But some unrestricted possibilities are not felt objectively: “A member of the subjective species [of eternal objects] is, in its primary character, an element in the definiteness of the subjective form of a feeling. It is a determinate way in which the feeling can feel.”38 In short, in the second mode of ingression, there is an order in subjective feeling, and considered in the mode of possibility, this feeling reveals a determinate order, pointing to its own possibility as subjective feeling. Whitehead continues, “it is an emotion, or intensity, or an adversion, or an aversion, or a pleasure, or a pain. It defines the subjective form of feeling of one actual entity.”39

We have stressed the importance of the physical as we learned about the determinate order of the cosmic epoch. The unrestricted presence of eternal objects in the actual world is a part of what defines the world, but it doesn’t follow that the world is just the way it must be. Our subjective feeling of the world in emotion, intensity, adversion, or aversion (for example) point to possibilities unavailable as data or datum, wholly peculiar to the subjective form of the prehending actual entity and in the world in no other way. Yet possibilities of the subjective species are wholly actual, and we would say that the meaning of “unrestricted” draws exclusively upon what is wholly actual for our appropriation of the eternal objects in these constellations. These eternal objects are “inherited” from the actual world of the actual entity.

But the third mode of ingression belongs neither to the objective nor to the subjective species. Possibilities considered in light of transition that are not part of the physical world are still felt, but in a restricted way. It isn’t easy to learn about the structure of feelings available only in the mental pole. Whitehead says that “the subjective forms of feelings are only explicable by the categoreal demands arising from the unity of the subject,”40 but those feelings that are not physical at all are accessible only to coordinate division (the kind of contrasting procedure we explained above).

We can illustrate this subtle relationship by considering the “Impossible Snowflake.” Imagine that one snowflake, unique in its configuration, is called “Plato.” Plato is hexagonal, and might never have formed or fallen in just the way it did, but having fallen, it illustrates in definiteness a determinate order in the immediate epoch. Now contrast Plato with a near neighbor, whom we will call “Octy.” Octy seems incapable, in principle, of forming in this immediate epoch. Its unique pattern is octagonal, making it a merely possible snowflake due to the molecular structure of H20 in our immediate epoch. Whether Octy might fall in our cosmic epoch isn’t something we can know. Yet, we don’t find the possibility unintelligible.

If there were an entire theory of snowflakes that never fell, but might have, their snowdrift would be a fair metaphor of the theory of the actual entity as transition. Can we ski on that drift? In imagination, yes. In concrescence, well, best stay in the lodge for some hot buttered rum.

The octagonal snowflake is a might-have-been dominated by the objective mode of ingression. The third mode of ingression can be dominated by either its objective or subjective aspect. Hence there can be might-have-beens dominated by the emotive, or advertive, or aversive character. For example, imagine a car has just sped past as you were about to step off the curb. Your health has been preserved by the difference of a fraction of a second, and you feel, as the car disappears in the distance, that you almost died. The fact of the world, in its solidarity, will not allow this feeling to be any part of its definition. Yet, there is a determinate order that includes your physical death which just barely failed to be part of the world in its definiteness. You do feel that determinate order, and the feeling is subjective in the same sense as the second mode of ingression, but this is a conceptual feeling only, bringing on a positive value, i.e., a sense of physical relief, precisely because it isn’t part of the world. You will never be hit by just that car at just that moment. But the determinate order to which such an accident belongs just barely failed to be actual.

Such conceptual feelings are closely akin to the kind of intensely aesthetic experience had by mathematicians in the presence of ideas they have not yet been able to prove, but of whose demonstrability they are convinced.41 Such mathematicians are dealing with futural possibilities that evade them, whereas determinate order as it characterizes transition depicts the past. Yet, it is impossible, according to Whitehead, to be certain about what is contemporary with the prehending actual entity, and thus, matters we take to be might-be’s are sometimes might-have-beens. Such a line is never sharply drawn.

Compared with such ephemeral matters, we can easily understand the sense in which some aspects of that physical order are operationally unavailable to a percipient actual entity when analyzed into prehensions. This is the genetic sense of the term “negative prehension.”

The possibility of finite truths depends on the fact that the satisfaction of an actual entity is divisible into a variety of determinate operations. The operations are ‘prehensions.’ But the negative prehensions which consist of exclusions from contribution to the concrescence can be treated in their subordination to the positive prehensions.42



Determinate negative prehension transforms initial data (multiplicity) into objective datum (nexus, proposition, entity). “There is a transition from the initial data to the objective datum effected by the elimination.”43 Knowing the effect of an elimination is far easier than knowing what has been eliminated. The ontological event horizon is outlined by what is not available in prehension. But the relations between these effects and the forms, both objective and subjective, that have been eliminated are creative relations. They can be formalized in algebraic terms, and even if we have not fully carried that demand through, we have shown its determinate outlines.
