10 The Nature of Naturalism


At this moment scientists and sceptics are the leading dogmatists. Advance in detail is admitted: fundamental novelty is barred. This dogmatic common sense is the death of philosophic adventure. The universe is vast.

—Whitehead, Essays in Science and Philosophy (92)





Model-Theory Redux


As we have noted, model-theory is an important instrument for philosophical analysis. This tool is a late addition to the methods of formal logic, unavailable to Whitehead in his work on extensive abstraction. Trapped under the shadow of the Principia, Whitehead turned away from the techniques of proof-theory for the more appropriate algebraic framework which dominated his earlier mathematical work, and richly informed his philosophical thinking. Model-theory is not reducible to algebraic approaches to logic, but it is highly algebraic in its approach, especially in comparison to proof-theoretic methods. Much in model theory, especially the interpretation of the quantifiers, is about the comparison of equivalence classes of formulas (recall the quote from Paul Halmos). Hence, the close relationship between model-theoretic and algebraic methods is readily visible. The absence of model-theory cost Whitehead an efficient tool for analyzing and characterizing the structural features of relational abstractions. We have sketched such a model-theoretic approach above, closely approximating Whitehead’s actual analysis.

First, model theory deals with abstractions. That which is genuinely concrete is experienced in its wholeness and totality. Anything less than that totality is at best abstract and at worst recondite. Second, the worst thing about moving away from the totality of experience is not falsehood. As Whitehead’s theory of propositions makes clear, falsehood is oftentimes the most creative of deviations. Rather, the worst thing is to be recondite. Being recondite means being not only narrowly conceived, but dubiously applicable: worse than wrong, it is irrelevant.

Regarding the second point, an abstraction, bringing a reduced picture of concrete actuality, renders the model “false” in the sense of partial, but such abstractions are not falsehoods merely on account of being partial. (See below our account of Whitehead’s radical realism.) A model must drop out many details of the reality it is modeling to achieve a manageable abstraction of that reality. Only some of the totality of relational connections are highlighted by any model. (Recall our earlier model of Fenway Park). But if the model is built well, if it is constructed carefully through logically rigorous inquiry—then the relational connections so highlighted will still be real relations, even if not the totality of real relations.

Thus, Neil Young’s model trains are not falsifications of “real” locomotives, even though the loads they are carrying are not measured in metric tons. Young’s fascination with the details of scaling down the work needed to haul a “real” load so that his model trains accurately reflect a scaled version of the effects in sound, in acceleration and deceleration, in hill climbing ability, in the rattle and boom, of the loads on “real” trains might seem eccentric to the non-enthusiast. Perhaps, but it is only eccentricity. Such “modeling” would be altogether meaningless if there was not a concrete reality that all these factors were genuinely modeling.

Following these considerations, a model-theoretic approach to inquiry is entirely compatible with a robust realism. If a model is not a model of some-“thing” really “out there,” then in what sense can it be called a “model”? Yet how a model relates to that some-“thing” cannot be taken for granted if we are serious about our realism. Consider the Boeing 747. There is the scale plastic replica of the exterior of the aircraft that one might find in the lobby of Boeing’s headquarters. That plastic representation is certainly a model of a 747. But then, the set of technical manuals used by the maintenance staff at the hangars where these vessels are housed are also a model of a 747. Unlike the plastic representation, the technical manuals will bear little visual analogy to the systems aboard the plane.1 Neither the craft in the lobby nor the manuals actually fly, but the plane they model does. So which “model” is more “real”?

Also consider the high-resolution color photographs from the Voyager spacecraft. These images are a stunning display of visual detail and color.2 What is interesting for us is that all of this color imagery is a fabrication—it is not “really” there, but has been digitally added to the pictures by computer enhancement. Bluntly, these pictures are not exact representations of the astronomical bodies themselves, but only visual models of them, in which coloration that enhances the real details has been super-added to the original images to enable the human eye to take in the real details with more ease. But that is exactly what a good model does. It allows us to cognize real and salient facts that might otherwise be lost to a finite mind in the overwhelming minutiae of the concrete totality.

Thus, models serve purposes—our purposes—which are “local” to the topic and intentions that motivate the making of the model in a given inquiry. But a model is not less realistic for being intentional than for being abstract. These two (intention and abstraction) are flip-sides of the same coin. One cannot abstract out relevant details without first intentionally focusing inquiry in an appropriate way, while the intentionality-driven focus is already an abstraction away from the totality of the concrete fact of the world. This is not a retreat from reality, it is the logically mandated emphasis upon salient relational connections.

In the case of model-theory, the thing it is an abstraction from is not so much the totality of experience, but rather of cognitive structures—often themselves quite formal—which are, in turn, abstractions from that fullness of experience. Formal model-theory is an abstraction from an abstraction, a model of modeling; tools for refining tools. A real tool is a reflection of the reality it is intended to work upon, even when that reality is a few steps removed, by processes of abstraction. We would argue that model-theoretic approaches come with an implicit, but essentially “built-in” implicit realist “metaphysics.” This implicit realism is an expression of how model-theory understands the logical quantifiers as expressing an interrogative “game” of fitting a theory to the structure being modeled.3

This “game-theoretic” approach to the model-theoretic understanding of the quantifiers is quite literal. One imagines two players who are testing out a model of some kind. For our purposes we’ll refer to them as “Verifier” and “Falsifier.” Regardless of the terms we use, the purpose of the players is the same: one wants to show the model is “true,” the other that it is “false,” these evaluations being defined upon the game itself, not some context-free semantic analysis. Falsifier might present an object from the universe of discourse, challenging Verifier to show that the model can match this object properly within the model’s theory. Verifier might present a structure within the model and demand that Falsifier provide any example from the universe of discourse which stands outside the theory’s entailments. If Verifier has a winning strategy (one that wins on any possible play by Falsifier), then the model is true. If Falsifier has a winning strategy, then the model is false. If neither has a winning strategy, then the model is neither true nor false. (This latter possibility occurs only in games of infinite length.)

Regarding our model of Fenway Park, we could say that Falsifier has the winning strategy, due to the impossibility of modeling every aspect of the stadium under the stated purpose (i.e., the relevant universe of discourse), since certain features of the task are irresolvably recalcitrant. Yet, if these limits are incorporated explicitly into the purpose of the model, with hedges and caveats, then Falsifier is robbed of a winning strategy. With Neil Young’s trains, we have something closer to an infinite game. Falsifier says, “Hey, Neil, bet you can’t …” to which he replies, “Dude, let me think about it … and I wish I hadn’t given up weed.” This is not relativism, but it is a kind of contextualism. This is how finite minds (some more finite than others) situate models in a vast universe.

Where the quantifiers come in to “play” is with the idea of a winning strategy, using a universal (“for all”) quantifier, which says that any move the other player can make will fail to trump the first player’s move. An existential (“for some”) quantifier says that there is something the current player can do that will match or beat the other player’s previous move. Note that which player is asserting which quantifier depends on whether the particular move is to show the model to be true or not, and on whether the move is to trump the other player’s efforts in this regard.

This game-theoretic approach to the quantifiers makes model-theory the most appropriate methodology for justifying the centrality of formal logic for good reasoning; it centers the formalism directly upon the process of inquiry itself.4 “Verifier” represents the inquirer or community of inquiry; “Falsifier” represents that which is being investigated. Scientists who support a theory are the Verifiers, while nature (and those scientists challenging the paradigm) play the role of the Falsifier. In the absence of an objectively real nature, the role of Falsifier makes no sense.

This realist interpretation of the quantifiers is in line with our position throughout this book. “Logic” as the theory of inquiry; model-theory then becomes the principal formal tool for mapping key abstract relationships within the process of inquiry. This mapping shows how model-theory is an essential auxiliary to science, since scientific inquiry is “just” the most highly refined form of inquiry, with nature and natural processes playing the most uncompromising Falsifier we can encounter.5

This introduction contextualizes what follows. We return to Whitehead’s philosophy of science and nature, informed now by our account of his relationalism in the context of the quantum of explanation and the intricate algebra of negative prehension. Contemporary physical science has wandered from its supposedly empirical commitments. Some blame for this drift can be laid at the feet of the philosophers. Philosophy as a public conversation, vigorously pursued with the public, has disappeared in favor of the perceived safety of academic isolation.

Yet scientists are not innocent. Understanding our criticisms of these attitudes amongst scientists applies basic ideas of model-theory in order to understand the failings of “model-centrism.” Model-theoretic ideas open up a powerful line of interpretation, enabling us to formalize a significant part of Whitehead’s philosophy. We already mentioned the deep connections between model-theoretic and algebraic approaches, the latter being Whiteheadian to the marrow. When seen in the light of the failures of set and proof theories, the model-theoretic approach stands out as a substantial advance in formal methods.6 We will argue that these factors make the model-theoretic approach the most appropriate one to the thoroughly radical form of realism that is the flip-side of Whitehead’s radical empiricism. This needs some explanation, since realism and empiricism are often treated, since Hume, as opposites. But that is only because empiricism and realism are not handled in a genuinely radical way.

We will look at two attempts to do an “end-around” on the careful metaphysics of nature. The first is the ex fiat declaration of the supposed end of philosophy by scientists who are doing philosophy badly. The second will be an examination of Bas Van Fraassen and his old(ish)-school empiricist application, using many of the model-theoretic tools in his project that we have been advocating here. Van Fraassen’s project is ultimately untenable on account of its Humean commitments. Each of these positions illustrates something about the model-theoretic approach that serves our argument about Whitehead’s “radical realism.” Our starting point is the bad metaphysics of contemporary model-centric physics. The model-centric and the model-theoretic approaches are as different in spirit as the distinction between medieval philosophy and genuine science. The appeal to medieval philosophy is not entirely rhetorical.





Bad Metaphysics


Is it possible to do science without philosophy? Stephen Hawking—among others—is convinced it can be done. In Hawking’s late forays into popular writing, one of the first moves is a back-handed dismissal of philosophy.7 Hawking has sparred with philosophers in the past with no constructive intent, and even less constructive effect. The sheer vacuity of Hawking’s broadside is notable. One cannot call it a “criticism” because nothing he says might be mistaken for a reasoned argument. But more importantly, the overtly philosophical purpose of Hawking’s enterprise throughout The Grand Design renders his initial attack disingenuous; he can avoid the charge of overt hypocrisy only on the grounds that he was unaware of the blatantly philosophical method and intent of his book. Ignorance is seldom a good excuse for sloppy hyperbole. Contrary to the view expressed by Hawking, Whitehead asserts the following:

The claim of science that it can produce an understanding of its procedures within the limits of its own categories, or that those categories themselves are understandable without reference to their status within the widest categories under exploration by the speculative Reason—that claim is entirely unfounded. Insofar as philosophers have failed, scientists do not know what they are talking about when they pursue their own methods, and insofar as philosophers have succeeded, to that extent scientists can attain an understanding of science.8



The problems with Hawking’s view are indicative of larger of problems endemic with contemporary physics in particular, and science in general. Many of these problems are the effects of bad metaphysics. Contemporary science has been hamstrung by metaphysical commitments that are not recognized as such, and consequently cannot be addressed through the normal scientific channels. Such commitments cannot be addressed even through extraordinary channels—largely philosophical ones—until it is recognized that those channels exist and play an important role.

The willful blindness engendered by this absence—indeed, aggressive abandonment—of philosophical inquiry into basic principles has shackled physical science in particular to a clowder of assumptions for which there is little justification. Whitehead published Science in the Modern World in 1925, so it is not as though fundamental criticisms of hidebound physcialism are only now appearing. Yet these criticisms have been ignored by the scientific community. As a consequence we will not shy away from polemics in what follows.

Turning to Hawking’s bromide, after listing certain ideas and pursuits, Hawking declares that, “traditionally these are questions for philosophy, but philosophy is dead. Philosophy has not kept up with modern developments in science, particularly physics. Scientists have become the bearers of the torch of discovery in our quest for knowledge.”9 This is a throw-away remark, unaccompanied by any argument, meant only to upset philosophers.10 Hawking labors under the delusion that philosophy is only “real” when it is doing physics, as though the philosophical assumptions Hawking takes for granted brooked no critique. But aside from its failure in critical thinking, Hawking’s dismissive swipe comes with significant history of its own. In his earlier Black Holes and Baby Universes, Hawking lamented the poor reception of his previous ipse dixitisms amongst philosophers:

There is a real problem here. The people who ought to study and argue such questions, the philosophers, have mostly not had enough mathematical background to keep up with modern developments in theoretical physics. There is a subspecies called philosophers of science who ought to be better equipped. But many of them are failed physicists who found it too hard to invent new theories and so took to writing about the philosophy of physics instead. They are still arguing about the scientific theories of the early years of this century, like relativity and quantum mechanics. They are not in touch with the present frontier of physics…. Maybe I’m being harsh on philosophers, but they have not been very kind to me.11



It is very difficult to put a charitable spin on Hawking’s remark. We are not too proud to offer criticisms of our discipline for failures on the part of some—indeed, many—to achieve an adequate grasp of mathematical ideas. But those criticisms are predicated upon a principled understanding of what mathematics is and how it can and ought to be employed. Hawking, by contrast, provides no actual reasons for his claims beyond a failure by philosophers to accept contemporary physics without question. Quite aside from his utter disdain for the very real philosophical issues that continue mercilessly to hound the developments of physics since the early twentieth century (still unresolved, even within physics) he evidently considers his ad hominem remarks sufficient.

Hawking fails to consider that the rough handling he complains about may have been deserved. Anyone who troubled to compare Hawking’s Brief History of Time to Sherover’s The Human Experience of Time, might be struck by the fact that Hawking’s volume was so brief was because it lacked any history.12 Realistically, Hawking’s responses are sheer petulance. Some latitude must be given for the fact that Hawking’s works were popular books. But some responsibility ought to be taken for the fact that they were written from a significant bully pulpit and some effort expended by Hawking to achieve at least a marginal level of scholarship. So Hawking’s argument that “they hurt my feelings” scarcely seems worthy of someone who (until recently) held the Lucasian Chair at Cambridge, as he often reminds us.

This isn’t the worst of it. The worst is Hawking’s defense of “model-dependent realism.” The problem with this proposal is not that it is bad philosophy—although it certainly is that. The problem is whether it is any sort of philosophy at all. Having declared the philosophical enterprise to be dead—because it is not sufficiently akin to physics—Hawking then blithely engages in a patently philosophical project, apparently in ignorance of the fact that he is doing philosophy:

Until the advent of modern physics it was generally thought that all knowledge of the world could be obtained through direct observation…. [This] naïve view of reality … is not compatible with modern physics. To deal with such paradoxes we shall adopt an approach that we call model-dependent realism. It is based on the idea that our brains interpret the input from our sensory organs by making a model of the world…. But there may be different ways in which one could model the same physical situation, with each employing different fundamental elements and concepts. If two such physical theories or models accurately predict the same events, one cannot be said to be more real than the other; rather, we are free to use whichever model is most convenient.13



That this is a philosophical rather than a scientific position requires no commentary, yet Hawking considers himself to be functioning as a scientist. But there is nothing here that is even marginally testable; it is a program for interpreting—and a framework in which to interpret—the results of physics. The complete catalogue of the history of such ideas and their problems would take days to produce, although Quine’s work on the under-determination of theories leaps to mind. The fact that Hawking wants to argue for a “realism” in which it is “dealer’s choice” (our phrase) as to which model is “real” whenever it conveniently “fits” one’s “observations” hardly stands out as an exemplar of logical coherence. Even the word “observations” must be scare-quoted since the actual data supporting—and necessitating!—Hawking’s multiple models is so thin it almost does not exist.

Hawking’s “model-dependent realism” is a prime example of what we call “model-centrism.” For model-centrists, theory trumps all else. In Hawking’s case, rather than take from the failure of a coherent model to emerge from the scattered shards of evidence that there is a fundamental problem with theories of physics, he cavorts triumphantly, legislating that all the equivalent models are true and real. Another example of this theory-above-all attitude is found in the writings of Brian Greene. Greene, with an innocent charm, casually declares that, “The overarching lesson that has emerged from scientific inquiry over the last century is that human experience is often a misleading guide to the true nature of reality. Lying just beneath the surface of the everyday is a world we’d hardly recognize…. assessing life through the lens of everyday experience is like gazing at a van Gogh through an empty Coke bottle”14 The solution for Greene is not merely “extraordinary” experience (since the everyday variety cannot be trusted), but experience corrected by theory. The question that model-centrists never ask is, “What, then, corrects theory?” Indeed, quis custodiet ipsos custodes?

With Hawking, apart from the lack of historical understanding, his dogmatic defense of patently inconsistent models is supposed to justify theory in the absence of observational evidence. Hawking’s drive to have things both ways, real yet model-dependent, is a consequence of various contradictory beliefs Hawking holds but refuses to subject to serious, philosophical criticism. Hawking’s commitment to realism is almost the sine qua non of any working scientist. Whitehead spoke to this sort of view with his usual compelling logic and grace regarding the discovery of Pluto. Initially, the idea was that Pluto had been discovered because there were deviations from the mathematically predicted paths of Uranus and Neptune:

There is, however, no difficulty in producing a mathematical formula which describes the observed deviation. Such a formula will be of the most elementary mathematical character…. Altogether a description of charming simplicity which would have delighted Plato by its exemplification of his most daring speculations as to the future of mathematics. Every Positivist must have been completely satisfied…. But astronomers were not satisfied. They remembered the Law of Gravitation.15



Note the ease with which scientists could have formally “tweaked” the mathematics in order to make them “fit” the observations. Observations conflict, but simply manufacturing an ad hoc mathematical formula to “take care of things” enjoys (in Russell’s phrase) all the advantages of theft over honest toil. This is simply fabricating parameters from the blue and inserting them into the theory and brushing aside any embarrassing contact with empirical facts. This adding of parameters is a favorite move of the model-centrists, fundamentally at odds with the realism that is a driving force with working scientists. Hawking insists that the emerging mathematical structures that he and others have developed are real. But these mathematical constructions do not comprise a univocal theory of the real; worse yet, as many physicists have pointed out, these abstract creations are so devoid of empirical content that they lack genuine scientific standing at all.16

The most notorious form of these theories—which Hawking enthusiastically embraces and uses as the justification for his “model dependent realism”—is the “M-theory” family of string-theory based mathematical constructs. “M-theory,” Hawking observes, “is not a theory in the usual sense. It is a whole family of different theories, each of which is a good description of observations only in some range of physical situations.”17 Hawking profoundly mischaracterizes the situation. The problem is not just that M-theory is not “a” theory; the problem is that it is not a theory in any scientifically robust sense at all.18 Lacking even the abstract possibility of empirical test, string-based proposals are so inherently vacuous that they do not even qualify as hypotheses. A hypothesis is something that at least might be tested; string-theories require such outlandish experimental set-ups—nuclear accelerators whose diameters are equal to that of our own galaxy, for instance—that they make a mockery of the distinction between “practical” and “in principle” impossibility.

Regarding Hawking “model-dependent realism” does not develop the topic with any nuance. He might have noticed the absence of empirical content in his mathematical constructs and why that was significant if he knew any philosophy. He might have discovered that the logical tools to render coherent his model-dependencies were developed by philosophers like Brandom and Rescher, and deployed by folks like Brown and Priest. But Hawking didn’t bother. His dismissal of the philosophy of science included the declaration, without evidence, that many philosophers of science were simply persons who lacked the ability to do physics. It seems legitimate to wonder about the talents and proclivities of mathematicians19 who would legislate to the entire history of human thought, rather than take the trouble actually to learn and engage that history.

Model-centrism is bald-facedly medieval in its methods and attitudes. This is not rhetorical extravagance; it is a direct analogy. Many important questions were engaged by the medievals: the relation of universals and particulars and the nature of possibility were two we noted above. But the medievals were also severely limited in their lines of inquiry: whatever question they asked and whatever answer they proposed, it had to be made to fit within the confines of the standard model handed to them by the Church. Some variation was permitted, but any fundamental challenges were variously extirpated by force or logical trickery. There was even an equivalent of the model-centrist’s endless use of parameters, in the form of casuistry. When the orthodox deemed it appropriate, it was always possible to make some action justifiable within the scope of supposedly “absolute” dogma.

The model-centrists’ unbridled use of parameters, forcing the world to fit their theory, is a reduction of reality to epicycles all the way down. We noted in chapter 6, the numerous scientific criticisms of ΛCDM within the community, over and above Whitehead’s critique of the measurement problem. Many of these criticisms—including Whitehead’s—came in the context of workable alternatives whose real measure of viability is ignored. If Einstein’s initial presentation of GR had been left in its original form, given no more attention or modification than Whitehead’s theory has received over the decades, then GR would be every bit as much an abject “failure” as Whitehead’s theory is declared to be by the model-centrists. GR is the “heart” of ΛCDM, but that heart is only beating because of the endless addition of stints, bypasses, and even a pacemaker, all in the forms of model-centric parameters that do not so much “show” the theory to be true as manufacture the desired fit with observation.

In recent science news, the Planck satellite, which is providing the most refined images so far of the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation (“CMBR”) is triumphantly hailed as providing the most exacting confirmation of the standard model. But in the same breath, enthusiastic model-centrists also state that it shows features that cannot be explained by the standard model and may require an entirely “new physics.”20 In other words, the Planck satellite has decisively falsified ΛCDM …

We can do better than the self-contradiction of declaring the theory true while calling for a fundamentally new physics. Even though the model-centrists are faced with their own overtly self-contradictory claims; even though they are presented with (largely ignored) alternatives to ΛCDM in the peer-reviewed literature; even though such evidence as is actually available is compromised by the systematic assumptions underlying the interpretation of that evidence; and even though all of that evidence only “fits” because the overwhelming majority of gravitational cosmologists has, for the past century, devoted their careers to inserting and tweaking parameters in the standard model so as to guarantee that fit, their triumphalism remains unabated. But at least there is some evidence supporting the standard model of cosmology; string theory is altogether devoid of empirical content.21

From a model-theoretic perspective, model-centrist triumphalism has two main props. First, model-centrists have effectively denied the proper function of the quantifiers. Our game-theoretical approach to the quantifiers requires that scientists play only one side of the game, nature takes the other side. The model-centrists have usurped both sides of the play, legislating that only those moves that “verify” the preferred model are permitted. Genuine testing by nature is not allowed, either by changing the rules of the “game” with ad hoc parameters, or by disregarding falsifying evidence. Second, model-theorists realize that within the scope of any finite amount of evidence—or, equivalently, a finite number of moves of the semantical quantifier “game”—it is always possible to construct an equally valid model to “fit” evidence/moves up to that point. Yet even when viable alternatives are present, their existence is seldom even acknowledged much less given serious consideration. So the standard model is again insulated from serious test by avoiding substantive comparison that might challenge orthodoxy. Finally, on those rare occasions when a comparison is made, the model-centrists often use an older version of the alternative model, no attempt being made to consider whether the same boundless introduction of new parameters, which the standard model enjoys, might serve the alternative model to an equal or greater degree.

Hawking’s move in The Grand Design—declaring philosophy otiose, while practicing it—is simply the latest step of the hide-bound philosophy that Whitehead so thoroughly criticized in Science and The Modern World. Hawking is trapped in an inconsistent triad: his theory must be about reality, it must be true, and yet it is not even fully coherent with itself. His philosophical position binds him because he cannot even admit he is doing philosophy—and doing it badly. He has bound himself to a metaphysical perspective he cannot acknowledge as such, and hence cannot defend, criticize, or modify, much less reject.





No Metaphysics?


Hawking’s model-dependent realism could be defended, but the steps necessary to make it credible would not please him, since it requires relinquishing some part or parts of the above mentioned triad. It is worth our while to glance briefly at one such alternative that has been advanced by a respected philosopher of science, i.e., Bas Van Fraassen and his “constructive empiricism.”

Van Fraassen avoids Hawking’s inconsistent triad by denying realism altogether and moderating Hawking’s truth claim. According to Van Fraassen, scientific realism holds that, “Science aims to give us, in its theories, a literally true story of what the world is like; and acceptance of a scientific theory involves the belief that it is true.”22 In lieu of this sort of realism, he turns toward a kind of anti-realist empiricism that has not been especially popular for some decades, even within analytical circles. Van Fraassen notes, “according to the anti-realist, the proposer (of a theory) does not assert the theory to be true; he displays it and claims certain virtues for it.”23 While noting that the idea of “literal construal” requires unpacking, he expands his comparison with realism:

The idea of a literally true account has two aspects: the language is to be literally construed; and so construed, the account is true. This divides the anti-realists into two sorts. The first sort holds that science is or aims to be true, properly (but not literally) construed. The second holds that the language of science should be literally construed, but its theories need not be true to be good. The anti-realism I shall advocate belongs to the second sort.24



Hawking would be extremely unhappy with any form of anti-realism, though Van Fraassen certainly has his reasons. Van Fraassen shifts the truth claim to one of “empirical adequacy,” a move necessitated by his empiricism, yet which Hawking would find extremely distasteful. However, Van Fraassen’s empirical adequacy criterion is far less of a shift from Hawking’s truth claim than the shift from realism to an anti-realist empiricism, and might be less vexatious for Hawking.

Van Fraassen’s empiricism is not so much a systematic doctrine or definitional ideology, as it is a “stance.”25 Eschewing a false precision, Van Fraassen argues for a broadly construed collection of notions that do not reduce to a simplistically consistent account. This move is an attempt to capture the core ideas of traditional empiricism26 without committing any of the reductionistic fallacies that open that tradition to criticism. Van Fraasen hopes to capture a principled agnosticism toward the unjustifiable and grandiose claims of analytical metaphysics. Van Fraassen’s “type 2” anti-realism also allows him to take the language of science seriously (to be construed literally) and incorporate such language into his constructive view of empiricism.

Van Fraassen’s work has long shown a predilection toward model-theoretic forms of logic. Throughout The Scientific Image, he carefully exploits model-theoretic ideas, grounding the “constructive” aspects of his empiricism and developing his account of the scientific enterprise. This disposition ideally situates him to develop in a formally respectable manner a collection (or family) of ideas that do not meld into a simplistically “consistent” set of first-order propositions. Simplistic melding is very much what Hawking wants to achieve with his model-dependency with respect to M-theory. However, Van Fraassen is logician and philosopher enough to pull it off.27 As he shows in The Scientific Image, the structure of explanation itself cannot be reduced to a single set of principles, and a multiplicity of irreducible models will typically be required in even the most elementary situations. Van Fraassen’s model-theoretic approach is substantive and robustly non-reductionistic. Hawking’s discussion in contrast, seems more than a trifle blunt.

However, Van Fraassen’s empiricism remains problematic. He is obligated to a normative claim about scientific realism/anti-realism. Clearly his account is a failure if it is intended to be merely descriptive. Scientists are almost universally realists. So, Van Fraassen’s anti-realist account has little if any historical or sociological content. That is not a problem per se, since philosophy of science is about the underlying logic of inquiry rather than the recorded methodologies of practice. But as a normative proposal, Van Fraassen’s position provides us with no tools for criticizing the model-centric position. After all, what basis can be offered to argue against simply adding parameters whenever convenient in order to save one’s cherished standard model? Since truth and reality are no longer the bases upon which we extol the “virtues” of our theories, why not appeal to the triumphalism of the orthodoxy? Following the above quote from Adventures of Ideas, fixing the formulae to fit the available observations is easy. The only “virtue” one might appeal to for not doing so in the case of Pluto is that Pluto was really there. But then one comes right back to the fact that Pluto was really there.

Furthermore, the model-theoretic issues of quantifier interpretation snap even harder at Van Fraassen’s heels than at Hawking’s and the model-centrists’. Van Fraassen does not appeal to the game-theoretical approach to the quantifiers, despite his otherwise robust model-theoretic orientation. This is probably due to the fact that widespread interest in the game-theoretical approach to quantifier interpretation is a relative late-comer to the literature.28 But the game-theoretical interpretation poses problems for Van Fraassen, because the interpretation of the quantifiers in the game-theoretical approach works from the fact that there are two players in the “game.” The model-centrists want to shove the second player aside in order to guarantee that they always win; Van Fraassen cannot entirely admit that there is a second player, since otherwise his anti-realist position would contradict itself. The game-theoretic approach is not just a formal way of “tricking out” the quantifiers. It is the first genuinely concrete methodology for establishing a meaningful connection with one’s universe of discourse. It is the only method available that enables one to get any leverage on characterizing finite models.29 (Recall that at any given time, a finite model is all we have validated.) While one can always be a “traditionalist” with the quantifiers, and just pack them in under the heading of the traditional IIO syllogism (It Is Obvious), this is not an especially satisfactory philosophical move. Yet it is the only move that remains to Van Fraassen if he insists that he is not “really” talking about the real. Either the universe of discourse is there, and the quantifiers quantify against the challenging play of reality, or we are left with the inward spiraling maelstrom of our own imaginative makings that ultimately connects to nothing.

Finally, despite his efforts at a constructive approach in The Scientific Image, Van Fraassen offers us no real ground or context within which to understand—much less rationally develop—the speculative elements of the scientific (or any other) enterprise. This is a serious flaw in his approach, revealed early on in The Scientific Image with a purely throw-away remark. While laying out the basics of his own constructive empiricism, Van Fraassen says, “It is often not at all obvious whether a theoretical term refers to a concrete entity or a mathematical entity.”30 This is Van Fraassen’s old-school empiricism speaking; no radical empiricist would make such a comparison. For radical empiricists—such as ourselves or Whitehead—mathematical “entities” can be concretely real relations that are objectively present in nature and experience. Recognizing this fact is the first step in dissolving the antipathy between realism and empiricism. But for that dissolution to occur, both must be genuinely radical.

This inability to acknowledge real relations leaves Van Fraassen with no way of accounting for, or explaining the effectiveness of, speculative thought. That there are speculative metaphysical ideas both in and undergirding science is indisputable. Quite aside from Whitehead’s critiques, consider the “multiple and multiplying universes” approach that Hawking advocates. He would have us believe that the universe instantaneously splits itself into almost identical copies over infinitesimal differences—for example, whether or not an electron jumps to another state at this immediate instant rather than another instant that differs only by an immeasurably small interval, and that such copies—of entire universes!—copy themselves without bound.31

The only possible excuse for this outlandishness is that the scientific and philosophical communities, with their limited orthodox interpretations of the mathematical tools, have so boxed themselves in with their metaphysical assumptions that they are unable to take relational possibilities seriously. Hawking’s “bad metaphysics” approach requires that we pretend such empirically vacuous foolishness is “good science,” devoid of any metaphysical commitments. On the other hand, Van Fraassen’s “no metaphysics” approach leave us to make up mathematical theories that are “empirically adequate” while requiring that we avoid interpreting those theories in ways that demand something better, something true. We are left without speculation that could actually motivate constructing such theories in the first place. While it is certainly true that we must exercise the greatest care and rigor when we engage in speculative thought, it seems to us that he has become over-worried about being wrong and has abandoned any effort at being right.





Speculative Philosophy


Whitehead presented a careful defense of the nature, role, and purpose of speculative philosophy in the opening chapters of Process and Reality. However, our initial point of engagement comes later in that work: “But in the real world, it is more important that a proposition be interesting than that it be true. The importance of truth is, that it adds to interest.”32 No small part of that interest is the enormously constructive contribution that boldly rigorous speculation provides to all aspects of human action and inquiry, including science. An erroneous proposition can be interesting for its constructive effect, an effect it can have only because it stands in contrast with what is true. This contrast is not only important on cognitive grounds, as a direction and inspiration to inquiry, but also as a fundamental moment in the creative advance of the world. For our purposes here, the cognitive aspect is the only one of importance.

Science is not self-contained. This is not peculiar to science, but a consequence of being an activity of persons in the world. Oftentimes, science can get on without philosophy, and at such times philosophers may content themselves with studying and interpreting the results of science. But at times of crisis and reorganization—times which scientists like Hawking may not recognize—philosophical critique becomes more than an adjunct, but is a fundamental contributor to the process of inquiry. As Whitehead phrased it, “philosophy then appears as a criticism and a corrective, and what is now to the purpose as an additional source of evidence in times of fundamental reorganisation.”33 We think it likely that Van Fraassen would agree with Whitehead, but Whitehead also enjoyed a background as a working scientist during much of his career, and appreciated the necessity of the realist commitment. It is that commitment that both licenses and limits speculative thought.

Speculation for its own sake is frivolous. Even writers of fiction must compose their tales within boundaries that are not only recognizable as a world, but sufficiently close to this world that the situations and characters can be recognized by the reader as meaningfully akin to situations and characters in this world. But that connection requires a robust commitment to the idea of this world. Speculative philosophy—that is, “metaphysics”—must be bound even more closely to reality than is fiction, since the standards by which it is evaluated include not only logical coherence and narrative intelligibility (by which fiction is judged) but Van Fraassen’s own “empirical adequacy” as well.

None of those things means anything unless there is a world against which they are compared. Van Fraassen’s empiricism is ultimately too Humean to allow him to escape his self-imposed skepticism and rigorously engage in speculative thought. We suspect that Van Fraassen would say that his position exemplifies the highest qualities of rigor and discipline of thought by demurring from engaging in empty mind experiments not anchored in experience. But the experience he speaks of is not the fullness of human experience: being Humean it fails to be radical. This criticism works with greater force against the model-centrists. For while they do engage in bold speculations—M-theories and infinitely multiplying universes—they offer nothing beyond a lip-service connection to reality. There are no tests in their speculations, no rigorous comparisons to equally viable alternatives, no serious effort to challenge their own cherished standard model. There is only the speculation, and the triumphalist announcements about theories declared true ex fiat in the effective absence of empirical facts, effusively cheered on by an under-informed media. Scientific journalism has gone the way of all journalism in the last quarter century.

Whitehead’s relationship to the philosophy of science—to say nothing of experience—isn’t simple. We noted how Whitehead’s radical empiricism is pervasive in all of his works. Thus, for example, Whitehead consistently argues that “nature” is what is revealed in our sensory experience. But the “characters”—his term, whose meaning we will explore momentarily—of that reality are themselves things that, while intrinsically a part of our experience, only unpack themselves in our cognitive knowledge of that experience as expressed through thoroughly relational symbolisms.34 The amount of reality we take in through experience outpaces anything that we can shoe-horn into our cognitive “bottles,” so the Humean reductionism of experience is a grotesque over-simplification.

How are we to account for this tsunami of reality pouring into us from our senses? We wish to introduce what we call “radical realism.” This phrase captures the fact that, especially when applied to nature, radical empiricismof Whitehead’s variety is a kind of realism: reality is really there. It is the content of experience, but at the same time also the radical content, which is the immediacy of reality in its relationally concrete totality.

Consider again the efforts by Hawking and others to account for relational possibilities by appealing to the empirically vacuous notion of “multiple universes.” The least of the problems with this approach is that it lacks a metaphysical framework in which relational possibilities can be taken seriously on their own account.35 As a result, these would-be metaphysicians must fall back upon the dubious metaphor of infinitely multiplying universes, in a desperate attempt to interpret their own mathematics. On the other hand, Van Fraassen’s “Humean” approach offers us no real insight into this matter, but encourages that we not talk about such things. This does not solve the problem, but merely strangles it.36

These issues are traceable back to bad metaphysics: bad regardless of whether it is produced by ignorance or denial. The solution, then, is good metaphysics. Such a program, as Whitehead asserts, is driven by the desire, “to frame a coherent, logical, necessary system of general ideas in terms of which every element of our experience can be interpreted.”37 In Whitehead’s scheme, the development of relational wholes, including the structures of possibility, is central: his “eternal objects,” which he characterizes as “Pure Potentials for the Specific Determination of Fact,”38 are there precisely to capture such relational possibilities within an explanatory framework without dismissing them or trivializing them as parasitic on their relata.

This business is one of speculative philosophy; it is not that of the scientist because its content—while it cannot fail of exemplification39—also transcends the subject matter of science; it goes beyond nature (that which is given in sense experience) to include the entirety of the real, including the bases of intelligible possibility itself. Solidly anchored by its commitment to the real, speculative philosophy becomes an active, constructive participant with science, without attempting to be science. At a time when theoreticians, dazzled by their mathematical cleverness, seem to dominate physics, it is well to remind ourselves:

Philosophy, in one of its functions, is the critic of cosmologies. It is its function to harmonise, refashion, and justify divergent intuitions as to the nature of things. It has to insist on the scrutiny of the ultimate ideas, and on the retention of the whole of the evidence in shaping our cosmological scheme. Its business is to render explicit, and—so far as may be—efficient, a process which otherwise is unconsciously performed without rational tests.40



This role is not ended because someone like Hawking declares it dead. As Hawking himself so woefully demonstrates, this task is all the more necessary precisely because scientists who enjoy gatekeeper status are altogether unable to see their own activities with a critical eye.





Radical Realism


Part of the difficulty we face here is that Whitehead’s philosophy of science has rarely received the attention it merits, even within the Whitehead community; outside of that community it is not even known. With only a few exceptions, when Whitehead’s work is applied to matters of science, it is his metaphysics that is invoked, and almost exclusively in the context of quantum mechanics.41 But these applications of Whitehead’s thought are focused upon those metaphysical developments that logically precede natural science. We have seen how the attempt forcibly to re-interpret Whitehead’s discussion of the quantum as a physical notion goes astray. Meanwhile, Whitehead’s work on the philosophies of science and nature (1919–1925)—which temporally precede his metaphysics—is seldom consulted, even though it is the most relevant source.

The general disregard for the triptych is an unfortunate inheritance from decades of Ford-influenced readings of Whitehead. Yet in these three works, Whitehead lays out his vision of nature, science, and their connection. This development does not occur in his metaphysical works, nor can it. Whitehead states on multiple occasions that the philosophies of nature and science eschew any comment on the relation of mind and the world, which is the province of metaphysics. Metaphysics, for its part, provides the logical “back story” (our phrase) for nature and the relevant methods of inquiry into it (i.e., science). But it cannot explain either nature or science per se, since these are dependent upon, and specific to, the facts about the particular cosmic epoch in which they are found. Metaphysics provides the logical framework for explanation, but it does not provide the particular explanations of those abstractions that need to be explained. For its part, science does not burst forth Athena-like from the Zeus of metaphysics. Rather, science (and, of course, nature) must be inquired into independently, and we must adapt our inquiries by bringing to bear the relevant specifics of the subject matter and the world as we find them. The natural details of this cosmic epoch do not flow of necessity from the metaphysical characters of that epoch—those characters only provide the generic order of possibility. So science and nature must be engaged as they are found, and on their own terms.42

In addition to the above nuances, Whitehead’s philosophy of science challenges the traditional classifying schemes. The two broadest thematic strands in the philosophy of science are (1) the demarcation problem—what marks off a genuinely scientific theory from one that is not?—and (2) the realism/anti-realism problem. These two themes are not disconnected, but for brevity’s sake we can treat them so. Whitehead is a realist, but what kind of relation to reality is involved? What are the essential features of that reality? Underneath it all is Whitehead’s radically different notion from that of mainstream philosophy of science about the “nature of Nature,” and its relation(s) to science. By this point in the book, the reader should be alerted to the significance and importance of the term “radical” without much additional explanation. We will now explain Whitehead’s scientific realism with his already noted Jamesian radical empiricism.

We raise three questions: What is science? What is nature? What is explanation? There is no alternative to starting in the middle. The appearance of arbitrariness derives from the coherence of Whitehead’s thought on this subject (as that term is specifically explained in Process and Reality). For historical and contextual reasons, we will approach the questions in the above order.





What Is Science?


Whitehead entered into the philosophy of science from the position of a working scientist. But unlike many of the philosophically inclined scientists who followed, Whitehead was not one to valorize theory above the experiential bases of scientific inquiry. That is, Whitehead was not a model-centrist. He was a peculiarly “amphibious” creature: a mathematician who was suspicious of mathematics as a route to fundamental truth, even though all of his thinking was informed by his mathematical background. This is not surprising. The best critic of a subject will be someone who actually knows that subject.

First, consider the context of the philosophy of science in which Whitehead found himself. Science was being transformed by the architectonic shifts caused by the general theory of relativity and the early stages of the quantum revolution. These demanded revisions of fundamental theory at both a scientific and a philosophical level. Second, philosophical inquiry was on the verge of splitting into the “analytical” and “continental.”43 The analytical/empiricist thread that inherited the philosophy of science was still dogged by the ghost of Hume. This haunting caused the philosophy of science to break into two further camps. The realists provided a robust account of how science “worked,” but could not provide a logically coherent account of why its methods of inquiry could capture essential characteristics of reality. There were also positivists whose anti-realism grasped the Humean nettle without qualification. Within their empiricist assumptions, they offered a superficially coherent account of scientific activity; but any connection with reality vanished, leaving only desiccated vision of merely descriptive “adequacy.” By the 1920’s, the positivists had gained dominance in the philosophy of science, not broken until the early 1960’s.

Whitehead found both philosophical alternatives unacceptable; but the anti-realist approach of the positivists was downright anathema. The purpose of science was to discover the truth about nature, to find the real characters of the natural world. Thus, speaking of space and time, Whitehead said, “This spatio-temporal framework is not an arbitrary convention. Classification is merely an indication of characteristics which are already there.”44 Speaking of a more technical part of the development of his theory regarding scientific objects, Whitehead says, “the object is more than [a] logical group; it is the recognizable permanent character of its various situations.”45 This permanence is not something scientists are making up, or which only approximates the reality of nature for our descriptive purposes. The intention of science is to achieve a theory that is true, not one that merely enjoys some nebulous “virtue” of empirical adequacy. On the latter attitude, Whitehead comments, “I do not think that it is any answer … to say that our propositions are only a little wrong, any more than it is a consolation to his friends to say that a man is only a little dead.”46

Most explicitly, in The Concept of Nature, referring to atoms and molecules, which the positivists described has being nothing more than mere “logical constructs,” Whitehead states:

I assume as an axiom that science is not a fairy tale. It is not engaged in decking out unknowable entities with arbitrary and fantastic properties. What then is science doing, granting that it is effecting something of importance? My answer is that it is determining the character of things known….47



He continues:

Now if there are no such entities, I fail to see how any statements about them can apply to nature. For example, the assertion that there is green cheese in the moon cannot be a premise in any deduction of scientific importance, unless indeed the presence of green cheese in the moon has been verified by experiment. The current answer to these objections is that, though atoms are merely conceptual, yet they are an interesting and picturesque way of saying something else which is true of nature. But surely if it is something else that you mean, for heaven’s sake say it. Do away with this elaborate machinery of a conceptual nature which consists of assertions about things which don’t exist in order to convey truths about things which do exist. I am maintaining the obvious position that scientific laws, if they are true, are statements about entities which we obtain knowledge of as being in nature; and that, if the entities to which the statements refer are not to be found in nature, the statements about them have no relevance to any purely natural occurrence.48



These statements leave no doubt as to the fact of Whitehead’s realism. The task Whitehead has set before us is a bold one, but the fact of his realism does not clarify the nature of that realism. We must not imagine Whitehead’s realism is akin to the kind which insinuated itself into the contemporary philosophy of science, especially naïve form of realism one finds in such popular treatments as Hawking’s.

Reality cannot be boxed off to the side as standing against or opposed to experience, thence to be magically “mirrored” in our theories. With Whitehead we must resist the tendency to assume there is a simplistic point-for-point correspondence between the “elements” of our scientific theories and the real world. This might appear to violate Van Fraassen’s requirement that the language of a “realist” theory be literal. However, a mistake here treats the concept of “literal” as applying only to substantive “things.” Relations are also real. But how is one “literally” to interpret the language of any theory? A little attention to hermeneutics will show it is unclear in what sense any rendering of any text can be called “literal.”49

Problems immediately present themselves regarding the interpretation of the mathematical portions of scientific theories. Here the previously mentioned irony of Whitehead’s mathematical “suspicions” appears. Whitehead, the mathematician, rejected attempts to treat the mathematical elements of scientific theories as providing foundational insight into the nature of the world. “There can be no true physical science which looks first to mathematics for the provision of a conceptual model.”50 Similarly, Whitehead rejected the spatial metaphors infusing the interpretation of the tensor symbolisms in contemporary cosmology,51 and he emphatically rejected any attempt to valorize the theoretical aspects of scientific inquiry over the practical ones.52 Whitehead does not view the Einsteinian, i.e., the standard model, interpretation of the mathematics as a “literal” reading of the concepts; the mathematics allows for a variety of interpretations, including those merely metaphorical ones that fail to characterize the reality.

The problem is that mathematics is not self-interpreting, as Whitehead recognized. Even in so “simple” a mathematical theory as arithmetic the concept of number is rife with what Whitehead called, “queer little contradictions which thoughtful people disregarded.”53 Similarly, Whitehead notes that the theory of types developed in the Principia does not rescue the concept of number from these contradictions, but merely presents a “rule of safety” to avoid committing the more glaring errors. “It follows that … the complete explanation of number awaits an understanding of their relevance of the notion of the varieties of multiplicity to the infinitude of things. Even in arithmetic you cannot get rid of a subconscious reference to the unbounded universe. You are abstracting details from a totality.”54

So the “literal” language of a theory is still an abstraction, but a true one (if it is true) because it highlights the relations that are really there. It is not enough to have a refined mathematical theory if we cannot even say how the most elementary parts of that structure should be interpreted. But no simplistic reference to the practical effectiveness of a theory as a guide to action will suffice either. While any simplistically direct correlation between the mathematical forms of a theory and the reality that theory is about cannot be justified, Whitehead also rejects any valorization of the merely practical over the theoretical. “In practice,” he tells us, “exactness vanishes: the sole problem is, ‘Does it Work?’ But the aim of practice can only be defined by the use of theory; so the question ‘Does it Work?’ is a reference to theory.”55

To grasp Whitehead’s program fully, one must favor neither abstract theory nor practical exigency. One must “jump in” to the fullness of the scientific enterprise, not abstracting away little bits of it, hoping to find its essential or literal “nature.” Essential “nature” is nothing less than nature itself. Superficially, such a statement might seem too obvious to mention: what else would natural science be about? But tepid forms of realism that try to push nature aside wherever it can be “mirrored” by abstract theories, cannot work. But rejections of realism falsify the activity of science itself. We must change our focus. Nature is the subject of natural science, but we need an effective notion of nature prior to developing a refined scientific picture of the relational structures within nature: we must get clearer on the nature of nature.





What Is Nature?


Whitehead offers many statements of his definition. A few examples should suffice here. In the preface of Enquiry, Whitehead characterizes nature as, “the object of perceptual knowledge.”56 In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead states:

Nature is that which we observe in perception through the senses. In this sense-perception we are aware of something which is not thought and which is self-contained for thought. This property of being self-contained for thought lies at the base of natural science. It means that nature can be thought of as a closed system whose mutual relations do not require the expression of the fact that they are thought about.57



Continuing this theme, Whitehead says, “Nature is what is observed,”58 and “Nature is the system of factors apprehended in sense-awareness,”59 and so on.

While such statements seem clear enough, and can be easily multiplied, they also may appear to be in tension our earlier assertions of Whitehead’s realism. The above statements seem to articulate an “empiricist” position, not a “realist” one. But we must move beyond the traditional oppositions of those classifications. We must appreciate the genuinely radical nature of Whitehead’s realism. It is certainly the case that Whitehead is a Jamesian radical empiricist (as we have been emphasizing). Yet, this latter label might conceal the radically objective “there-ness” of nature and its relational structures in Whitehead’s robust version of radical empiricism. Thus, we speak of the radical realism of Whitehead’s philosophy.

With respect to radical empiricism, let us revisit the original texts. James says that,

To be radical, an empiricism must neither admit into its constructions any element that is not directly experienced, nor exclude from them any element that is directly experienced. For such a philosophy, the relations that connect experiences must themselves be experienced relations, and any kind of relation experienced must be accounted as ‘real’ as anything else in the system.60



To be counted as real, a thing must be experienced; and to be counted as valid, a philosophy must not overlook anything experienced. But being experienced, it is genuinely real, not something we are merely constructing “in our heads.” Note how emphatic James, insisting upon the inclusion of relations and relational structures. Whitehead shares this emphasis; it is the centerpiece of his radicalness.

Significantly, Whitehead named the second chapter of The Principle of Relativity “The Relatedness of Nature.” Although the particular form of relatedness that concerned Whitehead in that volume was the kind of uniformity to be found among important sets of relations (those modes of relatedness known as “space” and “time”), the general fact of nature, as a related whole whose relations are themselves natural components of nature, is equally present.

We will discuss “fact,” shortly in a technical way, noting here only that for Whitehead, “fact is the undifferentiated terminus of sense-awareness,”61 that is, nature taken as a whole and all at once.62 Whitehead’s position is sufficiently clear when he states that “fact enters consciousness in a way peculiar to itself. It is not the sum of factors; it is rather the concreteness (or embeddedness) of factors, and the concreteness of an inexhaustible relatedness among inexhaustible relata.”63 These relata are there for experience, not the products of some additional act of cognition—i.e., all, the relatedness of nature that Whitehead talks about. “[T]he relations holding between natural entities are themselves natural entities, namely they are also factors of fact, there for sense-awareness.”64 These relations and relata are experienced, and are thus real, not merely logical constructs or “merely instrumental,” constructive adjuncts to that experience. Emphasizing this realism, Whitehead also is committed to the idea that science aims at truth, not merely some diluted notion of adequacy.

This realism about relations poses a different problem for Whitehead’s philosophy of nature. The relatedness of nature is “inexhaustible.” In such a densely relational universe one cannot know a part merely as a part; its relatedness to the whole is an essential aspect of its character. Whitehead is thrust into acknowledging no middle ground between absolute knowledge and utter ignorance. Relatedness ceases when things cease to exist in relation to one another. One must either have all of the relations or none. Thus, we must discover some meaningful sense of limitation that makes knowing possible without first having to know everything. This limitation will be a natural relation in its own right. Finding this relation, one then has an account that is an abstraction, but still a “literal” expression of relations within “fact.”

The first step is recognizing how nature and natural knowledge are themselves “bracketed.” The first such bracket is the limitation of nature and its philosophy: “Our experiences of the apparent world are nature itself.”65 But, “nature is an abstraction from something more concrete than itself which must also include imagination, thought and emotion.”66 The philosophy of nature “is solely engaged in determining the most general conceptions which apply to things observed by the senses. Accordingly it is not even metaphysics: it could be called pan-physics.”67 Whitehead’s realism does not fret over the Humean tangles others created for themselves, attempting to resolve issues of the knower and the known within the theory of nature. Whitehead says:

We leave to metaphysics the synthesis of the knower and the known…. [A]ny metaphysical interpretation is an illegitimate importation into the philosophy of natural science. By a metaphysical interpretation I mean any discussion of the how (beyond nature) and of the why (beyond nature) of thought and sense-awareness. In the philosophy of science we seek the general notions which apply to nature, namely, to what we are aware of in perception. It is the philosophy of the thing perceived, and it should not be confused with the metaphysics of reality of which the scope embraces both perceiver and perceived.68



This limitation does not imply that mind is in some sense unreal or a mere epiphenomenon; nor, Whitehead insists, should he be understood, “as implying that sense-awareness and thought are the only activities which are to be ascribed to mind.”69 Rather, “nature as disclosed in sense-perception is self-contained as against sense-awareness,70 in addition to being self-contained as against thought.” Nature, Whitehead tells us, is “closed to mind.” This closure ensures that, against Berkeleyan forms of empiricism, Whitehead’s view is thoroughly realistic in its radicalism. Knowing about nature does not alter the nature that is known. This closure also ensures that there is a primary form of limitation to the relatedness of nature such that these relations are knowable by means of humanly possible methodologies. Not everything in nature is “infinitely relevant” to everything else, even though the totality is bound into a relational unity. We, as finite minds, are able to highlight salient points and turn these into the primary focus of our inquiries, not because other forms of relational connectedness are not there, but because they are not relevant.

There is a second important form of limitation, striking at the heart of the relational structure of nature itself and our ability to know it. Not all relations are of a kind, and these distinctions are operatively present in experience—they are a real part of nature. There is a distinction in experience between (some types of) contingent and necessary relations (local not only to the immediate epoch, or our cosmic epoch, but to nature itself) making it possible to determine various classes of essential limitations through the global necessities of their connections. Among those necessary relational structures, Whitehead argues, are the direct experience of the previously mentioned uniformities in nature of space and time.

This claim that we have a direct experience of the uniformity of space and time can be difficult to accept. It is a bit challenging to buy into the idea that we have direct experience of relational features of nature that are in some sense universal and “necessary.” Yet, taking radical empiricism seriously, one is obliged to admit to the possibility of such experience; the alternative to radical empiricism is being trapped in a Humean world where experience is but a disjointed collection of subjects qualified by predicates—so much sound and fury, signifying nothing. In such a Humean world, “you must fail to give a coherent account of experience.”71 But even taken radically, what evidence might we find in experience to confirm the claim that the uniformities of space and time are immediately present features of experience? Whitehead’s response is that there is no other evidence than that actually provided in and by experience itself.

Consider the example of a yardstick, both wherever you are and in New York City.72 What “logical” reason is there for thinking that the yardstick means the same thing in both places? There is an unbounded range of viable mathematical relations that could hold such that, for example, the yardstick in one place would be no more than an inch long in another. No one seriously entertains such a possibility, and not because we’ve investigated the matter and discovered it to be false. Rather, the uniformity of space is such an immediate and necessary factor of our experience that only from the æther of recondite formal thought could any alternative occur to us.73

Distilling such relational differences as those between the “necessary” uniformities of space and time and contingent factors of physical nature,74 the mind casts a sufficiently robust net over reality to capture a systematic totality of basic relational characters of nature such that genuine knowledge is possible. A natural limit is discovered in the separation among relational forms so that the essential structures can be discerned, from which the naturally contingent ones can be teased out through further inquiry.

This relational picture reiterates Whitehead’s numerous criticisms of the natural philosophy of his day, a view that still operates in many quarters (often implicitly); we are speaking of hide-bound physicalism.

“Physicalism” in this sense is not merely the claim that nature consists of nothing more than point-like bundles of matter in billiard-ball style collisions. Rather, it is the generic presupposition that the fundamental characters and qualities of nature come in punctiform bundles (such as infinitesimal points of time and space, not just bundles of matter) that are just and only the things they are without any further reference to the rest of nature; as a corollary, all relations are ultimately parasitic upon these punctiform bundles. These bundles, being ultimate (according to hidebound physicalism), neither need nor admit of any further explanation, and themselves explain all of the relational structures of nature.75 These relational structures are themselves merely parasitic abstractions of the supposedly “real” punctiform “things.” This position abandons any discussion of real possibilities within physics, leaving them to multiply universes. A considerable part of contemporary science rejects this model of nature, but it is unclear to what extent an alternative is consciously operating amongst those who make the rejection of the above naïve form of materialism explicit.

Hidebound physicalism is implicated in the general failure to take relational structures seriously. Once the fundamental structure of reality is conceived as concentrated in discrete points, then any relations amongst such points can exist only as external and parasitic interpretations we ourselves have made and imposed upon the “true” realities. The only “reality” that remains within this physicalist worldview is not that of experience and nature in their fullness, but rather of subjects (the punctiform “realities”) qualified by predicates. But as Whitehead observed, “If you once conceive fundamental fact as a multiplicity of subjects qualified by predicates, you must fail to give a coherent account of experience.”76 The fallacy of materialism, in forms which, by materialism’s essential nature, reject the fundamental relatedness of nature—is the root source of two of Whitehead’s more famous charges against orthodox scientific and philosophical thinking: the fallacy of simple location and the fallacy of misplaced concreteness.

For Whitehead, while any particular set of equations is a poor source for a conceptual framework of nature, the generic habit of algebraic thinking is different. Algebraic thinking is not about some specific mathematical model, nor is it about something as broadly conceived as a conceptual frame. Algebraic thinking is about taking relations seriously on their own account by disciplining the mind to such thinking through the engagement with abstract algebra itself. This is the resolution of the seeming paradox of Whitehead the mathematician rejecting mathematical models as a source of conceptual models. The habit of algebraic thinking will open many doors, but it will not (by itself) provide us with the conceptual model necessary to tell us which door we should go through.

In order to know nature, we must know it as it is: a relational whole, closed to mind but penetrable by inquiry. Yet nature is not an unlimited whole. Nature is a system of relationships that variously break themselves out between the “essential” and the “inessential,” the “necessary” and the “contingent.” How these relational structures break out will be relevant to some inquirential purpose. But relational realities are not less real or less objective simply because human purposes are selectively brought to bear upon the experiential totality of nature. We choose which parts of reality to focus our attention upon. If we have chosen well, those parts are objectively, radically, real features of nature and experience.

Our subject is beginning to shift, and parts of it are “bleeding into” one another like patches of paint that keep running on our canvas. Our topic seems to have slipped from the radically realist “nature of Nature” into the more epistemological issue of the nature of knowing about Nature. This is where we began our discussion of the nature of science. So it is now time to close our circle, with a newly informed perspective on our starting point.





What Is Explanation?


Whitehead’s theory of science is a theory of explanation, and not merely one of description. Any attempt to leave science at a purely descriptive stage while claiming it could be an adequate philosophy of science is wrecked upon the shoals of scientific practice. Describing observed phenomena is only a starting point for scientific inquiry. As the discovery of Pluto shows, tweaking parameters does not suffice to learn what is true, only to show how clever we are with our mathematics. Empirical adequacy (Van Fraassen’s criterion) fails us because the only real “virtue” relevant to a scientific theory, qua theory, is whether it is true. Truth will ensure empirical adequacy, but we should not take for granted that a cleverly parameterized model pushes its empirical adequacy any closer to scientific truth—the lesson from Hawking and the model-centrists. It is not enough for a scientific theory to be an adequate description; it must provide us with a correct explanation. This is Whitehead’s realism; a description can be good or bad, but an explanation is supposed to be true.

Van Fraassen makes some good points regarding the context sensitivity of any explanatory framework.77 But Whitehead’s work addresses those concerns by establishing the context of Nature, understood in his radically real way. Context sensitivity does not undermine the realist claim. The number of true things claimed within an inquiry might be quite large, and those true things might not say “the same thing.” All forms of inquiry are automatically limited by considerations of relevance that cannot be eliminated in the name of a “more real” truth. We must abstract from the totality of nature to address the purpose(s) of inquiry, and this abstraction will take account of the real lines of relevance-relatedness, else our inquiry spins off into purposeless and recondite tangents.

The question of explanation does not admit of simple, or even complicated but straight-line, approaches. The work of Hempel is generally agreed to fall short of its aim in capturing the scientific notion of explanation. Carnap’s work—both before and after Hempel’s—focused on probabilistic theories from within a positivistic framework. Yet Carnap’s statistical models were philosophically precluded from giving a metaphysically adequate explanation of themselves.78 Peter Achinstein commented that, amongst those who do stress that hypotheses should explain evidence, “most frequently, defenders of such a view do not define the concept of explanation involved,” citing William Whewell, Gilbert Harman, and Peter Lipton.79

Whitehead has very little to say on the subject of explanation, and per Achinstein, does not “define” the concept of explanation at all. The idea that explanation was in need of philosophical analysis did not emerge until after Whitehead’s major works. There are some questions begged in Achinstein’s observation about whether explanation can or even ought to be “defined.” The nature of Nature requires a centering of our focus such that the totality of natural relatedness is limited to structures that finite minds can encompass. Such situated relevance might preclude anything a simplistic “definition.” And Whitehead does offer us an opening into an “explanation of explanation,” not admitting of definitional reductions. We have already introduced some of the tools needed for discussion. In discussing what is to be explained—nature, for example—Whitehead also showed how that explanation is built.

We make explicit the connection between some specific act of explanation and the appropriate act of abstraction. This act of abstraction must cull irrelevant data from the masses of undifferentiated fact, imposing themselves upon our senses and thought, selecting just those factors that can legitimately functioning as evidence within the specific inquiry. The terms “fact” and “factor” are chosen from Whitehead’s use in The Concept of Nature. Whitehead says:

[T]here are three components in our knowledge of nature, namely, fact, factors and entities. Fact is the undifferentiated terminus of sense-awareness [that is, the totality of nature as it is given]; factors are termini of sense-awareness, differentiated as elements of fact [that is, the first stage abstractions taken from the whole but still solidly rooted in the immediate contents of experience]; entities are factors in their function as the termini of thought [that is, second and higher order functional units of cognition.]80



We have emphasized this aspect of Whitehead’s theory throughout; Whitehead says a few lines later that, “evidently, the relations holding between natural entities are themselves natural entities, namely they are also factors of fact, there for sense-awareness.”81

The relational structures distilled by inquiry and cognized in a logically rigorous manner both support the relevant explanatory hypothesis (where relevance will be local to the featured abstractions driving the inquiry), and these factors should be explained by that hypothesis.82 If the abstractive selections are to serve the explanatory purposes, then it is not enough that these selections provide descriptive parsimony or (naïvely) pragmatic uses; they must also be true. Selections made for epistemic purposes must correspond to the characters of natural realities that are objectively present.

The characters which science discerns in nature are subtle characters, not obvious at first sight. They are relations of relations and characters of characters. But for all their subtlety they are stamped with a certain simplicity which makes their consideration essential in unraveling the complex relations between characters of more perceptive insistence.83



This special insistence—including the kind of simplicity that indicates one is dealing with the real heart of the matter—is a central feature of relevance. We have already observed that while experience does not come pigeon-holed for our passive inspection, neither does it come undifferentiated and unlimited. The relational features of nature do not all stand on the same footing, and this difference is also a manifestly present aspect of experience.

Much has been glossed over regarding relevance and abstractive selection here.84 We have made an initial gesture toward formalizing these ideas in chapter 9.

A context of highest relevance amounts to a system of models—basically, a Kripke frame—with the transition and relational connections between models representable along lines akin to those employed in modal logics, especially as these are used and interpreted within computer science. Explanation is possible only within contextually limited frames of intentionally selected abstractions that highlight real relational connections in the world. The context, the frame of explanation, is the structure of relevant connections that localize the characters of inquiry to make true statements about the world possible for finite minds.

In model theory, the model will be represented by a theory, and this will “satisfy” certain statements and claims. This structure of satisfaction is symbolized with the “double turnstile,” or “⊨.” So if “T” is a theory, and “α” a sentence, then “T ⊨ α” says that α is true according to the theory T. The “⊨” relation asserts an explanatory connection between T and α: that is, T is a symbolic representation of some model M—an explanatory framework—and serves to explain the “fact” (in Whiteheadian terms) expressed by α within the context of the model M.

What can we say about the “⊨” relation? “⊨” within any particular context/model amounts to an act of explanation. But what about the generic characteristics of that act, in any rather than just some context? The unpacking of “⊨” is a problem for metaphysics,85 and brings this part of our story back around full circle. We close this chapter by noting that the explanation of explanation, the grounding of “⊨” within the limitations of this cosmic epoch, is nothing other than the quantum of explanation itself. Any account of the nature of explanation must provide a complete relational framing of the connections between cognition and the real. Limiting our attention to just nature allows us to make partial inroads on the subject, but will never permit those efforts to rise above fragmentary analogies. The fullness of such an account requires a complete metaphysics. Those who abandon metaphysics—and worse still, those who abandon philosophy—toss the possibility of explanation aside as well.
