11 Synoptic Pluralism and the Problem of Whiteheadian “Theology”


The use of the word ‘nature’ is more fitting to the limits of human reason and more modest than an expression indicating a providence unknown to us.

—Kant, Perpetual Peace



In this passage, and many others, Kant expresses a profound humility before the power of what he calls “ideas.” These are inexhaustible (also a Whiteheadian term, as we mentioned above) and serve as the ground for an indefinite number of “concepts” which determine our experience (including the “concept” of nature)—for cognition, for action, and via feeling, for reflection. Whitehead shares the humility, if not the precise distinction between “ideas” and “concepts.” Yet, we may attribute to Whitehead a distinction between the logic of concepts and the order of ideas. Ideas, for Whitehead are the sorts of philosophical entities that govern history. In Adventures of Ideas he specifies seven such. The book is not entitled Adventures of Concepts. Nor could it be. Conversely, The Concept of Nature is not entitled The Idea of Nature. Nor could it be. We will draw on a distinction between “idea” and “concept” that follows Whitehead’s usage, but also does not depart very far from Kant’s views.

Religious and theological Whiteheadians have exercised tremendous influence over Whitehead’s legacy in the last half-century. Much good has been done by extending Whitehead’s thought in this way. Yet, we think these projects are different in spirit from Whitehead’s cosmology and philosophy of culture. Whitehead’s God is not, as Richard Ely pointed out, the God of religion, or indeed, a God capable of bearing human religious feeling.1 Charles Hartshorne’s God, by contrast, most definitely is the God of Western religion, as William T. Myers has argued persuasively.2 Hartshorne’s influence over Whitehead’s interpreters is greater than most people think, to be discussed in subsequent chapters. Here we want to address the relationship between Whitehead and religious and theological thought by applying what we have said about “nature” above to the problems of religious and theological naturalism.3

A number of interpreters of Whitehead, including sympathetic voices, such as Hartshorne, George Allan and Donald Sherburne, along with critics such as Donald Crosby, Robert C. Neville, and Robert Corrington, have associated Whitehead’s naturalism with an untenable interpretation of his cosmology. Most have conceded the field to Lewis Ford and then attacked the weaknesses of Ford’s views as if these were Whitehead’s. Ford’s interpretation of Whitehead is manifestly wrong. We have corrected those errors. What remains is to explain what Whiteheadian naturalism really is, addressing this result to the tradition of religious and theological naturalism that has grown alongside process philosophy. The discussion should return to philosophy of science. If something can invigorate religious experience genuinely in keeping with Whitehead’s thought, we favor it—and we have some suggestions of our own.





Philosophical, Religious, and Theological Naturalism


What sort of concept of “nature” is appropriate to philosophical and/or religious naturalism? There are at least two different questions here. Philosophical naturalism depends upon concepts, in the sense that conceptual determination is a condition for philosophical discourse. If philosophy exists apart from the discourse of reflective experience, we do not know what it would be or how it would be related to the reflective discipline of our tradition, The disciplining of reflection is a necessary condition of philosophizing well, although we do not say that unreflective or non-reflective experience has no place in philosophy.

Religious naturalism may depend upon concepts for its articulate expression, but there is a precognitive domain of praxis that grounds religious experience as a mode of human experiencing; such praxis does not depend upon linguistic or conceptual articulation, nor upon the disciplining of reflection. One could be a religious naturalist without knowing it, which is not true of philosophical naturalism. The inclusion of reflective experience, disciplined or not, is also compatible with religious naturalism. A “power of concepts” (to use Kant’s language) is a precondition for being a religious naturalist; we doubt whether any animal lacking the ability to conceptualize experience could be a religious naturalist. It is a serious question whether dolphins, whales, and higher primates might possibly be religious naturalists, since it seems possible that they have religious feelings and experiences and also a power of concepts. That question is beyond our scope.

Being a philosophical naturalist depends upon conscious adoption of a position in a way that religious naturalism does not. Our view raises questions about the status of theology—what it is and what it does. Systematic theology seeks to employ the tools of philosophy, because it seeks to be thoroughly reflective. Such theology can endorse naturalism only in a philosophical way, and hence, theology is not the creator of a view of nature; it borrows a view of nature from philosophy (or social or natural science operating philosophically), asking what happens to religious issues, investigated in a thoroughly rational way. A “natural theology” is thus thoroughly dependent on whatever view of nature it appropriates from philosophy (including social and natural sciences). The varieties of theological naturalism are further elaborations of the respective versions of philosophical naturalism so appropriated.

There is no purely theological view of nature; the question of what nature is, even including God in one’s cosmic elements, even where all of nature dependent upon that God (e.g., as “creation”), is a philosophical rather than theological question. Theology owns only one question: “what is God?” To ask whether there is a God is a philosophical question (despite the assertions of atheologians like Altizer and Taylor). It follows that one cannot be a theological naturalist without knowing it. Religious naturalism thus neither implies nor depends upon theological naturalism; a religious naturalist is free to reject the legitimacy or authority of any reflective and conceptual assessment of natural, religious experience. Religious experience requires no theology. Practitioners and intelligent disciples of any religion can be seekers of certain kinds of experiences of nature. The practice of philosophy, however, requires reflection and must maintain authority over its own organization of concepts and ideas. Theological naturalism presupposes religious naturalism, otherwise it would have no content (becoming an empty logic of ultimates4).

Thus, we should treat philosophical and religious naturalism as separate fields of experience that sometimes overlap, incidentally and interestingly. Yet, they have a few crucial common features. When religious naturalism allows that human beings naturally express their experience, and to the extent that such expression is mediated by concepts, the question “what is nature?” will arise for religious naturalists just as for philosophers. Philosophical naturalists may believe that the question “what is nature?” is presupposed by the activity of philosophizing, but it is not. One could have a systematic, subtle metaphysics, epistemology, logic, aesthetics, and ethics without ever considering the concept of nature, or even the idea of nature. Like all philosophical concepts, the concept of nature has a history and did not always exist (philosophy is older than any clear idea of “nature,” let alone a concept thereof), and the concepts of nature we articulate in our philosophies have changed over thousands of years. Presently, the question “what is nature?” is, by ubiquitous convention, a required piece of any complete philosophical inquiry.





Philosophy and the Idea of Nature


Whether there is a fundamental “idea” of nature, distinct from the many “concepts” of it, is a serious question. We leave aside whether a single concept of nature exists adequate to every possible scheme of thought and human activity. Such questions for the doctrinaire (model-centrists being a prime example). Kant decided that the idea of nature was not as inevitable as were the ideas of God, freedom, and immortality, but he thought that nature was the closest thing to an “idea of reason” in the strict sense, lying below the three necessary postulates of pure practical reason. The idea of nature is almost necessary for the determinate interpretation of our experience. If the idea of an orderly, self-organizing system of all possible sense-experience were, in the infinitely distant future, wholly consistent with the three necessary postulates (especially freedom), then “nature” would be an “idea of reason.” But a tension exists between all versions of the idea of nature and some aspects of our experience of acting freely.5 It is unwise, and unphilosophical, to treat as necessary in thinking what is contingent in experience. We are not certain that we have experiences that go beyond nature, but we are also not certain we do not.

Part of the problem with philosophical naturalism in the past two centuries is that it has been forgetful both of the history of the concept of nature, and of the contingency of the concepts that have successively been framed in the history of philosophy. Even Richard Rorty’s emphasis on contingency misses this point. If there is one thing he affirms dogmatically without apology or doubt, it is evolutionary naturalism (in his sense6). But Rorty sets the agenda on this question. We cannot accept his rejection of philosophy as inquiry (as opposed to edification), although we cannot ignore Rorty’s critique of the pretenses of philosophy, setting itself up as the arbiter of the idea of nature. Rorty says:

I have been insisting that we should not try to have a successor subject to epistemology, but rather try to free ourselves from the notion that philosophy must center around the discovery of a permanent framework for inquiry. In particular, we should free ourselves from the notion that philosophy can explain what science leaves unexplained.7



Rorty is right that a permanent framework for inquiry is not the desideratum, but there is a world of territory between admitting that philosophical inquiry is contingent and pluralistic, and rejecting the claim that philosophy picks up where scientific explanation leaves off. Philosophers can be inquirers without claiming to be authoritative meta-scientists (see chapter 10). But the widespread error Rorty is pointing out does turn on this: philosophers have assumed that when they speak of nature, they are speaking of the same thing science studies. That is an understandable assumption, but it requires very close scrutiny. The cost of denying it would be very high. Our position is that a philosophical idea of nature includes but is not exhausted by the “nature” that is studied by the sciences. We take this to be consistent with Aristotle’s and Whitehead’s views.

As a remedy Rorty presents some unpopular ideas, because the dogma of narrow naturalism is so closely held by philosophers as to make anyone who calls it out a kind of heretic. Whitehead was also such a heretic, and we follow him to the stake, if need be. But radical empiricists cannot sit by idly while philosophical dogmas are being used as empirical, cultural currency. To restore to philosophy a robust idea of nature requires that we avoid the mistakes Rorty dragged into the sunlight. But leaving nature entirely to the natural sciences, is not the answer, as we have argued. Philosophical inquiry not only includes nature, it is almost always about nature, and no gain comes from simply allowing current science to tell us what we mean by the word.





Reflective and Unreflective Experience


Let us return to the topic of philosophical and religious naturalism. What religious and philosophical naturalism really do share is a dependence upon experience (not the idea or concept of experience, the having of experience). Royce argued (in ways that will never be refuted) that the practice of philosophy has an inexpungeable religious aspect.8 The activity of philosophizing, even when it deals with doubt conceptually rather than existentially, requires that practitioners have a kind of faith in the orderliness of the universe and thought’s relation to it. Religious persons need not be philosophical, but a philosophical person must be at least slightly religious.9 The difference between philosophers and other religious people turns whether the issue of “nature” arises in an insistent way.

For unphilosophical religious naturalists, God, freedom, and immortality remain ideas that have great power, but religious naturalists often deny that these ideas yield to a single system of conceptualizations. The idea of nature is taken in tow behind the other three ideas. If the idea of nature is given equal treatment with those other three, we move into the jurisdiction of philosophy (even if we are only doing theology). Insistence upon this comparison of nature with the other three ideas of reason arises not from reflection upon the relationship between those three “unavoidable” ideas and the idea of nature. We cannot help thinking that Rorty’s half-hearted efforts in latter days, to make room for religious experience in his worldview was motivated by a guilty sense of intellectual irresponsibility about excluding something very real in human experience we have usually called “religious.”

Consider: the onset of reflective experience seems to be coeval with the development of an idea (not necessarily a concept) of nature. If we take God, freedom, and immortality to be the fundamental and irreducible “ideas of reason,” we might, by analogy, assert that nature is the fundamental “idea of reflection,” only in the sense of reflecting, i.e., the idea is active in transforming unreflective experience into reflective experience. We do not assert that in every act of cognition we also think “nature” explicitly, only that the whole of the reflective order of our thought is designated by the word “nature.”

The reason one could have a philosophy without an explicit concept of nature is because the idea of nature connects the rest of experience with the experience of reflecting. That is the most important claim in this chapter; we will reiterate it. Reflection, as an activity, is, for human beings, as far as we know, a natural experience—it requires nothing beyond the natural order for its existence or employment. Yet, it is a “reversion” of the temporal flow, to use Whitehead’s term.10 Like all the other things that belong in and with “nature,” human reflection is counted, as based upon the natural experience of reflecting. Perhaps there might be more to reflection than the natural experience (we don’t know), or perhaps all that the experience consists in, naturally, is available to our reflections (the product of reflecting). This point merely restates the twin theses of radical empiricism and radical realism we have defended. There is probably more to the experience of reflecting than can be held in any reflective idea of reflection. Here we discover a maxim: From a Whiteheadian point of view, there is always more to experiencing x than is contained, implied, or even suggested by an account of that experience of x. Reflecting reduces experience, and hence its products, call them “individual thoughts,” are static reductions (“reversions”). It is unwise to mistake a concept, a thought, or even an idea of x for the experience that gave rise to it.

Thus, naturalizing reflective experience does not require the denial of reality beyond “nature” (see chapter 10), whether as a concept, idea, or experience, and it does not imply that reflection upon the experience of reflecting is perfectly transparent—the latter involves a kind of judgment in which we seek to find generalities and universals adequate to our particular experiences, and when we fail to find adequate ones, we fail to know very much about our own experience of reflecting. We are claiming that the idea of nature connects the rest of experience with the experience of reflecting. We do not believe that the idea of nature connects reflecting with the rest of experience, per se. Moving from reflecting toward unreflective experience, freedom is the relevant idea.

Kant allowed that of the three ideas of reason, freedom is the only one of which we have concrete experience—in the experience of moving our bodies in accordance with the actions we autonomously prescribe to it. When the body is energized, enlivened, Kant says, this is the function of reason in nature. Let us reserve the idea of “freedom” for the active processes by which our reflective activity becomes unreflective bodily action. The idea of nature is appropriate to the other process—whereby unreflective experience becomes available for reflecting, and then becomes the product, that is, reflection, or individual thoughts and their order.

Nature, as an idea, is implicit in all philosophizing, but whether it should be made explicit—in extent, and likelihood of error—is also a part of the task of philosophizing. Anyone who ponders the relationship between reflective and unreflective experience encounters the idea of nature and may be prone to conceptualizing it—in one way for monists, two ways for dualists, and many ways for pluralists, such as Whitehead. The germ of a philosophical concept of nature is evinced whenever we offer a solution to the metaphysical problem of the problem of the One and the Many, rejecting the other paths. It seems that the idea of nature is relevant to all the ways the many can be joined and increased, whereas the idea of freedom seems to govern (and, we do mean “govern”) the ways that the unifications of experience become diffuse elements in the world.11 Thus, the idea of freedom, so far as we experience it in our bodily movements, is an ethical solution to the problem of the one and the many. Choosing a course of action, forsaking all others, we solve that problem in practice. E pluribus unum.

The idea of nature is grounded in a relation between unreflective and reflective experience; both types of experience are tied to the question of existence. The reason these two kinds of experience are joined in the broader question of existence is that both unreflective and reflective modes of experience do exist (even when existence is devoid of novelty), but together they fall short of full-fledged action. The problem of action includes the problem of existence, not vice-versa, and that is what makes us process philosophers. The idea of freedom is more comprehensive (and therefore more pressing, more philosophically urgent) than the idea of nature. So, stating the issue in terms of the classical problem of act and being, we assert that the problem of freedom includes the problem of experience and existence, and it exhausts the problem of act and being. This is not a chapter on freedom, however, and while we hold that any discussion of nature already implies a reciprocal discussion of freedom, we now set these complements aside and pursue our main objective.

Experience and existence are different enough that they not only engender the idea of nature, as a contrast of unreflective and reflective experience, but they also engender that contrast as a problem for reflection. One does not solve the mind-body riddle by asserting that one is a philosophical naturalist; in making such an assertion, one simply states the problem in the broadest way. If naturalism has a philosophical meaning, the mind-body problem (that is, the problem of the contrast between reflective and unreflective experience) isn’t the crux. How naturalism acknowledges and approaches the very real differences between those two modes of experience is the heart of the matter. Self-aware philosophical naturalists know that unreflective and reflective experience do not correspond, and do not attempt to get a theory of truth to do any heavy lifting. Hence we can have models of concepts but not of ideas.

In Whiteheadian language, if there were no mentality in the universe, it would not be a cosmos. The mental pole of the actual entity elevates the mere abstract possibility of intelligibility to a real potentiality. Without mentality, there might still be a flux, but there would be no “time” (no rational order) because “before” and “after” would have no stable relations existing in anything like “order.” The mental pole not only reverses the flux, it does so in ways creative of novel order; that order is raised to a level of intelligibility in its sustaining of a compound collection of relations prehended. Reflection tears apart that whole in activity but not in action. This analysis called “reflection” partializes without destroying the cosmic order. It is not a model, per se, but it grounds the real potentiality for modeling the real. We discussed this process under the names genetic and coordinate division. But as Whitehead says, “there is no holding nature still and looking at it.”12

The contrast between unreflective and reflective experience is a productive contrast; the former becomes the latter, but is also a reductive activity for the purposes of action. Where action fails to fulfill the promise of that-for-the-sake-of-which we reduce unreflective to reflective experience, we have “missed the mark,” or, in traditional language, “sinned.” Sin, here, means leaving something out of experience for the sake of an illusory greater good, projected in some plan of action, and carried out. This is missing the mark—due at least in part to the gap between the goal as projected and the real aim. There is no such thing as “evil,” but evil is a fair word to apply to grievous error.

The reduction of unreflective to reflective experience is the price we pay for choosing our actions. The idea of nature is the limit of the reduction—it provides the “musts” that we cannot afford to ignore in reducing unreflective to reflective experience. The aim of action upon a reflective product is only normative adequation—this adequation can fairly be called “modeling.” We don’t care why we have acted successfully, we only care to have been justified in our thinking once the consequences of our actions are available. Adequacy of genuine action to its plan of action is the justification of selection and reduction in the transformation unreflective to reflective experience.

Yet, we must ask, why are the reflective and unreflective modes of experience so different? Why do they even seem to obey different laws or rules (since the norms of logic are identical with the laws of physical nature, as far as we know)? Is there any third realm that unites them? (We have suggested that freedom answers this demand; that is another story.) This sort of doubt which gives rise to our various philosophical concepts of nature. “Existence” is that realm to which both unreflective and reflective experience belongs, but whether they are there united in an identity is a metaphysical issue beyond our ken. We are pluralists. Reflective and unreflective experience could be united in different and perhaps incommensurable ways, but they could not fail to be constructively related, even if we are unable to discover all the ways they are so related. Similarly, Whitehead says that “space as pure extension, dissociated from process, and time as pure serial process, are correlative abstractions which can be made in different ways, each way representing a real property of nature.”13

We take the view articulated here to be Whiteheadian in character, emphasizing that we read Whitehead as a radical empiricist. We also think that radical empiricism, as a fundamental orientation on what philosophy is and how it ought to be done, is most compatible with the idea of nature we have just suggested. But what sort of view is this?





Varieties of Naturalism


John Shook has recently offered a compact, systematic schematization of the varieties of philosophical naturalism we want to endorse, as far as it goes, without qualification or modification.14 He rightly sees that Whitehead, William James, Peirce, Santayana, Paul Weiss, Stephen Pepper, Nelson Goodman, and—most importantly—Richard Rorty in The Linguistic Turn (but not later writings), endorse a version of naturalism that he calls “synoptic pluralism.” It is bold to group these thinkers together. Shook describes this view as “the most open and flexible naturalism, defining reality most generously.”15 “Synoptic pluralism” holds that “reality has a variety of aspects or modes as known by the many sciences, and also has aspects or modes known by experience and perhaps pure reason as well, that the sciences are incompetent to describe or explain.”16

Shook’s schema of naturalisms is based upon the positions philosophers take regarding science’s contribution to our understanding of “reality.” This is the best approach to sorting the types of philosophical naturalism, but the explicit limitations must be noted. Shook does not claim to be sorting out types of naturalism that take the concept of nature to be dispensable, i.e., non-philosophical naturalisms—such as religious naturalisms are free to do. Various romanticisms, nativisms, atavisms, aestheticisms, asceticisms, pyrrhonisms, cynicisms, hedonisms, ritualisms, and any version of a major or minor religion that rejects the exclusive authority of theology, while embracing religious experience, could be called “non-philosophical” and a variety of naturalism without being unphilosophical or anti-philosophical, but not strictly “a philosophy.”

Shook’s schema takes for granted a certain positive view of the relation between philosophy and the enterprise of scientific knowing. That is a position not only about science, but also about what philosophy is, what it does, and what it can do. Those who take a different view of philosophy, less optimistic and more deflationary, are not likely to endorse naturalism for philosophical reasons.17 The difference between Rorty in The Linguistic Turn and his later writings is that his naturalism is still philosophical in the earlier writing. When he wrote Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, his naturalism had become non-philosophical. Still later, he accepts the authority of science, but not for philosophical reasons; he did reject the authority of philosophy to deal with the concept of nature for historical and philosophical reasons. Rorty accepts the authority of science in spite of the philosophical bankruptcy of all efforts to justify its knowledge claims. And that is a problem for philosophy. Is there a philosophical concept of nature that avoids the narrowness of most philosophical naturalisms and is also of some use to reflective religious naturalists?

Radical empiricism, as an orientation on the scope and limits of philosophy, can underwrite a synoptic pluralism that frames a concept of nature that is non-dogmatic, philosophical, and useful to reflective religious naturalists. Indeed, that is how we read Whitehead’s concept of nature. A religious naturalist does not require a concept of nature, only an idea of nature, and that idea is already functional in the relation between his/her unreflective and reflective experience. We do not claim to address religious naturalists except insofar as some of them become philosophical in their doubts and responses to those doubts (Neville, Corrington, and Hartshorne loom largest). In the remainder of this chapter, we will examine the question of nature, and philosophical and religious naturalism, by examining the relation between experience and existence, as radical empiricists.





Experience and Existence


Both unreflective and reflective experience have immediacy.18 The immediacy of reflective experience can be expressed in the “what is it like to be a bat” question, but applied more narrowly to the experience of reflective beings.19 There is a something “it is like,” i.e., an aesthetic and unreflective experience, of reflecting on one’s experience. This immediate experience of reflecting has been chased by philosophers for a long time, but Bergson’s “reflective intuition” or Husserl’s “categorical intuition,” or better, Whitehead’s “conceptual feeling”; even our most mediated modes of experience possess some immediacy.

The general problem of immediacy is how to think about and describe the point at which the experience of x is indistinguishable from the existence of x; perhaps the two are “identical,” but what does that mean? The absence of discernible difference does not imply ontological identity for radical empiricists. Still, there is no reason to postulate that the problem of the immediate experience of reflecting is different in kind from any other immediate experience. What empirical inquiry is advanced by such a hypothesis? What experience could legitimize such a claim? (These are the questions Whitehead always asks when dealing with the limits of experience.) We cannot come up with a thoroughly empirical reason to postulate a dualism of that sort (what Whitehead calls the “bifurcation of nature”). The pervasiveness of mediation in the experience of reflecting may be the dominant character of its very existence, but immediacy cannot be wholly absent in reflecting.20

If there is an act of thinking that does not imply an experience of thinking, we don’t know how we could include it in a philosophy, except as a negation, and here we follow Aquinas. We also believe we have covered this in our discussions of negative prehension. Thinking is one kind of reflecting, and we can generalize this point to all types of reflecting—however many types there may be. Whatever the immediate experience of reflecting may be, unless we find a reason to think of it as utterly and irreconcilably different from other kinds of experience, we postulate that it is of the same kind as other immediate experience, and the difference, where it comes in, lies in the presence, the degree, and the modality of mediation.

The question of connecting experience to existence should be treated as the same question in both reflective and unreflective experience. If we have overlooked some reason to be ontological dualists about reflective and unreflective experience, we await correction. But we have just suggested that whatever “mind” may be, it is compatible with bodily experiencing at least as far as the immediacy of experiencing goes. “Nature,” then, is the idea of a possible unity of existence and experience where the unreflective aspect of experience is becoming reflective. Such existence is a dynamism (not static being), and its process of becoming reflective is a reduction that has the effect of slowing down temporal passage in intelligible ways.

If we assume that the idea (and the various philosophical concepts) of “nature” can do the work of connecting experience (both unreflective and reflective) and existence, the question is how? Many philosophical naturalists hold that a concept of nature can do the needed work. There are many varieties of naturalism, each crossing this bridge in a slightly different way. Let us endorse again Shook’s schema and his conclusion that there are seven viable types of philosophical naturalism. He points out that all seven viable types still suffer from “unresolved problems requiring further intense philosophical work.”21 We offer some of that work here.





Challenges for Synoptic Pluralism


Shook says, “Unless synoptic pluralism can develop its own compelling naturalistic ontology, its enthusiasm for multiple modes of reality can easily amount to ontological dualisms and pluralisms that entirely depart from naturalism.”22 In Shook’s account, the main problem with all seven viable naturalisms (as with the non-viable types) is that, under pressure, they morph into a different type of naturalism. When that happens, naturalists are inconsistent in maintaining their respective positions. We naturalists equivocate, Shook believes, and either fail to stick to a clear concept, or keep shifting our view (consciously or not) from one type of naturalism to another, rejecting the earlier by implication.

In addition, synoptic pluralism has the extra problem of morphing into a non-naturalistic position, and also, we add, a stance too friendly to non-philosophical naturalisms. That is the move Rorty made after The Linguistic Turn. He did not defend his dogmatic naturalism because it wasn’t a philosophical position.

But a Whiteheadian concept of nature goes a long way toward justifying a synoptic pluralism; it is clear and unequivocal, and does not morph under our noses. We think most people will allow that Whitehead’s naturalism is thoroughly philosophical, but some believe that his view of God or of eternal objects removes his system from the realm of philosophical naturalism. Interpreters such as George Allen and Donald Sherburne have sought to “naturalize” Whitehead’s thought by re-working or eliminating some of the basic elements. We believe such interpreters are misreading Whitehead, not grasping his method or his commitment to radical empiricism. Whitehead’s naturalism is so “generous” (to use Shook’s term) as to let in apparently non-natural entities.

Whitehead aims to “lay the basis of a Natural Philosophy which is the necessary presupposition of a reorganized speculative physics.”23 He calls this “cosmology,” and the ontology internal to that project is in Process and Reality. It is a type of naturalism. In discussing a radically empirical Whiteheadian naturalism, remember the qualification he introduces in framing his concept of nature. Noting that not all philosophies and religions employ the idea of nature philosophically, he says:

The mention of these vast systems and of the age-long controversies from which they spring, warns us to concentrate. Our task is the simpler one of the philosophy of the sciences. Now a science already has a certain unity which is the very reason why that body of knowledge has been instinctively [unreflectively] recognized as forming a science. The philosophy of a science is the endeavor to express explicitly those unifying characteristics which pervade the complex of thoughts and make it to be a science. The philosophy of the sciences—conceived as one subject—is the endeavor to exhibit all sciences as one science, or—in the case of defeat—the disproof of such a possibility. Again I will make a simplification, and confine attention to the natural sciences, that is, to the sciences whose subject-matter is nature. By postulating a common subject matter for this group of sciences a unifying philosophy of natural science has been thereby presupposed.24



Whitehead is postulating a concept of nature that will enable him to show how a philosophy of science presupposes a common subject-matter for all the sciences. Thus, the philosophy of science presupposes what we have called “nature” above, or, the slowing down of temporal passage that has the effect of emphasizing the reflective character of existence, transforming primarily unreflective experience into reflective experience. It is not that we know for certain that “process” is organized this way; we presuppose such an organization when we postulate that the sciences have a common subject matter, and that “nature” includes that subject matter.

Whitehead does not draw knowledge from the sciences, nor demonstrates the unity of individual sciences, nor the unity of all the sciences; he shows only how the philosophy of science presupposes that unity. The unity itself, in the sense of “existence” we have used above, i.e., immediacy of experience and existence, is the practical possession of individual sciences, granted to them by our instinct that a whole group of thoughts is aimed at the same mode of existence. Whitehead avoids slipping into non-philosophy or non-naturalism by simplifying the investigation. He famously uttered of the dictum “seek simplicity, and mistrust it.” The position is a synoptic pluralism that seeks to be radically empirical. If we have Whitehead wrong, our aim has been to articulate the position, not exclusively to explain Whitehead. Yet, this is Whitehead’s project, even if it is possible to catch him in occasional “lapses of attention,” as he puts it.





Narrow Naturalism


We finish by pointing to some of the perils associated with the types of naturalism that are not based on radical empiricism. One in particular is reductionist Darwinism.25 These views are damaging the reputation of philosophical naturalism and, being too narrow, they give religious fanatics an advantage in public debate, in legislation, and in the courts they ought not to enjoy. These views bear a strong analogy to the model-centrism, but are biological, or, rather, bio-historical. Not only are these positions philosophically inferior to synoptic pluralist naturalism, there are good practical reasons to avoid them. If Richard Dawkins and his ilk are to be regarded as spokespersons for naturalism, scientific and philosophical, then naturalism is in trouble.

First, in addition to being naturalists, we are also evolutionists. We follow Whitehead in this regard. But the idea of evolution is being over-stretched these days. The undeniable operation of natural selection within genetically informed biochemistry and cell biology, and its long-term statistical results upon both genetic configurations and, to a more limited degree, the phenotypes of organic forms, is beyond serious questioning. “Natural selection” is clear in that context. We have 60 years of evidence since the culmination modern synthesis. Whitehead did not live to see the discovery of DNA, and so we are obliged to extrapolate a bit regarding this important character in nature. How to generalize and apply our observations since DNA was discovered to longer spans of time remains a serious question. The principle of evolution certainly applies in “nature,” at least as an interpretive, narrative concept, and quite probably more, but how much more is yet to be determined. To give one’s unconditional commitment to a single version of evolution, as Darwinians do, is unwarranted and unphilosophical. It is a scientism that threatens the future of more thoroughly philosophical naturalisms.26

Generalizing the mechanism of natural selection beyond what can be genuinely observed under experimental conditions requires tremendous care—it is bio-history, subject not only to errors that characterize even careful science, but also those that haunt the historiographer. Sober history is difficult enough, but history that was neither observed nor recorded by reflective agents at all is beyond speculative. We have known about DNA for sixty years. We became able to document alterations in DNA about fifty years ago, and have thoroughly understood the replication process and some of its variables for some thirty years. We have been gathering reliable data for that long. We have only a few generations of actually observed higher organisms with which to generalize the operation of natural selection and genetic variation, and due to their complexity and the difficult-to-control variables of environing circumstance, the meaning of the term “natural selection” becomes both vague and general, placing it into genuine scientific dispute. And that is what should happen.

Good science recognizes its own vagueness, the limits of its observation and their safe generalization, and works to clarify what remains poorly understood. Thus, we cannot reliably say that higher organisms “evolve” according to the documented patterns of simpler organisms. Our dislike of religious fanatics who claim absurd things is irrelevant to our science. Present social upheavals aside, we must not let responsible science devolve into irresponsible scientism, slowing our general progress in both science and in the public judgment. We avoid these consequences through a collective commitment to propositional and conceptual sobriety. Even if our errors are productive, we must remain fallibilists.

We can say that there is no compelling reason to think that complex higher organisms do not evolve. If they evolve, it is reasonable to look for order in that process, and the well-documented occurrence of natural selection in simple organisms is a good place to begin. We can say better hypotheses about higher organisms are scarce, and that it the term “evolution” can be applied analogously to higher organisms, with the qualification that the term “natural selection” is too broad and vague to do the same work relative to higher organisms that it now performs relative to lower ones. Increasing the orders of complexity in nature affects our capacity to generalize safely.

Creationists and intelligent design ideologues appeal to the concept of “irreducible complexity,” asserting that some organic structure or other is too complex to have arisen incrementally via natural selection, since there are (they claim) no intermediate stages leading up to the final, complex structure which would give the organism a selective advantage.27 As with so much creationist nonsense, this is an argumentum ad ignorantiam. It speaks to the vacuity of creationist-driven ideology according to which it is possible to make an impossibility proof regarding the development of mechanical structures, via mechanical processes, from mechanical bases. Aside from the fact that such impossibility proofs are themselves all but impossible, the fact that the structures, processes, and bases are all firmly located within the same semantic and ontological framework—i.e., all mechanical—is a “clue” that they are looking in the wrong place.

Issues of complexity and emergence dog reductive, natural selection biology, but they are not to be found in something as easily accounted for as bacterial flagella.28 But these issues are more semantic and logical than ontological. For example, the three problematic areas that Nagel focuses on in Mind and Cosmos are the emergence of consciousness, cognition, and value. (The first two are, of course, generically included in what Whitehead calls the “higher phases of experience,” while the third is built into the very structure of prehension.) The problem with these three is not that they are some very queer kind of mechanical “stuff,” akin to bacterial flagella; the problem is that they are neither mechanical, nor any kind of “stuff,” at all.29

Indeed, one cannot even talk about such things in purely mechanical terms; one must jump from the semantic realm of the mechanical into the full-blooded field of intentionality in order to speak about such things as consciousness, cognition, and value. These are among the most immediate aspects of our experience, yet reductive naturalism and narrowly construed Darwinism cannot even acknowledge their existence, much less talk about that existence in the mechanical terminology to which they have limited themselves. Indeed, reductive naturalism requires these terms that it cannot account for: there must be intention-rich semantics in order for any theory, even narrowly construed Darwinism, to be interpreted at all, since interpretation is an intentional act informed by intention-rich semantics. Nature as investigated by science is only closed to mind; it does not pretend that mind does not exist.30

Above the level of complex biological organisms, the broader suggestions that cultures evolve, that geological change is a kind of evolution, and that a solar system or stars or the universe “evolve” simply adopt a favored metaphor. All of these change according to discernible patterns. But if evolution is to retain the clear meaning that good science requires, we must acknowledge it is only a metaphor at when we generalize it beyond biological life. It may not be the best metaphor in some of these instances, although it is suggestive. We see no reason that science should not seek out some mechanism corresponding to natural selection at the level of geology or planet formation or universe expansion. We have our doubts whether any such thing will be found.

Still, what will we say about the processes whereby unreflective experience becomes reflective? It is patterned change. Is it “evolution”? We have only begun to explore that. Any philosopher who wants to claim that philosophical naturalism necessarily implies such “evolution” must be smarter than we are. It seems possible that reflecting is an eddy in the current of dynamic process, a temporary retrogression that has become an oxbow in the river of process, so to speak. We like this metaphor. We take this to be Whitehead’s view as well. Eventually, “becoming” finds a way to pass by the eddies of reflection. Consciousness is a hard problem not just because narrow naturalism cannot address it conceptually; it is hard because consciousness might be a pathology of temporality, for all we know. If our reflective experience is temporal disease, the best we can hope for is an extinguishing of our suffering. No naturalist can afford to rule this out, however pessimistic it sounds. The refusal to consider whether consciousness is a retrovirus of temporal passage, operating on the double helix is irresponsible. This idea of temporal pathology is not simple nihilism, it is a live option for synoptic naturalists; it is reasonable to acknowledge it and seek alternatives with chastened hearts. We see precious little of this beatitude among scientists, less among philosophers, and none in the press.

When scientists and scientific journalists use the term “evolution” to mean something other than the reliably documented phenomena indicate, they give fundamentalists and other idiots an unearned advantage. If we use the term “nature” in a way that purports entirely to close the gap between experience and existence, we become dogmatists ourselves. What we can know is that experience exists. Existence is not thoroughly hostile to the experiential modality. We are the proof. If by “nature” we mean “existence,” we must allow that there may be more to existence than we experience, and more to the experience of nature than we can reflect upon; but what we experience does exist, insofar as immediacy is common to all modalities. “Nature” expresses that confidence, with the well-warranted idea that ordering our experience rationally and scientifically is the best way to clarify and verify our confidence.





Radical Empiricism Redux


We end this inquiry where it really began. The best way to keep dogmatists and religious fundamentalists at bay is to adopt the position of radical empiricism. It is worth revisiting what James said:

Radical empiricism consists first of a postulate, next of a statement of fact, and finally of a generalized conclusion. The postulate is that the only things that shall be debatable among philosophers shall be things definable in terms from experience. The statement of fact is that relations between things, conjunctive as well as disjunctive, are just matters of particular experience, neither more nor less so than the things themselves. The generalized conclusion is that therefore the parts of experience hold together from next to next by relations that are themselves parts of experience. The directly apprehended universe needs, in short, no extraneous trans-empirical connective support, but possesses in its own right a concatenated or continuous structure.31



What James calls “directly apprehended” we called “immediacy” above. Our position begins with a postulate. It is not that we know that matters beyond experience are not debatable by philosophers (clearly philosophers do debate things beyond experience all the time). We don’t go that direction. This is a postulate. It is more important for naturalists to respect this postulate than philosophers who do not claim to be naturalists. Attempting to discuss, debate, and know what may or may not exist beyond experience lacks a solid method. If such a method appears, we can revise our postulate.

The second constraint is that we begin not with experience in general, but with particular experience; so far as we know, there isn’t any “experience in general” that is neither yours nor mine, nor anyone’s in particular. It may exist, but we do not know how to get at it. If there is knowledge, and there is, it comes from properly generalizing particular experience. Particular experience includes both continuity and discontinuity, so science cannot afford to generalize continuity to the exclusion of discontinuity in nature. Thus, pluralism is the wise stance relative to the various fields of science. Dualism is unempirical and against naturalism, as is monism.

To assume a perfectly orderly and continuous nature that lies “behind” experience, as we have it, is roughly the same as assuming the existence of God. We have no experience to confirm or disconfirm the notion. If “nature” becomes a substitute term doing the work of the idea of “God,” the naturalist becomes unempirical. Ideas of reason belong to the domain of the act, not to the domain of reflection. Concepts of reason, on the other hand, belong to the domain of reflection as well as to that of action. Naturalism is easily seduced by the temptation of over-generalizing continuity, of ontologizing it, either locally (as Dewey and Mead do), or globally (as Peirce does). Perhaps nature “in itself” really is continuous—general relativity assumes so; but perhaps nature contains genuine discontinuity—quantum physics mandates this. Our “quantum of explanation” imposes no ontology on nature but only a condition upon explanation. The principle is that parts and wholes have a plurality of reciprocal relations, but that neither part nor whole constitutes its self-sufficient reciprocal. The many become one and are increased by one, we read somewhere. Choosing one alternative among these for all time is not a serious concern to radical empiricists, since they build explanations in both the local and global domains, not from a favored scientific theory, but from particular experience with both continuities and discontinuities. Bad metaphysics derives from privileging one over the other.

Dewey modifies radical empiricism in a useful way in adding the postulate of immediate empiricism: philosophers will take things to be, existentially, what they are experienced as. We do not know this, we postulate it. The general problem of experience and existence remains. But we worry over the genuine problem with Dewey’s postulate, not a host of pseudo-problems. Deweyan naturalism is thus, as Shook rightly notes, almost synoptic. But in the end Dewey’s view is unempirical, since it takes the problematic situation and the perspective of the problem-solving organism as primitive. These categories are not primitive to philosophical naturalism. They are concepts, heavily conditioned by the more or less independent history of thinking. They are not “ideas” in the same way that nature, God, freedom, and immortality are “ideas.”

What is the relationship between particular experience and existence? We venture some safe generalizations:

(1) Experience exists. Thus among the modes of existence, whatever they may be, experience is one.

(2) Experience comes in a variety of modalities, including physical, biological, physiological, perceptual, and reflective. Whether these are explainable in terms of fewer divisions is an open question, to be vigorously investigated. Whether there are more modalities than these is also an open question. However, this list reflects Whitehead’s concern in Process and Reality.

(3) Existence, whatever it is, is not wholly hostile to experience, although, given the apparent scarcity of reflectively conscious experience (i.e., highly organized feeling) in the universe, would appear to be a fairly minor mode of possible existence.

(4) Existence may, for all we know, contain inexperienceable modalities, but we can make nothing of them except through the lens of experience.

(5) Particular experience is the ground of generalization, and generalization is fallible.

(6) Nature is experienced existence, from unreflective to reflective; it may be more than that, but it is not less.



This is enough for good science. Science, done properly, does produce knowledge of experienced existence; and because it is methodical, repeatable, inter-subjective, and systematic, it is capable of discovering and correcting some of its own errors. There is no reason a radical empiricist needs to insist that every error of science is correctable or discoverable. The method itself grows and changes. Radical empiricists only say is that science produces the most reliable measurements of experienced existence that we currently have. Therefore, insofar as we have reliable knowledge of nature, it should stand the test of science. Science should not presume to tell us what exists in itself, only how existence is experienced, offered in reliable generalities. There are other kinds of knowledge than science, but these are less reliable in proportion to their inability to discover and correct their own errors of generalization.

Thus, moral knowledge, for example, is more appropriate to the solution of moral problems than is scientific knowledge; not all persons who attempt to solve moral problems are equally accomplished in the requisite kind of knowledge. Scientific knowledge is not required for moral knowledge. There is surely a relationship between and among types of knowledge, but how they relate is, for a radical empiricist, an open question. Scientific knowledge is to be favored in all situations in which the problem to be solved is cast in terms that can be controlled by science, usually only a small part of a larger problem. There is a scientific aspect to nearly every problem, and good science should be applied to that aspect. But let’s not imagine that solving the scientific aspect of a problem solves the entire problem. This overstretches science.

For example, if the problem is “what is the origin of human beings?” this is not just a scientific question. It has a dominating scientific aspect. But the question addresses multiple modalities of human experience (such as consciousness, cognition, and valuing), and while science may illuminate some of the terrain involved in these other modes, it must not be overstretched. If we ask the question for religious reasons, science can supply reliable details about the possible meanings of terms like “origin” and “human,” but cannot provide an exhaustive answer to all that the question means. When science dismisses or eliminates those other modes of experience, it does a disservice to everyone, especially to science, and ceases to be, in our sense, naturalistic.
