12 Possibility and God


There is finitude—unless this were true, infinity would have no meaning. The contrast of finitude and infinity arises from the fundamental metaphysical truth that every entity involves an indefinite array of perspectives, each perspective expressing a finite characteristic of that entity.

—Whitehead, Essays in Science and Philosophy (60)





Introduction


Our extended discussion of naturalism reclaims for the idea of nature a robust sense of possibility. Whitehead’s interpreters are persistently averse to “eternal objects” (admittedly not the best term for “possibilities”). We have shown that there is nothing problematic about treating Whitehead’s theory of possibility as belonging to a perfectly respectable philosophical naturalism. Indeed, narrower kinds of naturalism involve non-empirical assumptions. Radical empiricism is satisfied only with a synoptic pluralism regarding the relations of existence and experience. Possibilities, while theorized on the basis of particular experience, should not be limited to particular experience regarding their existence. We do not know whether possibilities can or do exist independent of particular experience, but there is more reason to suppose they might than to suppose that they cannot.

We take Whitehead’s theories of “eternal objects” to satisfy the requirements of this delicate relation between existence and experience, but most of Whitehead’s interpreters have difficulty understanding this part of his cosmology.1 They commonly conclude that this feature of his cosmology is overly Platonistic and thus anti-naturalist. Such interpreters too hastily seize upon Whitehead’s statements that eternal objects are “universals,” and, thinking that they know what this means, they conclude that he has gone off the tracks. It seems to occur to very few to work carefully through the idea of the elimination of eternal objects from prehension so as to grasp why these “universals” are, for Whitehead, generalizations from particular experience, with certain restrictions lifted for the purpose of abstract theorizing. These are not Plato’s forms, but, as Whitehead says, closer to what he imagines Plato would say if he lived in the twentieth century.

Analogously, many of Whitehead’s readers attempt to expunge “God” from his cosmology, assuming they also know what that word means. Conversely, other interpreters try to expand Whitehead’s cosmological God beyond cosmology and into all sorts of areas that are beyond the scope of the inquiry in Process and Realty. The divisive arguments in the literature about the consequent nature of God are carried out with little or no reference to the way Whitehead’s various books are different inquiries with different purposes. Whether his concept of God in a work is or is not beyond the scope of a defensible naturalism depends both upon what “naturalism” means and what role the concept of God was playing in a given inquiry. Our account of Whitehead’s naturalism covers all of his inquiries, but we allow that the most important test of that naturalism comes in Process and Reality. Demonstrating that his theory of possibility in that work is well within the scope of naturalism implies, in our view, that the burden of showing that any claim that eternal objects are non-natural now devolves upon those who claim it. Whitehead would find the charge surprising.

But in light of our account of possibility and naturalism, we still must show how to handle the vexed question of the idea of God, and its several conceptualizations in Whitehead’s various inquiries. We insist that the conceptualization changes from one inquiry to the next, but it is incumbent upon us to show something about both the idea of God that informs Whitehead’s thinking and that the most important conceptualizations align with the ways he treats possibility in his most important works.

In the previous chapter we mentioned the complex relation between Hartshorne’s interpretation of Whitehead and the subsequent legacy of Whitehead interpretation, especially in the United States. What we may fairly call the “Claremont School” of Whitehead interpretation is more indebted to Hartshorne’s worldview than it acknowledges.2 The result has been three generations of Whitehead scholarship that tends to affirm some un-Whiteheadian principles. Chief among these is the claim that there is no negative prehension in God. That is not Whitehead’s view, but it is Hartshorne’s.3

Yet, if there are no negative prehensions in God, then God cannot be a personal being. That point would not concern Whitehead, but it is a dilemma for those who follow Hartshorne. If there are negative prehensions in God, then it is still an open question as to whether God is a personal being, but affirming negative prehensions in God would provide a fairly firm basis for thinking of God as having personality. This is what Hartshorne should have asserted, both on behalf of Whitehead, and for himself. The issue of whether there are or are not negative prehensions in God has been widely written upon in the circles of process thought; it is not our objective to engage that literature exhaustively here.4

But our thesis reveals an important difficulty in Hartshorne’s philosophy. This difficulty does not show up in Whitehead’s philosophy, due to differences in the methods of Hartshorne and Whitehead. Our purpose is not to criticize Hartshorne or defend Whitehead. Rather, we aim to show why the issue of the nature of possibility is the key to understanding the issue of negative prehension (chs. 8–9). The effect of the following argument will be the liberation of Whitehead from the theological interpretation of the Claremont School. We want to make it clear that we admire these scholars, their purposes, and their accomplishments. Hence, we also aim to liberate the Claremont School from a procrustean theological bed made from eiderdown they plucked from the works of Whitehead. One’s account of possibility in relation to negative prehension has profound implications for one’s ideas of God, particularly whether God is or is not a personal being.





Analogies and Such


Our argument has similarities with Robert Neville’s views, but rather than dealing with “creator” and “created being,” and then following out the implications of the idea that the God that is “beyond the creator,” we will approach the issue in a less traditional way. Neville’s view, although current, has a traditional structure. He attacks the problem by rejecting the Thomistic analogy of being, offering instead an account of God that re-invigorates the medieval quest for the univocity of being. The disagreement between the sanguine partisans of univocity, such as Duns Scotus, and more cautious analogizers, such as Aquinas, was well worn even in the thirteenth century, but is novel and curious in our time.

We would call his approach “traditional” because he does not attempt to give a new theory of analogy, but defends a vanilla conceptualist account of universals (following Peirce and Scotus), and reframes the Thomistic analogy of being as a mid-level of reference. Only then does he move to a more modern, semiotic account of language. There is a difference between the theory guiding Neville’s philosophy of symbols, and the account of language he advocates for doing metaphysics. The latter was adopted early in his career and he continued to rely upon it thereafter.5

Neville’s association of the problem of God with the problem of the unity of God (or, the unity of language about God), and his assumption that the being of “person” requires or implies an ontological unity, are positions we do not share, and neither does Whitehead. We take unity to be a reduction or abstraction to a single modality of the societies of actual occasions that genuinely exist only in plural modalities. If, as Peirce says, it is order (rather than disorder) that calls for explanation, then unity, even complex unity, as an extreme manifestation of order, is rare and curious in the universe. The obsession with the unity of the self in Kant and post-Kantian philosophy is a red herring. Following Whitehead, we hold diversity to be a co-condition with unity (or identity, which he uses interchangeably with unity) of existence. Unity alone is not to be sought. Its attainment would be the destruction of all depth and intensity in experience. Unity under contrast is an achievement, but by no means is it so very unified as to supply an old-fashioned ontological “identity.”

In criticizing Whitehead, Neville relies upon Lewis Ford’s rendering of the Category of the Ultimate,6 and defers to Ford on the basic interpretation of Whitehead. It should be clear by now we disagree with Ford. Thus, when Neville criticizes Whitehead, he is often speaking of a misinterpretation of Whitehead rather than of Whitehead’s actual views.7 Ford created the problem of temporal atomicity in Whitehead. This and other habits of misreading Whitehead allowed philosophers of religion and theologians to kidnap Whitehead’s name and leave his actual philosophy unexamined. It is time for the real Whitehead to roam the planet again.

Obviously Religion in the Making is better suited for appropriation by theologians, but few of them make use of the conception of God articulated there. Arguably, even this book (and its God) is unsuitable for the purposes of theology, since it makes no claim at all about whether any God ever existed, contenting itself to examine how the idea of God changed in Western history as the civilization came to be “rationalized” (and this is a good thing in Whitehead’s sense of the term).8 A better view of Whitehead reveals a philosophy that, contrary to the wishes of many, asserts no ontological knowledge and is of little theological value. Neville’s critique of Ford’s Whitehead is philosophically unnecessary, its main value lying in its cautionary effect on theologians who might believe Ford.

However, Neville’s critique of Hartshorne is almost the same as our own.9 Unlike Whitehead, Hartshorne’s God has theological value. Thus, we must wrangle with the metaphysics of negative prehension in God to see why, in effect, Whitehead allowed it for philosophical reasons, while Hartshorne rejected it for theological reasons—and then Hartshorne has to deal with the philosophical fallout. In our estimation, Hartshorne cannot free himself from the philosophical tangle he creates when he rejects negative prehension in God, although the theological gains may be almost worth the philosophical cost.

Ironically, if we are correct, Hartshorne, who is a personalist and insists upon the personal character of the divine being,10 is the one who has undermined that very claim by holding that there are no negative prehensions in God. Meanwhile Whitehead, who explicitly denies being an unqualified personalist with respect to God,11 has provided an account that leaves open the question of whether God is or is not a personal being.12 One of the best examinations of this question is Neville’s,13 but unlike Whitehead, Neville assumes that a personal order of actual occasions requires an over-arching unity, a personal being to whom the personal history belongs. Whitehead does not assume or assert that.14 Otherwise Neville’s unimpeachable account of the relationship between the ideas of “person” and “God” would be definitive, but as it stands, there is still room to discuss the issue of whether God is best thought of as a personal being.

We will follow the excellent analysis of R.J. Connelly in his book Whitehead vs. Hartshorne: Basic Metaphysical Issues.15 Connelly confronts how Whitehead and Hartshorne differ on the issue of negative prehension, arguing that while it is clear Whitehead allows no negative prehensions in the primordial nature of God (which is unsurprisingly the least personal way of understanding God), his position leaves open the possibility of negative prehensions in God’s consequent nature. Hence, Connelly takes on a number of interpreters, particularly William Christian, who have argued from textual clues that God’s consequent nature is all-encompassing and hence free of negative prehensions.16 Connelly goes on to defend the claim that “Justice is done to [Whitehead’s] notion of the consequent nature, and analogy between God and other entities perhaps becomes more meaningful, if we conclude simply that God’s physical experience compared with that of other entities is the most inclusive and the least exclusive. Negative prehension may be the exception in God’s experience and transformation through intellectual feelings the rule.”17 We think Connelly hits upon the interpretation of Whitehead that is least hostile to Hartshorne’s typical gestures, but still, the most inclusive idea of God will be the primordial nature, and it is the least personal precisely because it is the most inclusive. Still it seems consistent with Whitehead’s temperament to grant to his concept of God inclusiveness to the extent that it doesn’t interfere, conceptually, with the irreducible eternal objects and actual entities.

We will build upon Connelly’s account here, not as a contribution to the understanding of Whitehead, but to the understanding of how God ought to be conceived by process philosophers who think in the Whiteheadian line. We do not think that Whitehead pursues this line very far himself, but there are better and worse ways to proceed upon the basis of what he did say. Hence, this is a reform of Whiteheadian philosophy of religion, and if theology is needed (which we question), also of Whiteheadian theology.

Regarding Hartshorne’s view of negative prehension, Connelly cannot make it fully self-consistent regarding whether the subjective immediacy in present experience is ours, God’s, or both, and this problem is connected to the issue of the objective immortality of past experience, and the full, active presence of past experience in the present (however “present” is defined). Auxier has addressed this issue with Hartshorne’s philosophy elsewhere, and rectifying the ambiguities in Hartshorne’s view, to make it consistent.18 This view builds upon and supports Connelly’s view. Hartshorne also should have endorsed the idea of negative prehension in God, even though he endorsed the opposing view.19

Connelly concludes his analysis of Hartshorne saying that “there is no systematic reason for saying that God has to feel everything. It is enough to realize that God’s experience is more perfect than that of any other actuality.”20 We add to Connelly’s claim a systematic reason for saying that God does not feel or prehend everything (positively at least), and suggest that this characteristic goes to the very heart of the issue of the personhood of God, of actual entities, and of their freedom, when we interpret Whitehead. We do not necessarily express our own views in what follows, but rather we aim to provide a roadmap for understanding a Whiteheadian God—a philosophical God-function that squares with Whitehead’s view of possibility and actuality, and with the quantum of explanation. This project is most easily carried out in contrast to Neville’s views.





Some Terms


Neville sets out his schema of basic terms concisely in chapter five of Eternity and Time’s Flow.21 He defends a particular view of relationalism and its implications for time. For Neville, all three “modes of time” (past, present, future) have their specific essential/necessary characteristics. He draws upon necessity as a springboard for possibility. Whitehead neither affirms nor denies ontological necessity, and he never employs it as an ungrounded principle. But no radical empiricist can rule out its reality. After all, when we genuinely don’t know whether something is the case, we should not assume it either is or is not the case, in some final way. The suspension of traditional metaphysical claims is for the sake of doing better philosophy, and this move does not aim at excluding completely the traditional uses of philosophical necessity. The habit of excluding radically empirical approaches, by neglect, hostility, or ignorance, is a weakness in the traditional approaches.

Happily, Neville’s method and his habits of inquiry rise above such complaints. He says traditional metaphysics is inadequate for both theological and religious purposes, and we concur. We think that even if Whitehead does not do so, there is a version of personalism that answers both theological and religious needs without having to rely upon a philosophical conception of God. That account falls beyond our present scope, but following out the consequences of our account of extension and negative prehension does require a discussion of Whitehead’s God.

Preliminarily, we need to explain some terms. In Western thought it has been commonplace to accept Aristotle’s claim that necessity (ananke) is the most basic modal notion, that we derive the idea of impossibility from necessity, by conversion—what is necessary cannot fail to be, and therefore it is impossible that it not be—and the idea of possibility is then derived from impossibility.22 Aristotle thus defines possibility in terms of necessity.23 What is clearest, Aristotle says, is that “ ‘necessary’ and ‘impossible’ do signify the same but … when applied conversely.”24 Also, historically, possibility and necessity have been understood not only as logical principles, but metaphysical principles as well.25 We find the logical sense of possibility and necessity most clearly manifest in the law of non-contradiction, “it is not the case both that A and not A,” at the same time and in the same respect. This is only as an abstract formula which is determinative of truth conditions for other propositional forms, but it is normative for our thinking.

To think well, as an ideal of inquiry, we must conform to the law of non-contradiction (among others). It keeps us from getting confused about our various levels of generality, and we ought not contradict ourselves at a more abstract level of generality when we have found a self-consistent generic contrast at a more concrete level of the analysis. When we do find ourselves locked into a contradiction at a higher level of abstraction, we can be assured that our thinking is confused. Hence, non-contradiction is very important, but it has no a priori ontological weight.

The metaphysical significance of necessity and possibility is not altogether clear, although it is often thought to be best expressed in Aristotle’s formula (above). This is not just a norm for clear thinking, but supposedly a universal claim about what can and cannot exist. From the above, we get the following conditional norm: if we wish to think about what is, rather than what is not, we should conform our thinking to the metaphysical claim that “grounds” the logical norm. (We might well ask why we would wish to restrict our thinking in that way, but that is getting ahead of the story.)

Possibility, therefore, is habitually considered by philosophers from the standpoint of the principle that nothing is possible except upon the basis of some metaphysically prior actuality, whether that actuality is contingent or necessary in its own way of existing. They assume that we want to think about something rather than nothing. Neville’s arguments about created being and God are examples—the determinations of God are dependent upon a prior undetermined being, called “being itself,” and further determinations, whether contingent or necessary, are possible only upon the basis of a prior (positive) actuality. For Neville, the one creates the many, and only having done so is the creator created qua creator. In others words, unity (in a strong, metaphysical sense) precedes plurality.26 Thus, traditionally, the possible is derivative, while the actual (and necessary) is prior.

Process metaphysics does not fully accept this view, and certainly Whitehead does not. While it is true that everything that comes to be actual becomes actual through the agency of some prior actuality (God’s contribution to creative synthesis), it does not follow that possibility is derivative of actuality. Indeed, it is equally true that everything that becomes actual must first be possible, and insofar as God “becomes,” whatever God actually becomes was first possible. Process philosophers, while not holding to the absolute independence of possibilities from actualities, nevertheless explore and explain the nature of possibility as a fundamental metaphysical notion, at least coeval with actuality.

Possibility can be distinguished from actuality in numerous ways. Whitehead’s way in Process and Reality renders possibilities lacking in actuality but still existing. What the character of that existence is remains unclear, but the account is adjusted to the demands of cosmology in the “modern style.” This view denies to actual occasions any immediate experience of past possibilities, or “might-have-beens.” Our analysis of this mediation in chapters 8 and 9 explains this point in detail. We think humans do have an immediate experience of the might-have-been, although only internal to a single durational epoch, but then, that’s what “immediacy” is—the indistinguishability of existence and experience. That is not Whitehead’s explicit position, although we have argued (chapter 11) that a Whiteheadian naturalism requires such a view. As far as we can tell, Whitehead wasn’t very interested in the question, since he treats a subject-superject (or a transition-concrescence) as something with no duration or endurance. The actual entity is an explanatory hypothesis, or more strongly, an irreducible quantum of explanation. The “actual entity” is not the outcome of a series of events.

Whitehead’s position is superior to Hartshorne’s, because, contrary to his own intentions, Hartshorne sets up a structure in which God cannot be a personal being—in spite of Hartshorne’s avowed personalism—while there is a way of seeing Whitehead’s God as at least arguably personal, despite, as we have noted, Whitehead’s explicit disavowal of personalism.27 Although it is an open question Whitehead does not assert whether God is or is not a personal being. If Whitehead did assert personality in God it would look a lot like E.S. Brightman’s position in Person and Reality (1958). We disagree with Brightman’s position too, which cannot handle the question of immediacy, especially the immediate interaction of what he calls “purposes” in the “illuminating absent.”28 In Whiteheadian language, if you imagined that eternal objects were active (as Brightman and Leibniz do), then what sorts of interactions would they have beyond our experience of them? Leibniz says they would all “strive to be.” Would those interactions be mediated? What would be the “order” in it? Brightman cannot answer this question without positing that monads have “one window,” which is the power to form purposes. Leibniz’s answer was more consistent, i.e., no windows, pre-established harmony.

Whitehead handles this question about the order among possibilities by hypothesizing that possibilities are utterly inactive—they are not purposes (God’s or anyone else’s). Their order is not active. It follows from this limitation that possibilities for Whitehead are uncreative and uncreated. God just deals with them, and with their “order” as given modes of limitation. That is why Whitehead’s God is not the God of religion nor necessarily personal. But depending on how the question of immediate experience is handled, God could still be a personal being of a sort. For example, God could be in the process of becoming more personal, or less personal, as God struggles with the non-rational Given (this is how Brightman characterizes it). We find neither position satisfactory, but of the three—Whitehead, Hartshorne, Brightman—Whitehead is the one who makes no actual mistakes. He never asserts any ontological knowledge, whereas Hartshorne and Brightman do. We can adopt Whitehead’s hypothesis about the utter indifference and inactivity of the possible for the purposes of cosmological “explanation” (in Whitehead’s sense, that the abstract is explained by the concrete). When a different set of abstractions needs to be explained, we can drop that stipulation about possibilities being inactive (e.g., when cosmology is not our main topic). Hartshorne and Brightman do not have this kind of flexibility—they are not radical empiricists.

Whether we could improve on Whitehead’s cosmology by postulating active purposes as the character of the possible is another matter. We are inclined to think that such a change would not improve the cosmology, because of the character of cosmology; it does not try to answer questions such as whether possibilities are “purposes in nature.” Yet, such a hypothesis might improve our ethics or theology. As Kant demonstrated in the Critique of Judgment, such questions as purpose in nature are relevant to our moral knowledge, but get in the way of science. Still, we should not flush all intentional structure from scientific inquiry, and Whitehead guards against that tendency. We can’t see how a philosophy of science can be improved by building in teleology at the level of possibility. Peirce also rejects this move. Bergson most definitely rejects it. James rejects it, because he denies independence to possibility. Dewey waffled on the question, for decades, before coming around to the same view as Peirce in 1938. Dewey’s waffled because he doesn’t want to divorce possibility, even by hypothesis, from the world of active purposes. It seemed to him that allotting to possibility any independence at all invites the vicious abstractionist into the conversation. But finally he recognized that one can hypothesize true universals (deploy universal propositions in logic) without believing they are “out there” somewhere. Dewey had conflated the process of fixing belief with the process of hypothesizing; he had pinned hypothesizing to the problematic situation in ways that Peirce found inappropriate.29

For Whitehead’s cosmology, the “higher phases of experience” are treated uniformly and he does not seek to discover their origins or to contrast those higher phases in our immediate epoch with more primitive versions of the same. He recognizes that the “rationalization of the world” is both the cause and the effect of civilization, and he sees tragedy as well as progress, but he takes it for granted in Process and Reality that we wouldn’t choose to revert to a less rationalized condition.

In Religion in the Making, the higher phases are a central concern. Whitehead replaces the idea of “eternal objects” with “ideal forms,” allowing us to think of possibilities as active purposes at various stages of civilization along the way, but Whitehead has no praise for that way of thinking, being clearly glad that the human race outgrew it—even if the cost was unbounded “solitariness.” There is no nostalgia for the old God of religion, but our religious instinct will treat possibilities as active purposes. This is the implicit basis of the Claremont School of interpretation: they treat possibilities as purposes, as do most religious people. Whitehead says very little about the relationship between immediate experience and the might-have-been when he is doing philosophical anthropology, but his position could be different from his cosmological view of possibility; if his view of possibility is different, why not also the specific case of the might-have-been?

Considering the contribution of eternal objects to creative synthesis, one sees their ingression as a formative element in every act. More plainly, even God has to work with possibilities and ordered constellations of possibilities to say “let there be light.” Thus far, Whitehead, Hartshorne, and Neville agree. But for those who follow Whitehead’s radical empiricism, there remains the other main option—that God might not act. A God who must create is not free, i.e., is a machine at bottom, and certainly not a personal being. Neville handles this contingency by distinguishing between God the creator and the transcendent God that is being itself. But we do not think the latter God, if there is one, can be conceived of as anything more than a possibility pointed out by a specific line of thinking. Regardless of whether God as “being itself” actually exists, the most we get from Neville’s argument is a possibility for thinking about God. As far as we know, no argument or mode of thinking necessarily commands or demonstrates the existence of the intentional object of the thought. Thought is freer than that in our experience, and need not imply the existence of the object of thought. “Explanation” does not mean commanding thought in some particular direction, forsaking all others; rather, explanation means replacing the abstract idea at hand with the more concrete combination of actualities and possibilities that gave rise to just that abstraction (and not some other).

We may also entertain the idea that the first creative act of God might have been something other than “let there be light” (which, admittedly is the product of human mythic imagination aiming for the infinite act). Whatever the original act is, we must confront the question whether it was the only possible act God could have enacted, or whether refraining from acting (which is also an act, perhaps) was a genuine possibility for God. Process philosophers do not agree on these points, and we hope to show that even so, at least the implications are clear regarding the options for self-consistent thinking left open to them.

Our position is that we get the best philosophical account of God by hypothesizing, in keeping with radical empiricism, that God creates freely from among genuine uncreated possibilities, including the option not to create at all, because possibility and act are genuinely related but independent modes of existence.30 We do not think that we can concretely conceive of a God who refrains from acting altogether, but we think we can imagine it through negative analogy to ourselves. When we don’t act, we have at least a vague idea of what that means and what the structure of the alternatives to acting-as-we-have would be. This is the “cash value” of our analysis of negative prehension in chapters 8 and 9. We do not mean that a naïve analogy or anthropomorphism is proper to thinking about this kind of problem.

Given the above, one ought to treat possibilities as ontologically coeval with actualities. Prior to the first act (ontologically not temporally prior), we see that the actual and the possible are not distinguishable, but that does not imply they cannot be distinct, only that they cannot be known as distinct by knowers such as we. Prior to the first act, all possibilities could become actual (indeed, this is where we can ground the idea of omnipotence in the primordial nature of God, as against Hartshorne). No possibility is yet excluded—there are no “might-have-beens” yet, since the first act commences separation of past from future by the mediation of the present. With the first act, infinitely many constellations of ordered possibilities become might-have-beens, viz., all those that were not concretely compatible with “let there be light,” including the act of restraint involved in not creating. After “let there be light” (or whatever the first act was), there is no longer any literal sense to saying “God is omnipotent,” only “God was omnipotent.” The first division of the extensive continuum is the becoming of temporality, and it conditions all future divisions by casting the form of time over the whole qua actual. While these might-have-beens remain real, remain possibilities, they no longer have any potency or potentiality.31 And here the distinction between the actual and the possible first emerges, via the mediation of the potential.

The word “potentialities” thus designates possibilities that still “might-be,” and does not apply to possibilities that are now “might-have-beens.” In this context the actual makes the difference, and we see the truth of the Aristotelian position. Every possibility that still “might be” has that status because it has potency, and its potency arises from something already actual. But there is still an important difference between possibilities that still have potency on the basis of present actuality, and possibilities that do not. The might-have-beens remain real (since they once had potency), but can never be actual. Yet, these might-have-beens still contribute something to the present as determinate but non-definite realities. The might-be’s are also real, and while the vast majority will never be actual, at least one collection of them will become actual. The members of this collection are known to be determinate only insofar as the constellations are ordered according to principles of mutual concrete compatibility and continuity with the actual. They can be abstractly sorted from one another according to numerous proposed operators (we demonstrate the most general form of these in chapter 9), as science does, but such analysis is contingent and must be judged according to its probability. If there are determinate orders that are wholly independent of the definite, concrete (and actual) order, we have no way to know about them.

Perhaps such a determinate order is not wholly closed to our imaginations, but Whitehead was never very much impressed with our human imaginative powers. The model of Abbott’s Flatland might provide us with a template for understanding determinate order beyond the influence of the actual, but even at this we are confined to analogizing. If we are in the position of Flatlanders trying to imagine the possibilities for determinate order, then we are unlikely to perform at a higher level than do our planar counterparts when they attempt to imagine three dimensional beings. That failure has no bearing on what is genuinely possible, only on what we can find out about, hypothesize, and theorize. The Whiteheadian theory of extension presses our capacity to think about determinate order about as far as it has ever gone, but not so far as to fall outside of the quantum of explanation. In short, this is not Rortyan deflationism about philosophy. It is rather a sort of radical realism about the relation between what might be known by some possible knower and the human capacity for knowing that relation in the present.

To put this in Whiteheadian terms, some eternal objects mutually imply one another and ingress together, while other eternal objects are excluded from a particular ingressing collection, being both logically and ontologically incompatible with the ordered collection that ingresses. We have explained the logical conditions and the practical structure of such ingression in chapters 8 and 9. But the various constellations of eternal objects are themselves partly indeterminate since infinitely many constellations have potency at any given moment, and there is infinite overlap of candidates. There are no elements to these constellations per se (and hence these are not “sets” as traditionally understood), in that the determinate constellations are not constituted by “elements”; membership is vague and the determinate order is prior to the enumeration of elements. No metaphysical or traditional (logical) principle of identity is needed, which is to say that there are no temporal atoms. It is true that an eternal object, considered as a member of one ingressing collection, is not precisely the same eternal object when it ingresses with another, since the identity of each eternal object, if we postulate an identity, is inferred from its relations to all the others in its constellation. But there is still an analogy between an eternal object considered as ingressing with one partly determinate ordered constellation and the alternate version of that eternal object seen as ingressing with another ordered constellation.

The best way to think of these eternal objects is as concrescence (rather than transition), as genuine possibilities, as might-be’s, as possibilities with some potency, seen from a given present (a frame of reference). These might-be’s are potentialities and are determinate in relation to one another precisely to the extent that some potentialities are excluded and others entailed relative to a given constellation. But these potentialities are partly indeterminate insofar as each constellation of potentialities still implies incompatible possibilities along the course of its further development, and some will later be excluded while some will be included in the actual. The structure of this inclusion and exclusion has been discussed.

From any given present, therefore, incompatible potentialities are equally real. This is not to say that incompatible potentialities can become actual. As an actual entity concresces, it excludes all potencies incompatible with its self-creative act and with the contributions of others, rendering one determinate collection definite, as we have argued, also rendering all incompatible determinate constellations mere might-have-been’s. This process is the achievement of the hybrid entity Whitehead calls the “generic contrast.”32 And yet, such exclusion is a manner of prehension—that is, the actual entity takes account of the potencies it excludes by excluding them. The exclusion of physical feelings is one process and the exclusion of conceptual feelings is a different process, as we have argued. In either case there is a broad and a narrow sense of inclusion. Broad inclusion means including x as a possibility only (positive and negative prehension), while narrow inclusion means positively prehending x, i.e., taking from x a positive contribution in the achieved satisfaction of the concrescing actual entity.

This account creates the following general, provisional ontology: the cosmos at any given moment (after the alpha point) consists of: (1) actualities, i.e., the present and objectively immortal past taken together; (2) potentialities, i.e., the actual plus all constellations of possibilities not presently incompatible with it, which is the future (not all potencies are equally relevant, since some have little potency, which is what we mean by “improbable,” and some are distantly removed in the future, which is what we mean by “indefinite”); and (3) the might-have-been, i.e., those real constellations of possibilities that once had potency but no longer have potency from the standpoint of a present (or abstractly, any definite frame of reference). Let us consider some of the things we can know, discern, or hypothesize about these modes of being, in reverse order.





The Might-Have-Been


We insist upon the reality of the might-have-been. Following Whitehead, we use the term “real” to designate the actual and the possible together, i.e., the actual entity (that is, the quantum of explanation) and the eternal objects (considered in their independent sense, as unchanged by actuality).33 And here, the medieval realists were correct. This is also close to Neville’s motive for affirming the transcendent God, but without the theological baggage. We do not know whether universals are “real,” for Whitehead or any other radical empiricist, having never encountered anything more than a contingently exceptionless generalization, but we could not deny that true universals might be real (even if “merely” so), and they are certainly useful. That position is consistent with Whitehead’s view, even if he does not explicitly say so. Thus, instead of treating “eternal objects” as functional universals, as Whitehead does (and that is as far as he goes), we are content to think of them as possibilities existing at various levels of generality, from exceptionless generality exemplified in every actuality down to the individual relation of one actual entity to an immediate predecessor or successor in its actual world (and here we restate the “two descriptions” of “reality” for Whitehead, the macroscopic process of transition and its converse microscopic counterpart, called concrescence). All such relations require some degree of generality, and hence exemplify some possibility.

Insofar as might-have-beens exist (and we are saying they do exist, drawing upon Hartshorne’s distinction between existence and actuality, which we take to be consistent with Whitehead’s view, just as Hartshorne claims; we are not saying these might-have-beens “subsist” á la Meinong), their reality is limited to being universals—they are intelligible to us as ideas, and they display a kind of order that follows (as far as we can think about) the order of thought and imagination. Might-have-beens are possibilities that were negatively prehended, dismissed from conceptual feeling, even at their highest point of relevance to a complex organism.34 Without repeating the full exposition of negative prehension, suffice to say that a philosophical account of the might-have-been is dependent upon what is not felt conceptually, by an entity, and can easily allow that everything that exists physically in the universe is positively prehended.35 The reality of the might-have-been is relevant when we consider those eternal objects, or possibilities, that are incompatible with the actualities and potencies felt at the highest grade of relevance, contributing to the subjective form of an occasion under the contrasting tension of objective unity and objective diversity.36 We can sort out ordered constellations of might-have-beens by numerous means, the most popular of which is probably historical thinking arising from nostalgia. This kind of thinking is easier than abstract mathematics, although the formal accomplishment in human thinking required by this act of abstraction is strikingly similar.

For instance, we can take two mutually exclusive might-have-beens and follow out their order by means of their historical implications. Had General Lee taken Longstreet’s advice and called off Pickett’s frontal assault at Gettysburg, we can call to mind, upon that basis, numerous constellations of might-have-beens that then may be adjudged according to their plausibility (we reserve the term “probability” for potencies and “plausibility” for judging the hypothetical likelihood of might-have-beens37). So we might, on one hand, consider the plausibility of the constellation of might-have-beens that accompanies the assumption that Lee called off the charge, but then did not follow Longstreet’s further advice to attempt a flanking march (e.g., Lee withdraws and chooses another battleground in Pennsylvania or Maryland or even Virginia); and we may, on the other hand, entertain the constellation of might-have-beens that accompanies the assumption that Lee did try the flanking march.

These two lines of thinking suggest very different lines of “research,” and one line is far more determinate than another, since these scenarios display variant degrees of compatibility the actual. If we want to tell a plausible story about the flanking march, we have an advantage. We can examine the positions, condition, and state of military intelligence possessed by both sides, and consider the timing of the movement of the army. We can show plausibly which units would have been withdrawn, and by studying the habits of the generals involved, we can even form a plausible account of which units would have remained to detain the Union Army, their strength in numbers and experience in battle, and gauge perhaps the likelihood of success for either side. This would be a highly speculative analysis, but one which could be made plausible by a person who was diligent in gathering facts and figures, and who was sensitive to the flaws in his/her own reasoning, and to alternative lines of reasoning that may seem more plausible but can be answered. There would be no final resolution, but there might be a compelling story.

For the person who takes the other line—that Lee cancelled the charge but retired from the field without attempting the flanking march, the task is far more complicated. This scenario is less compatible with the actual, and the ways in which a strategic retreat and move to another location might have proceeded are amazingly varied. We could say only that his army would have to go somewhere soon to re-establish supply lines and deter any attempt by the larger Union force to threaten Richmond. Further, one could not begin to form a very plausible account of where Lee would have gone and what battles might have followed, and indeed, one could not say with much plausibility what the retreat itself would have looked like. All of this reasoning is algebraic in character, and all of it depends upon narrowing down whole constellation of variables so as to draw on more determinate and law-like regularities with as little vagueness as we can manage. Plausibility is the reward for good reasoning about the possible.

As compatibility with the actual decreases, the effort necessary to exclude these rogue types of possibilities from an imagined scenario increases. Yet, one cannot say that the might-have-been has no order or structure. It has at least (and exactly) the amount of determinateness that can be gleaned from its compatibility with the actual, albeit abstractly in every case, since it has lost the potency it once had. Still, might-have-been’s do come in ordered constellations, and depending upon what principles of order one emphasizes (whether historical, or geological or ecological or mathematical or even purely imaginative), one can tell numerous different and comparatively plausible stories about the might-have-been.

All of these stories are algebraic, in the sense we have defended. We have used some narrative principles of history above, but a simpler example is the debate between uniformitarianism and catastrophism in geology, which employs a much less imaginative narrative structure, since one need not consider the wills and decisions of individual persons. The uniformitarians realized they were involved in a form of historical reasoning that emphasized gradualism and that they needed to presuppose uniform natural laws of a simple kind (e.g., linear) to have a plausible basis for excluding infinitely many might-have-beens. Thus, the principle of uniformity in natural law became, in and of itself, the target of philosophical controversy. Since catastrophists are gaining the upper hand again, the research to exclude completely different might-have-beens proceeds apace. What few participants in this debate seem to realize is that they have been arguing over a principle of exclusion in the might-have-been, not about the fundamental laws of nature. Uniformitarian thinking now proceeds ex-hypothese rather than from a conviction that the “laws” of nature (a suspect metaphor these days) do not themselves change. And, as a hypothesis, both the advantages and disadvantages of uniformitarianism are before us; we are aware of how the weaknesses in the hypothesis affect the plausibility of the stories we tell about geological phenomena. These weaknesses force us to recognize that creation scientists can tell alternative stories which, even if extremely implausible, cannot be finally refuted based on empirical evidence alone.38

The upshot is that the might-have-been admits of order—indeed of many forms of order. Our choices as to which relations to emphasize in discussing the might-have-been take direction from our interests in the present—Whitehead and Dewey both emphasized the perils and rewards of selection, and this awareness ought to chasten us.39 We must not confuse the plausible, as such (and the interests that lead us to tell plausible stories about the might-have-been), with the probable.40 Our orderings of the might-have-been deal with possibilities qua possible, not with potencies qua possible. We interact with the might-have-been in a fundamentally different mode of consciousness (more precisely, conceptual feeling) than we use to interact with the actual and its potencies in the present, in which physical feeling dominates. The same logic does not apply, nor are the standards of knowledge the same, in these situations. We experience the might-have-been abstractly and imaginatively when we experience it at all, at least from a Whiteheadian perspective—if there is a phenomenology of the might-have-been, he does not provide it. Our best efforts to concretize the might-have-been proceed by analogy, which depends first upon a negation of all that has become actual since the constellation of might-have-beens we are considering has lost its potency. The structure of determinate order in the might-have-been is algebraic, just as it is in every other description, but the variables are now permanently indeterminate as related to the actual.

Thus, for Whitehead, there can be speculative and abstract “knowledge” of the might-have-been, but no immediate experience of it—not even in God. And here is the rub: it follows from our treatment of the might-have-been and our prior discussion of God that God, as concrete, subsequent to the first act, experiences the might-have-been differently from the actual. Does God also experience the might-have-been abstractly? We cannot know this, but what we can say is that if there is no difference in God’s experience between the might-have-been and the “was” (past actuality), then God cannot be a personal being. We will make good upon this assertion as we proceed. For now let us foreshadow the argument by indicating that we think it makes the most sense to say that God negatively prehends might-have-beens.





Potencies


Earlier we said potencies are possibilities that still might be, considered from a given present. They are also “merely real” and are what is left over once the might-have-been is negatively prehended. As Whitehead says, “it is the mark of a high grade organism to eliminate, by negative prehension, the irrelevant accidents in its environment, and to elicit massive attention to every variety of systematic order.”41

Regarding the dependence of the present feeling on negative prehension, Whitehead says, “The negative prehensions, involved in the production of any one feeling, are not independent of the other feelings. The subjective forms of the feelings depend in part on the negative prehensions.”42 This is why nothing comes to consciousness without actively excluding data; to fail to exclude is to fail to take on a subjective form. As Whitehead says, “consciousness is the feeling of negation” in our perception.43 The actual world of a high-grade organism is saturated with the past, perishing but contributing to the environment all of its present characters. Past conceptual feelings that were incompatible with the possibilities physically felt, are unfelt conceptually, and are conditions for any and all consciousness. If no possibilities are dismissed, no consciousness arises.

Thus, we now identify potencies, or “real potentials,” by their impressive relevance and systematic order, which is so compelling as to evoke, to the exclusion of every alternative, a “massive attention.” Potencies therefore also admit of analysis in terms of relevance to the actual (i.e., the present). The most relevant potencies are the most probable ones, and analysis that seeks to anticipate which potencies will become actual may proceed variously. Scientific prediction is an example, and other frameworks for prediction are available. The framework chosen is more reliable when it is specifically adapted to the phenomena one is addressing, not merely borrowed from some more special or more general inquiry. Hence, in quantum physics, for example, one sort of probability (almost ontological in meaning) is needful, and in the reproduction and mutation of yeast quite another model is called for (statistical models suffice). Also if one gives an account of the likely actions of complex organisms, psychological, sociological and other models of prediction are needed. The more complex the phenomena, the more difficult it becomes to forecast which potencies will become actual, at any specified level of generality. Every animal has its own ways of dealing with potencies, so we ought not get carried away with the human ways of coping.

In spite of the difficulties involved in forecasting future actualities, certain relational structures will be required of all complex organisms. These relational structures capture, in the most general way, the contrasts among various ordered collections of potencies. Some potencies definitely imply others—causally, logically, mathematically, or otherwise—in the sense that all possibilities, including potencies, exhibit order and the compatibilities and incompatibilities in such a multiplicity fall into ordered constellations, whether we wish them to or not. We cannot always know whether some possibilities are included in particular collections of potencies currently under consideration. We can be confident that some possibilities are always excluded: assuming a collection of potencies, call it A, becomes actual, other particular potencies will be excluded, and will be destined therefore to become might-have-been’s, never conceptually felt by any actual entity. So, hypothetically, the differences between an outcome we expect more and other outcomes we expect less, we contemplate the more probable as if it were actual, and we may then ask ourselves, “if A is actual, then what is excluded by A?” Is there some mode of consciousness that will allow us to consider the relationship between A, as an imagined, anticipated actuality, and the particular potencies and collections of potencies that will probably be excluded by A? In a word, yes.

Whitehead captures this situation in a profound but difficult complex disjunction: “In awareness actuality, as a process in fact, is integrated with the potentialities which illustrate either what it is and might not be, or what it is not and might be.”44 Once the might-have-been is negatively prehended and “dismissed,” and its physical potency conceptually “eliminated,” what we have is either the contingent present (what is and might not have been), or the future (what is not yet and might be), and consciousness of the relation of the present to the future is dependent upon our negatively prehending the might-have-been. In short, our capacity to distinguish the present from the future depends on our ability to prehend possibility negatively, meaning that the distinction between present and future depends in awareness on the distinction between the was and the might-have-been. If you think about this in common sense terms, it isn’t so difficult. How do you know, right now, that one collection of potencies is available for present action, while other potencies will remain regardless of which collection you act on now, yet, some collections will be eliminated? How do we explain the basic structure of “choice”? It means that some choices eliminate other choices. All choices eliminate some choices. Some choices eliminate fewer other choices than some other choices. That difference is the relevant difference for understanding our awareness of potencies, and thus we also grasp that in potencies we integrate the actual and the possible.

With Whitehead, we think there is a mode of consciousness that allows us to distinguish among constellations of possibilities qua possible, and it is the same mode of consciousness we use to separate might-have-beens from past actuality. This is another way of saying that memory and imagination are really the same function in consciousness. What differs is our temporal orientation and awareness of this function—what we take ourselves to be doing in forming a generic contrast between these two illustrative temporal moments. When we seek to distinguish potencies from one another on the basis of an imagined actuality that is not yet, we do so by imagining what will be negatively prehended and what will be positively prehended by our future selves. When we seek to sort out ordered constellations of might-have-beens on the basis of past actuality, we imagine first a future that never was or will be, and then ask what we would have positively prehended in that imagined future and what would have been negatively prehended. We then construct plausible stories to support one set of might-have-beens over others.

When we sort out probabilities, that is, possibilities that still have potency, we similarly imagine an actuality that is not and try to construct a probable story about why some potencies and collections of potencies will become might-have-beens while another collection will become actual. In both cases the operation depends upon our willingness to bracket present actuality, negate it, and imagine another actuality as if it were the present, then building upon the fundamental features of the actual (degrees of relevance, for instance) in order to tell either a plausible or a probable story, but not both.

This operation impoverishes the actual (the concrete present) of all its complexity and concreteness, moves it thereby, to an imagined space/time location, ignores its own act of abstraction, and then reasons by principles of inclusion and exclusion about which possibilities are most relevant/compatible. One might call this operation the “deactualization of the actual” and the depossibilization of the possible, constellations becoming collections by fiat of cognition. One might as easily call it what Whitehead does, i.e., abstraction. It is the potentialization of the actual, and integration of actual and possible, at the expense of both—since both suffer negation with extreme prejudice.

It requires a very complex organism to eliminate so much of what it is feeling. It is more than an act of abstraction (although it is at least that) because we not only ignore some actualities in imaginatively relocating the actual, we also reconfigure all the ordered constellations of possibilities and force them to conform themselves to one privileged collection of potencies (the one we are merely calling actual at the moment). But what we are calling the “actual” in these cases is not in fact actual. It is not “fact,” to use Whitehead’s favorite word for the most stubborn features of physical experience. Rather, it is either a potency in our real present (in which case we are concerned with prediction and probability), or it is a dead potency, a might-have-been whose chance for actuality is past from the standpoint of our concrete present, in which case we are interested only in plausibility to serve some present interest. We interpret ourselves by such activities, give ourselves the reasons for what we have done that supposedly explain what we shall do. In both cases we are really thinking about potencies, but the difference is that considering might-have-been’s is carried out by analogy through past potencies, while considering might-be’s is carried out by analogy from the standpoint of future or present potencies.





Actuality


In thinking about possibilities and potencies above, the pivot of each was its relation to actuality. But there is a distinction between concrete actuality as presently and immediately experienced, and the concept of actuality or idea of actuality as it operates in our reflective thinking about possibility and potency. Whitehead was fascinated by the problem of immediacy and never assumed it was the same as simplicity. Hence, actuality as an idea is just an operational principle we employ to get a handle upon possibilities as related to potencies. Yet, this limitation, which renders our philosophical account hypothetical, is nevertheless also part of whatever we mean by “experience.”

The consideration of possibilities qua possible does not require a concept of actuality, although it is clear that it requires the assumption that something is actual (since only thus would there be any existing beings thinking about pure possibilities). As Peirce argued, the possible, taken alone, has no necessary connection to existence. Mathematicians, he claimed, when they operate as mathematicians do not care a straw for existences.45 They explore the relations among possibilities qua possible, and when they become interested in applying those relations to concrete existences, to actualities or to potencies, or even to past potencies now perishing, or as a matter of past contingencies, utterly unactualized, they cease being mathematicians and begin being scientists. Peirce insisted upon an independence of the possible qua possible, and criticized Dewey, for example, for not recognizing how relations among possibilities might be considered without choosing a particular actual (e.g., historical) frame of reference.46 This is only to say that we do need the concept of the actual to think about possibilities. If we wish to consider the possible in relation to anything else that exists in any other mode, we immediately must posit the actual, in concept, and distinguish the might-have-been from the might-be in relation to that postulated actuality. That distinction will give us the potencies for whatever actuality we postulated and enable us to analyze these potencies (as either plausible or probable, depending upon the character of the actuality we have postulated as either past, present, or future) in light of their degrees of relevance to/compatibility with this actuality.

But the concept of actuality (as distinct from the concretely present actual experience and its concrete relations to the future and the past) is abstract, and not only abstract, it is itself just one possibility (for thinking). We can alter our present postulate of the actual in as many ways as we like—emphasizing or ignoring certain relations, to treat our concept as past or future alternately. With each alteration of our concept of the actual we witness corresponding changes in the relations of the potencies implied to the possibilities presupposed. When we alter our postulated actuality slightly, we see some movement within constellations of possibilities in accordance with their relevance/compatibility. We are reminded that some event we have treated as a might-have-been suddenly becomes a “was” if the postulated actuality is altered in certain ways. For example, if we have postulated an actuality in the future and analyzed it to discover what potencies it contains and what possibilities will be excluded so as to become thereby might-have-been’s, and then we alter that postulated actuality in some way, we see that our further analysis has removed from potency some possibilities (eternal objects) belonging to the earlier constellation; we have now made them might-have-been’s, while other possibilities that were might-have-been’s in the earlier analysis now regain their potency, at least by hypothesis. This exercise is akin to Husserl’s “imaginative variation,” if it is different at all. The difference, if there is one, would lie in the ontological status attributed to the process by Whitehead—e.g., this isn’t just phenomenology for Whitehead. These hypotheses are realistic.

This sort of thinking pervaded the weeks following the disputed U.S. presidential election of November 2000, for example. Many commentators and ordinary people would posit a futural actuality (e.g., the recount of ballots in a given Florida county is prevented by court order), and then ask themselves, what potencies will be rendered might-have-beens by this? Then, altering this postulated future actuality a bit (the same recount is allowed to finish), they ask what difference there is between one scenario and the other. What difference will it make to some predicted or desired outcome? Some predicted, at that time, that the recount would make no difference. But what they really meant was that the winner would be the same, since obviously the future in which the recount is allowed and the one in which it is forbidden are quite different futures (the ordered constellations of possibilities are quite different, but they both happen to include the same outcome of the election). The variations are obvious.

This operation of postulating an actuality proceeds upon treating one complex of possibilities as actual, and we generally choose one we regard as highly probable in such circumstances. Then we rearrange the remaining potencies (might-be’s) from those possibilities newly excluded (the new might-have-been’s). We are free, if we like, to imagine a very improbable future or past, or even present, actuality and enlarge upon it—for example, the implausible possibility that a new nationwide election would be held in 2000. We may then say something like, “I think Ralph Nader’s voters would vote for Al Gore the second time,” might seem plausible to us on the ground of a new nationwide election. Some other person might interject that voter turnout would be much higher if a new nationwide election were held, and we can see this would also be plausible. But due to the improbability (back then) of the postulated actuality upon which these assertions depend, we feel inclined to call these “probabilities” merely plausible rather than saying they were ever, at any point, probable. And knowing the outcome, we are telling a story much along the lines of the Civil War story earlier. From the standpoint of the concrete present, we are almost prepared to treat highly improbable futures as might-have-been’s already. Yet, responsible thinking requires us to resist that urge, reminding ourselves that improbable future actualities nevertheless have some measure of probability.

Something similar happens when we postulate past actualities that were not—Lee’s choices, assuming he did not order Pickett’s charge. Note, the postulated actuality in this case is really just a possibility, and indeed, the postulated actuality is a might-have-been. We recognize this might-have-been as “interesting” (in the Whiteheadian sense) because we regard this decision as having been once genuinely within Lee’s power, an important decision with far-reaching consequences, and hence, as an actuality that at some moment had compelling probability. The past probability of this might-have-been makes it seem almost within our grasp, regardless of what sentiments we may have about it (we don’t wish away the ultimate outcome of that war). But if the past relevance (its high probability at one point) of our imagined actuality to a past concrete actuality (what Lee really diddecide) makes it seem lively, we may also recognize that our thinking is not bound by such relevance. We may as easily postulate a past actuality that was improbable even at the time—e.g., Lee suddenly changes his mind about his entire cause, rides off into the woods, and surrenders himself to the Northern troops. We cannot rule this out, but it will not receive much serious discussion among historians. The point is that any variation in our posited actuality may make a great difference to our subsequent judgments regarding ordered collections of potencies and ordered constellations of might-have-been’s based upon the variations in our posited actualities.

But what we have learned from this exercise is that the only way we can think about actuality, so far as we know, is to subjugate it to the order and variation that attends possibility, rendering actuality itself an open process, which includes the concrete process of thinking, while the content and form of what is thought has a less open character. The move from actuality to some version of it for thinking is a reduction of the actual to a concept of the actual, but the movement of thinking itself by which this conceptualization is accomplished, is not as tragic for knowledge as it may seem, at first, since a similar reduction of the possible itself to a concept of possibility has already occurred, and knowledge just is some kind of consciousness about a relation between what is possible and what is actual.

The “negation” (as Whitehead astutely called it) that we experience in an act of knowing, the elimination of what does not interest us for the sake of a focused act of attention, and the exclusion by negative prehension of infinitely many conceptual feelings, is a condition for knowing. Thus, negative prehension provides us with a structure of possibilities that then frames every available variation in how we postulate the actual (as a concept). This is the reason we would do well to treat possibility as the most basic modal notion, or at least not derive it from necessity. To do otherwise fails to recognize the conditions imposed by the act of feeling that which we wish to think about (which is a feeling of negation or elimination) upon the product of thinking—i.e., the thought.





The Implications: Narrative Intelligibility


We might ask, what limit is there to our ability to project possibilities of possibilities of possibilities, etc.? This rephrases Whitehead’s remark about the eighth category of existence, contrasts of contrasts, since we take possibilities qua possible to have the finality of eternal objects, while possibilities as thought, as generic contrasts, have an “intermediate character.”47 We have practical limits, to be sure; our interest in a topic disappears if the process of positing actualities strays too far from relevance to some concretely actual past, present, or future. And yet, the loops of positing actualities and enlarging upon their possibilities are quite broad.

For example, J.R.R. Tolkien’s Middle Earth is an enormously intricate concoction of posited actualities followed by an analysis of potencies and might-have-been’s, leading to further posited actualities, and so forth. Can Golem actually regret killing Deagol for the Ring of Power? Regret is attached to the might-have-been; Golem never existed at all, let alone did anything he could regret. Yet, we feel sorry for him in the concrete present as we read his story because such a pathetic creature might learn to regret something he did, if there were such a creature. Middle Earth in fact has a developed set of might-have-been’s corresponding to its posited actualities as Tolkien expounded them at astonishing length.

So in creating a fantastic narrative of this sort, we may vaguely analogize Middle Earth to a dark or supra-ancient or even future actuality that we could in principle experience. But we already understand that the relevance of Middle Earth to us is comprehended by an imaginative leap, not by a concrete analysis. In fact, when we examine literature such as Tolkien’s Middle Earth, we actually encounter the unity of memory and imagination, for in a sense Tolkien is remembering Middle Earth, and in another he is imaginatively projecting it. We go along with him in an amazingly complex act of consciousness called traditionally “the willing suspension of disbelief.” This is well named in its recognition of the negation required. Concrete actuality withdraws in favor of this alternative “actuality,” and we as readers surrender ourselves to Tolkien’s care (or Twain’s or even L. Ron Hubbard’s), allowing him to surprise and delight us with the further determinations of the potencies and might-have-been’s within his imagined actuality.

An imagined actuality is just a privileged possibility. Its fundamental character is governed by the structure of possibility, not by that of concrete actuality. To concretize this privileged possibility, we must retrieve the suppressed assumption of our own concrete actuality (not our concept of actuality). We cannot make the posited actuality accord with the concrete One.—the Society for Creative Anachronism wants to experience medieval warfare without hurting anyone (i.e., not wanting really to experience medieval warfare at all). Those who re-enact historical battles take upon themselves the same pathos. The exercise is still filled with nostalgia. Among the ends of “education,” according to Whitehead, we find remembrance of the past in order not to repeat it, but that end may be better served with less celebration of warfare per se than a re-enactment emanates.

As far as we can determine, we have to exist actually, in the concrete present, in order to read Tolkien, and the smart-aleck who points this out to us is not very interesting. Yet, actuality, the concrete present in its immediacy, is precisely the ground upon which possibilities as a whole (might-have-been’s and might-be’s taken together) become intelligible. Concrete actuality cannot be exhausted in any thought of it, since the thought is not the thing—it is a negation of the thing in its concrete fullness and a re-creation of it as an object of consciousness, in short, an analogy in sign or symbol. We hold these same conditions to be true of God’s thought, if God thinks, but we grant that God’s mode of experiencing may be such as to render thought (symbolically mediated abstraction) unnecessary. Certainly the concept of God as primordial, in Whitehead, is unthinking, which is precisely why there are no negative prehensions to be found in that condition of deity.

This limitation, the requirement of negative prehension for thinking, is a claim about the thought of the actual present, not the experience of it, and it is one thing to recognize that no thought can comprehend the whole of the actual present, and quite another to claim that no experience can comprehend the whole. Whitehead says, and we agree, that the principle of relativity requires that we think of everything physically existing in the actual world of an actual entity as positively prehended, however vaguely. But can concrete actuality be exhausted in any experience?





The Implications: God, Personhood, and Negative Prehension


Here we confront the question of God. Royce believed we had no choice but to concede that there is an experience of the whole, since there could be no experience of the parts unless these experiences were parts of a total experience, and he believed we would all concede our experiences both exist and fall short of an experience of the whole.48 Hartshorne defended the reality of an experience exhaustive of concrete existence using different arguments, but from similar logical motives.49 Neville takes the wiser course of depending only upon the revelations of being in open moments, a sort of Heideggerian phenomenology of Being, but without the trappings of the destruction of the history of ontology. Even Neville focuses too much upon what is positively experienced or experienceable, in our view, and it leads him to deny the personhood of God, while ironically, Hartshorne affirms it when he ought not. Meanwhile Royce holds on to the personality of God by sharply distinguishing the God of religion and history from the God of philosophy, even though the latter is only a concept.50 Thus, process philosophers have suggested a variety of responses to the problem raised by the idea of God’s thinking and experiencing process, and what limits or conditions are appropriate to the concept of God.

Here, Whitehead’s notion of negative prehension becomes relevant. If an actual entity may take account of the whole in concrescing by either including the contribution of some other present actuality (positive physical prehension), or by excluding its conceptual aspects (negative prehension), then the existence of the concrete whole need not imply the existence of a total experience. And here we come to the crux of the question about negative prehensions in God. Hartshorne never was persuaded by Whitehead’s ideas about eternal objects (that is, possibilities), and as a result, Hartshorne built a conception of God around the idea of an experience exhaustive of all actuality.51 Hartshorne argued that if anything were not in God or were not experienced by God, there could be no truth about that actuality.52 For example, he argued that propositions about the past actual experiences of persons now dead would be neither true nor false unless God experienced them and preserved them. And since Hartshorne was confident we would agree that there is a fact of the matter, some truth about whether these experiences were or weren’t had, he was also confident that we would conclude that God must be the experiencer in whom these experiences are preserved, and through this act of preservation there is still a true and a false about these experiences. Thus, if God does not experience all that is actual, then there is no final ontological distinction between the was and the might-have-been—that all past actualities would collapse into indistinguishable possibilities unless some being experienced them all and retains them totally.

This is a worthy assertion, but we think it is false, which is to say that it does not possess the universality and necessity Hartshorne claims for it. There need not be a total experiencer of all that is actual. Without such an experiencer there could still be a truth about the difference between the might-have-been and the was. E. S. Brightman, in arguing with Hartshorne, challenged him thus: If God has complete experience of all my experiences as I experience them, then my experiences are not really mine. Suppose I believe something erroneously. God will know both that I believe it, and that it is an error, but God will not believe it, and hence will not “contain” or “include” my experience of it, since I experience the belief as true and God does not and cannot. Brightman argues: God only experiences that I believe it, but not what it is like to believe it and not know it is an error. Hence, moving now to our own language, God negatively prehends my act of believing while positively prehending the physical content (feeling) of the belief along with its erroneousness.53 The only other option is to say that God is not the sort of being who “knows” things, which Hartshorne cannot abide. (See chapter 13.) This is bad news also for those who follow Hartshorne in saying there is no negative prehension in God, and in attempting to read Whitehead as though he held or should have held such a view.

Brightman further pointed out that, in general, God negatively prehends not just my beliefs but also my will. We might attribute to God a complete experience of all else that is actual, and we might presume that all else apart from our individual wills is perfectly preserved in God, but if we once say that God positively prehends our wills, and indeed positively prehends all that is actual, we take away the ontological basis for our freedom. Also we assert that God can include contradictions, concretely, in the divine self (e.g., both believe x and know x is false). At work here is something like Whitehead’s insight about how the actual entity’s subjective insistence on consistency, applying the categoreal obligation of subjective harmony to the phases of concrescence, replaces positive feelings with negative prehensions.54 Brightman favored saying that we negatively prehend God, and all else, and positively prehend only that which is given to our consciousness in a single time-span. This view is radical in the bad sense and we do not agree with it.55 So, according to Brightman we negatively prehend our own past (and must infer or imagine it), and similarly with our bodies, other minds, the external world, etc. This makes conceptual feeling the master of physical feeling, and hence is an ungrounded kind of idealism. But Brightman is right to say that the finite self does far more negative prehending than positive.

A genuinely Whiteheadian God could be thought of as positively prehending everything but the might-have-beens and the self-active wills of individual, finite persons (including subhuman personal beings, and superhuman personal beings, if there are any). We could say, it is because God negatively prehends our wills that we are free. We think this romanticizes and exaggerates the importance of the human type of experiencing, but there are reasons beyond those sanctioned by a severe radical empiricism to give some weight to such ideas.56

Whether divine negative prehension is a self-limitation on God’s part or a limitation imposed on God (assuming God constitutes the divine self as creator) is the precise point where our view runs up against Neville’s. Neville is committed to the view that God is limited by the order and conditions of creation, once the act of creation occurs. In short, the possibilities for our cosmic epoch limit God, but God also created those possibilities. But in our view, we could never distinguish between the limitations imposed on this problem by the conditions of our own thinking (that concrete actuality has to be transmuted into a possibility and varied according to some principles of order), and limitations of concrete actuality itself—this is why we favor descriptive metaphysics and provisional ontologies. We are unlikely ever to get an answer to the question about whether God creates all the possibilities, and we ought to be content to recognize this limitation in our philosophizing. Everything Neville says might be right, but we see no adequately careful philosophical path to it.

Hartshorne would not allow any of this kind of talk, ours or Brightman’s, and he responded to Brightman with compelling theories of mutual immanence, psychicalism and dual transcendence.57 These concepts defend the broader idea of a complete experiencer of all that is actual, and through that, all that is possible. But Hartshorne should not have bothered. So long as everything is experienceable, possibilities and actualities alike (as negatively prehended might-have-beens, or as actual experiences of some being), it does not matter whether they are actually experienced by a single being or even by all the beings taken together. Negative prehension is experience. It counts. It does not violate the principle of relativity. That principle governs whatever we can say, know, or say we know within a cosmic epoch. The principle of relativity assures us that things are related, but it doesn’t say how.

We cannot know whether God does or does not experience the whole of the actual, but what we recognize that if God positively prehends the whole, as Hartshorne claims, then God cannot be a personal being, as Hartshorne also claims. In short, that view of God contradicts Hartshorne’s own personalism, and that is why Brightman would not accept it. The reason: a precondition for the personal mode of existence is that a personal being must experience the actual as actual and the possible as possible. Being able to distinguish the might-have-been from the “was” in thinking is only one tiny example of the larger point (since thinking is only one exceptional kind of experiencing). But it is a crucial test case for philosophy.

Thus the following broad generalization is warranted, and exceptionless as far as we know: For all personal beings there must be a difference between the was and the might-have-been, and an implied difference between the will-be and the might-be. If there is no difference in God between the might-have-been and the was, i.e., no differing experience of these, then God cannot be a temporal being at all. There would be no difference between God’s concrete nature, primordial nature and consequent nature unless the was and the might-have-been are prehended differently in God. Here we differ from Neville. His transcendent God, lacking in determinations, cannot be the same God as the Creator, and indeed, Being itself is not God at all. We do in fact worship God the Creator, for only that God can be prayed to or can have a will for our lives that is different from our own (and hence, sin is made possible by this differing of wills). None of this has any relation to Whitehead’s conception of God. God simply is non-temporal for Whitehead, and the difference between the was and the might-have-been is of greater concern to us than our ideas about God.

The one certainty about Neville’s transcendent God is that there is no negative prehension in it, which is why he is quite right to deny to it any personality or personhood. God is, on Neville’s account, the kind of being described by Aristotle, Plotinus, and Spinoza, except that Neville defends not their monistic metaphysics, but the milder thesis of univocity. God would have to be a fully actual being for whom no potency is real, and hence a being that always and eternally is all that it can have been. But the defenders of univocity in the Middle Ages took that milder approach to avoid the charge of pantheism, which was a kind of “atheism,” which is what got the Latin Averroeists in so much trouble. But the non-heretical defenders of univocity, such as Duns Scotus, desired to retain an idea that God as a personal being, and they actually believed it. One wonders why Neville doesn’t simply go the whole way to Spinozism or Plotinianism, given that no one will roast him for defending extreme monism. Why does he not characterize his scheme of determinations of “being itself” as the hypostases or emanations of the One? Is it philosophical modesty or caution? If so, it seems that he is not quite cautious or modest enough, since, according to our argument, that sort of modesty requires that we leave open the question of whether there is negative prehension in God, and consequently, we also have to leave open whether God is a personal being.

One can create a self-consistent account of God with such ideas as Neville defends, but one cannot satisfactorily account for the reality of thought in a changing universe. The latter was a greater problem for Whitehead, although he was always careful not to exaggerate the efficacy of the mental pole. The perfectly actual God is complete, whether Hartshorne’s or Neville’s or Royce’s, but bears no real relation to the conditions governing our thought about the changing universe, and it is thinking about the changing universe that is stamped with the determination, exceptionlessly as far as we know, of personality. In this case one is confronted with the issue of whether there is a being who experiences the whole, since the unmoved mover doesn’t experience anything but itself, if that. It is not just a religious or theological God that thinks, but a philosophical one whose concept has to be consistent with a universe in which thinking occurs, especially when the thought produced by that thinking is a thought about God, taken to have a real relation to its intentional object. Previously we showed how the problem of intention undermines mechanistic, reductionistic, naturalist philosophies, and here we have applied the same problem in the opposite direction—to those who attempt to conceive of God as more than one formative element in the universe.

Thus, when it comes to conceiving of God, we might be thinking so badly that we effectively fail to have a viable analogy between what has been produced with the cooperation of negative prehension and what concretely exists, but we cannot be thinking about nothing at all. We temporal beings are worse off than all those might-have-been’s if God has no real relation to the tiny part of the universe that thinks. In that case, we poor little humans are worse than illusions with no reality of our own—as Hartshorne faithfully argued against the Thomists for so many years—we are rather self-deceived illusions who cannot so much as analogize.58 Mark Twain came to a conclusion like that in his darkest decade, going the Calvinists one better than their own worst estimate of our worth. Advocates of such views are often determinists, Calvinist or otherwise, and are not troubled at the idea that finite beings are not free. But that claim would be troubling to Hartshorne, as an ardent defender of ontological freedom. Yet, his claim that there are no negative prehensions in God seems to imply something like this unwanted conclusion. Hartshorne can have his God only at the cost of confusing possibility with potentiality, and equivocating on the personhood of God, since only the God conceived of as having negative prehensions is love.

Why must we conclude that there must be a single being who experiences everything? We need not, and indeed must not if we wish to preserve the idea of God as a personal being. We do not think God’s negative prehensions are limited exclusively by our wills, although it seems God must negatively prehend our wills if we are to be free, ontologically. Additionally, Whitehead’s God negatively prehends might-have-been’s. The consequent nature of God must negatively prehend the might-have-been’s to prevent past actuality from slipping into mere past possibility, in which case the might-have-been would be indistinguishable from the was. Unless there is a grounding for this distinction in God’s mode of existence, there can be no ground for our own habit of making the distinction, and all our analogies fail.

Here we find the value of Hartshorne’s suggestion that without God there is no truth. For a non-theist, what is the ontological ground for distinguishing the was from the might-have-been? Laws of Nature? Those depend upon the same distinction; alternate accounts of such Laws could account for the same present.59 Personal memory? This implies solipsism and a transcendental unity of the self that could never be demonstrated. Transcendental ego? Even that ego needs an actual past to distinguish its temporal retending from its intending and protending. Configuration of the present? Infinitely many pasts could have produced the present; if one and only one of them actually was, what basis do we have for throwing out the others? We repeat: How would a non-theist support the claim that the was and the might-have-been are different? Here we find also the reason that the Whiteheadian interpreters who attempt to eliminate God from the system are on the wrong track. In short, no God, no actuality, including no actuality of the possible in distinction from the actuality of the concrete.

Since we can postulate that God experienced the past actuality as actual when it was present, and was witness to the unactualized potencies becoming might-have-beens, we propose that we think of God as bound by the following “principle of possibility”: God cannot positively prehend a might-have-been and cannot negatively prehend a was.

This principle implies a fundamental distinction in God between the mode of experience that corresponds to the actual, and the mode that corresponds to the possible. That is, God has conceptual feelings. It is analogous to the same function in our finite consciousness, and this distinction renders both humans and the consequent God temporal and personal beings. Here we confirm Connelly’s prediction that we can make the “analogy between God and other entities … more meaningful”60 by saying God’s consequent and concrete natures are consistent with negative prehension. We would cease to be temporal beings as soon as our positive and negative prehensions, in relation to the concrete actual, became interchangeable. By negatively prehending the might-have-been we open up the door to contemplating the past in abstracto, along with all other possibilities. By positively prehending the concrete present, we are given our own actuality, and for particular, finite existences, there exists also a difference always between what we are and what we might-have-been. That difference is the ground of the difference between what we will be and what we merely might-be.

We are philosophically obliged to analogize our situation to God’s. If there are differences among the primordial, the concrete, and the consequent natures of God, then we may see God as a temporal being. But this difference in aspects of God presupposes the difference between the was and the might-have-been, and on that ground, the difference between the will-be and the merely might-be. On this view, God does not know what God will become because God does not know completely which actualities “He” will be obliged to prehend negatively and which “He” will be obliged to prehend positively in the future. However, God presumably does know which past actualities “He” is prehending positively and which might-have-beens “He” is prehending negatively. This, along with a vast amount of prehensive present actuality provides God with the best basis for knowing the relative probabilities of any given future, and anticipating adeptly what persuasive lures are most efficacious in the present. But God, so conceived, in order to be God, need not know what we will do. Rather, God, as Whitehead indicates, functions first as the original ground of the actuality of the universe, and as the sustainer of its present actuality, and as the being that loves what present actuality still makes possible in the future. This is not Claremont theology, but it isn’t wholly without consolation for spiritual people. We are not “co-creators” with God, whether of the good, or the bad, or the ugly, but we come from dirt, pass through the fleshly coil, and return to the dirt as witnesses of an actuality we never made and over which our influence was nearly negligible, but real.

If, however, by “personal being” we mean a being that, at a minimum, has a will and prehends the universe, then there cannot be a complete identity among the will, the universe, and the act of prehending it. If these are the same, we are pantheists.61 However, if we assume the principle of possibility we suggested—that whatever is positively prehended once is always positively prehended, while whatever is negatively prehended is always negatively prehended by the individual beings who have excluded those possibilities, and that the actual and the might-have-been correspond to these distinctions—we are free to believe the concrete and consequent God is a personal being. More importantly, we have the basis of a principle of individuation without subscribing to any temporal atomism. Personality becomes our best clue to genuine individuality in the universe, while time is our best clue about the character of continuity.

This does not settle the issue of whether God is a personal being. That requires further discussion of what is meant by “personal being.” But it seems impossible that a non-temporal being could be “personal,” in any sense we can understand. A temporal being must somehow preserve in its mode of being and experiencing the difference between the was and the might-have-been. This act of preserving is the very source of any being’s personal identity. That includes humans.

Finally, this principle of negative prehending in God also relieves us of another problem in Hartshorne’s conception of God. If God retains perfectly the entire past, that means that evil is never really overcome in God’s consequent nature—it is active just as truly in God’s concrete present as it was when it occurred. All Hartshorne usually says about this is that God continues to suffer that evil. If that is so, then we have little hope for its eventual defeat, no matter how much good God is able to do later on the basis of it. Hartshorne’s view is unsatisfying, even unsettling. If we are right, Hartshorne is off the hook, so to speak, since God negatively prehended the evil intent of evil wills, and always continues to prehend those evil wills negatively, although God can prehend the positive (morally salutary, albeit unintended) effects of evil wills. Thus, the evil will is not preserved in God as a positive part of the concrete nature of God, but is taken account of and preserved negatively only. That would make the forgiveness of sin easier to understand, and by analogy could apply to human forgiving as well, since it is a mode of forgetting what one never knew in any case, i.e., the intentions of the other.
