13 God’s Mortal Soul


At this point the discussion must be halted. It has run into exaggeration. The essence of the universe is more than process.

—Whitehead, Modes of Thought (100)



Whether we have fulfilled our stated purposes well, others may decide. But there remains a discussion that bears upon hope and possibility that we cannot ignore. As Whitehead says, “hope and fear, joy and disillusion, obtain their meaning from the potentialities essential in the nature of things.”1 We have tried to say something clear, clearer than Whitehead himself, about what might be intended by a word like “potentialities” in such assertions. We find that it has cost us our hope, perhaps even our joy, because the God that we find in Whitehead’s thought is little consolation in our solitariness. The faith of philosophers provides only a pale deity and a strained quality of mercy. Must we be so brutal? We conclude this book by answering that question in the affirmative. But there is, after all, this: “the universe is more than process.”

Robert Neville denies, with no hesitation, that God has a “soul,” whatever that may mean. This denial is not as worrisome as it may sound to theists, since Neville holds determinations of God, whether conditional or essential, to be a function of God’s creative activity, but the transcendent God is beyond all those determinations, and “soul” would be one such. We departed from Neville’s view because the concrete and consequent natures are the only aspects of the divine that a religious person could reasonably address. Those aspects of God concern philosophers only in limited ways. These aspects, if regarded as religiously important, are either to be worshipped without much analysis or analyzed within the limits of theology (see chapter 11).

We have defended a robust distinction between the God of philosophy and the God of theology and/or religious worship, both because we think that is the correct reading of Whitehead and because we think his view is true and unproblematic: we may speak of God without seeking univocity and also without failing to refer to what we speak about. Whitehead’s view of symbolic reference thrives on the reality of error, error without which we would neither grow nor learn. The quest for the final and immutable (dare we say inerrant?) words about God, or anything else, is a linguistic conceit driven by the very illusion of possessing the thing when all we really have is a word for it.2 Whitehead retained the word “God” and was right to do so. That is the word philosophers use when grappling with the essence of the Whole. It is no rigid designator, but it also cannot fail to refer, at least not if anything has an explanation.

We endorse a God for philosophy that is Whiteheadian. Functionally this concept of God is no more than a conception of a whole of the possible and the actual taken together (as the rational and creative whole, as Whitehead understood it). Neither is reduced to the other. A whole need not be a strict unity, let alone an identity or a condition for identity. We defend radical-empirical pluralism in our reading of Whitehead, an idea with which a few scholars do agree—although as far as we know, no one else has followed the idea through to our conclusions about the relation of the idea of God to the Whiteheadian concept of possibility. Specifically, we argue that Whitehead allows negative prehension in God, as concrete and consequent, and one of the results is that Whitehead leaves open the philosophical question not only of whether God is a personal being, but in so doing, leaves completely untouched the religious and theological questions associated with personality and God—questions for theologians and ordinary people to confront, with and without the aid of philosophical reflection. This is the correct position for a radical empiricist.

We think that almost no Whitehead scholar has Whitehead’s God right, since most either (1) deny that Whitehead’s philosophy needs a God,3 or (2) deny that Whitehead’s God prehends anything negatively (as we have described relative the Claremont school). Through a widespread aversion to Whitehead’s views about “eternal objects,” both groups fail to grasp Whitehead’s view of possibility. Anyone who wants to avoid the idea of eternal objects in Whitehead is almost certain to confuse possibility with potentiality. Thus, many process philosophers have ended up (sometimes unwittingly) with ideas closer to Hartshorne’s than to Whitehead’s—ideas which are not as philosophically defensible as Whitehead’s (in spite of their abundant theological and religious virtues). These weaker ideas are then either defended, or modified, or rejected, but none of this activity has very much to do with Whitehead’s actual philosophy.4 Also, without a proper understanding of the role of eternal objects in Whitehead’s metaphysics, the entire theory of extension and of continuity in relation to discontinuity is misunderstood. The result is a grand mess. We have tried to clean it up.

Hartshorne’s influence on Whitehead interpretation is the primary source of this widespread misreading, but it has been repeated and extended by the “Claremont School.” They have an interesting God, but it is not Whitehead’s. The atheists reconstructed Whitehead without God and eternal objects, while Neville and Frederick Ferré developed alternative ontologies, saving a little from Whitehead, but essentially giving up on Whitehead’s project as he saw it.5

To move our project forward, Hartshorne’s view of God has been pressed into two different and incompatible, non-overlapping magisteria—the personal, concrete and consequent God, on one side, and the impersonal, Absolute primordial God on the other side. Harsthorne’s error comes in asserting that there is no negative prehension in the former. He is entitled to claim this only about the latter, and given his own commitments to personalism he should have allowed negative prehension in the concrete and consequent God. Whitehead has almost nothing to say about this problem.

Hartshorne’s conception of God as the all-others-and-self-surpassing being is one of the keys to his philosophy, and indeed, to the overall grasp of most process philosophy beyond Hartshorne. But we think, contrary to Hartshorne, the process God must be viewed as negatively prehending some things—primarily our individual wills, and those past possibilities that no longer have any potency (might-have-beens); see chapter 12. Negative prehension in God provides a ground for saying that God is in some respects finite, a point Hartshorne grants, although he denies God’s finitude in the crucial respects we insist upon.

There are other modes of finitude that Hartshorne acknowledges, and those who follow him (consciously or not), such as Suchocki and Griffin, affirm some of the same modes of finitude as Hartshorne.6 The reasons for denying negative prehension in God also vary, but they seem motivated by a worry about the loss of the past to God or in God, like an assault on the objective immortality of the past. Hartshorne’s argument about the relationship between truth and the preservation of the past in God (rehearsed in the last chapter) is a powerful one—so powerful that it leads people to conflate Whitehead’s ideas about objective immortality and perpetual perishing with Hartshorne’s claims about negative prehension.

To comfort those who fret about God’s mortality (whether or not they acknowledge their fretting) that odious negative prehension is still prehension, and as such, is a “taking account of” the real existence of those supposedly “lost” possibilities and of the wills of others in the concrete nature of the deity. We are not forgotten by God just because we are not completely absorbed by God. It is akin to the old English saying “remember me to him.” It means that although I am not there, I am “there by proxy.” Such is anyone’s negatively prehended presence.

The concrete and consequent God need not be sub-philosophical, although the operation of keeping philosophy within its proper limits, while also defending its fence-line from the incursions of theology or unreflective judgment of model-centric scientism, is delicate. Having a philosophical conception of God as process forbids the identification of God with process. In short, Whitehead isn’t necessarily a panentheist. Hartshorne acknowledges this point, many times, but his followers, in Claremont and elsewhere, seem quickly to forget this caveat. We don’t believe Hartshorne ever forgot it.

Thus, we might still hold, with Hartshorne, that God “preserves” or “remembers” even that which is negatively prehended in and by God, and we might do so while remaining within the proper boundaries of philosophy. This move preserves the objective immortality of the past, as Whitehead understood it. If Auxier is correct in having defended the claim that Hartshorne’s metaphysics, contrary to his own statements, actually supports also a very rich notion of subjective immortality,7 then there remains a third puzzle (apart from those of negative prehension and objective immortality) associated with the philosophical God: whether and in what sense God has an “immortal soul,” and whether the recognition of finitude in God extends to saying God is in some respects mortal, or at least not immortal in every respect.

Having defended two modes of finitude in God, where Hartshorne allows no such contrasts (negative prehension of our wills and of the might-have-been), and having argued that such modes are required if we are even to leave open the question of whether God is a personal being, we now move to an examination of what these philosophical modes of “divine” finitude imply. We are attempting to replace a serious contradiction in Hartshorne’s view with a consistent account that preserves a point he insisted upon: God’s personal character. That more consistent account revives the issue of metaphysical possibility and follows from Whitehead’s version of that story.

The resulting philosophical conception is not the claim that God is necessarily, or even probably, a personal being; rather, the question of God’s personhood and personality is beyond the reach of Whitehead’s philosophy and all other forms of responsible radical empiricism, at least until such time as we gain access to experiences that might serve as serious evidence in philosophical reflection for or against any claim we might make on this score. Being beyond the reach of appropriately restricted philosophical investigation, the question remains a very important religious and theological issue. The theological investigation of whether God is personal actually is limited by the results of philosophy, since theology presupposes the philosophical validity of the question itself while philosophy need not make any such presupposition, and theology has no methods that are entirely independent of philosophy (as we have argued, see chapter 11). But, as James rightly argued, nothing in philosophy or theology infringes our religious appropriation of a personal God because not only are the methods inadequate and the evidence indecisive, they probably always will be. And we recall here that experience always outruns theory.

Moving now to a discussion of a new mode of finitude proposed in-and-for a philosophical conception of God, i.e., that the God of philosophy is best conceived as mortal in some respects, we begin with a word about why the process God needs to be seen as having a soul at all. Hartshorne’s God is a personal being, and unless God exists in a personal mode, many of Hartshorne’s arguments as resolutions to old theological problems fail. It is not simple to say what it means for God to exist in a personal mode; Auxier has treated those issues in some detail elsewhere.8 Suffice to say that treating as empirically real the experiences of consciousness, freedom, and temporality requires something corresponding to a personal mode of existence in God. We do not claim to know whether there is a God, let alone whether God actually exists in a personal mode, but we do know that Western religions conceive of God this way, and that many people believe such a God does exist. Those are religious and/or theological claims that derive from widespread experience across time and distance. They must be treated seriously.

Philosophy gets its subject matter from life, but also brings to bear upon it the critique available from the systematic examination of the reflective structures of thought. When we apply the limits and affordances of reflection to the range of experience that is designated by the word “God,” we arrive at a more rarified set of conceptions; these answer not to the norms of life, but to the small part of life that conforms to the best norms of reflective thinking. Reflective norms and lived norms, or more traditionally, intellectual and moral virtues, are as often at odds as in harmony—so that the most intellectually virtuous people are too often the most morally challenged, while intellectually simple people often have little difficulty in achieving and maintaining high moral standards. This dissonance (if that is a fair word for it) is more than puzzling; it demands an explanation. Here, in this gulf between the order of thinking (and its excellences) and living (and its excellences) we find philosophical conceptions of God. After all, we worry not only about the abstract whole, but also the accretion of value in the universe, when we philosophize.

Philosophically, we are also aware that a self-consistent worldview is difficult to espouse when one takes up the contrary assumption, viz., that we ought to conceive of God as impersonal, since it is not easy to explain how personal existence, such as we humans definitely have, can come to be in a universe that was wholly impersonal, as far as we know, prior to animal life on our planet. That is a recent development, from what we can tell empirically. Thinking of God as impersonal becomes philosophically inconvenient, especially since, only a personal being has any need of such an account of its own ultimate origins, and only the personal beings we call “human” actually possess any need of that kind. Yet, the personality structures of that “interpreting being” pervade all of our categories of explanation, including whatever categories enable that being to explain (or explain away) its own personal mode of existence.9

It is far easier to assume a universe informed by principles of the personal, and then account for what is apparently impersonal in the universe as a degenerate or misunderstood instance of personal existence. (One can account for the mechanical with the intentional, but not vice-versa, as we have noted.) A materialist is a strange kind of human creature who wishes to commence his/her investigation of the nature of the universe by dismissing or denying the most pervasive characteristic of his/her own experience (i.e., that it is personal). There can be no evidence in favor of such a move because the evidence itself is also mediated by the assumption that it will be interpreted and judged by a personal being with purposes and needs. The need to profess materialism is a pathology, not the outcome of high quality reflection upon experience. It is far less empirical to begin with a universe supposedly devoid of all personality (a recondite view, since it involves negating our own fundamental mode of experiencing), and being less empirical, the view is ultimately less rational (in the only defensible sense of “reason”). Thus, it behooves us to begin with the idea that there is at least some analogy between our personal mode of existing and the universe, and its God, if there is a God. This view is less recondite and abstract, and is not in danger of becoming a dogmatic stipulation, if we only suppose it rather than assert it.

Hartshorne conceives of God as a maximally affective and affected being who experiences our experience to the maximal degree, and who retains the subjective immediacy of those experiences without loss. This position is necessary to Hartshorne’s understanding of truth, for if a past event were lost to God, then there could be nothing knowable or extant that could make it true that these events ever happened (according to Hartshorne). This view is not empirical; it is a logical argument about the conditions for the truth of propositions about the past. Bergson, by contrast, held that the full weight of the past exists in the present, not in terms of its felt content (or subjective immediacy), but because the present would not be just the present it is had anything in the past been even slightly different from the way it was. This is hypothetical, but it is an empirical claim.

Bergson’s view is therefore ontological rather than logical. This claim is rendered as empirical as it can be in chapter two of his book Matter and Memory, and the argument stands up to contemporary science. Bergson designates the active presence of the full-past-in-the-present with two terms: “memory” is appropriate as we consider the images we experience more in their particularity and individuality; and “matter” (the repetition of events of minimal duration whose “togetherness” is found in nested, overlapping hierarchies of duration), when we anticipate possibilities for action in the present. This range of memory to matter includes, presumably, the subjective immediacies accompanying the experiences of all experiencers of any duration, in addition to the objective potencies and dynamics of an impersonal sort. Bergson is not concerned with subjectivity of this kind and leaves the privacy of images out of his account. The image we habitually privilege in perception is simply a center of activity. In short, it functions as a quantum of explanation, or, what is the same, an actual entity.

In contrast to Hartshorne, Bergson is not committed to the recoverability or continued existence of these subjective experiences, except insofar as they affect the configuration of action in the present. Bergson offers us a version of the objective immortality of the past which allows for the possibility that experiences can be genuinely lost—in the sense that they are not now being experienced by any person. Yet, even lost subjective immediacy, if there is any, would remain, minimally, in permanent contribution, meaning wholly active, relative to the present and the future. Recovering the past is an empirical problem for Bergson, not primarily a philosophical problem, but he does point out that a severing of the communication between past and present can occur in many ways, as can the recovery of the past in the present. The phenomenon we should be trying to explain, according to Bergson, is not the survival of the past in the present (clearly the past survives), but the general characteristics of severance and recovery.

Here in Hartshorne and Bergson we have the two extremes in the process tradition: the former theistic and dedicated to preserving subjective immediacy in perpetuity (albeit only in God’s experience), and the latter non-theistic and appealing only to the reality of “centers of action” in the present. We cannot here resolve the issue, but we want to raise a worry about Hartshorne’s account. We think his view cannot answer it. We have been very frank about the fact that Whitehead’s God isn’t “God,” but we realize many philosophers simply cannot hear or read that word with any sense of neutrality. In Whitehead studies, it is Hartshorne’s influence that leads “naturalistic” interpreters to conclude that they must jettison the idea of God in order to render the philosophy of organism scientifically respectable. Not only is this move unnecessary, it also renders the Whiteheadian philosophy incoherent and unscientific (i.e., non-naturalistic).

Our objection to Hartshorne makes the Bergsonian approach more appealing, since it is not subject to the same criticism. It is also closer to Whitehead’s view. The problem that concerns us is a version of the problem raised for the immortality of the soul in Plato’s Phaedo; it comes up routinely in the history of philosophy. For Hartshorne it makes sense to say that God has something like a “soul,” assuming we understand this as analogous to God’s “personhood” (an existential feature of the divine) and God’s “personality” (an actuality which is what it is due to the way God has experienced the actual unfolding of the universe). The warrant for the analogy between finite and infinite personhood is only that we are philosophically obliged to have some provisional idea of the “whole” to which our philosophizing refers and on which it depends. As we argued above, it is more empirical to analogize our own mode of experiencing to that whole than to deprive the whole of that personal modality and create, needlessly, a mystery (as materialists do) about how we came to experience everything in the personal mode.

Thus, we analogize a distinction between personhood as a functional and, evidently, an exceptionless characteristic of all possibility. Such a distinction includes personality as a generic feature of the actual determinations of the universe, except where there is some reason why personality has been dissolved or destroyed by some process or force, such as abstraction. Given that nothing existential or actual is ever lost to God, according to Hartshorne, we might understand God’s “soul,” on such an account, as having at least the following features:

(1) Personhood—God’s existential mode of being as a personal being; here Hartshorne asserts that God cannot succeed in existing impersonally (not that God would attempt to, but with nature as God’s body some are tempted to think of nature as impersonal, which Hartshorne denies).

(2) Personality—the way actual events in the past have been experienced by God as actual (not as mere possibilities). Contrary to Hartshorne, this experience, including the exclusion by negative prehension of might-have-beens and the wills of other persons, both restricts and enables God’s present experiencing of the concrete universe and future experiencing of what will be the concrete universe.

(3) Inexhaustibility—the inexhaustible capacity of God to take in new experiences, each in its full uniqueness and each making its full contribution to the aesthetic unity and variety of the real, including the concrete future. Hartshorne attributes this character to God, but denies it to human persons, a point on which Auxier has argued he is inconsistent. In any case, ours is stated below, but we can indicate here the “mortality of God” is the issue. The inexhaustibility question is the central issue surrounding Whitehead’s enduring concern with the accretion of value. Thus, when we speak of the inexhaustibility of cosmological “experience,” i.e., the radical-empirical criterion of futurity, we mean the problem of the accretion of value, taken in the grandest terms. The problem of evil is one of the many forms in which this issue comes to a head, but we will speak more of limitation or finitude than of evil.



Each of these general categories, possibility/personhood, actuality/personality, and inexhaustibility/potentiality, poses a basic sort of problem for grasping the nature of the process God. The first is a metaphysical (and derivatively, also theological) question requiring abstract but literal language to address. Here, logic is our best (and at present only) tool for discussing the personhood of God; analogy provides the best logic, and it is at this level that God’s negative prehending of the wills of other creatures is grounded. Correcting Hartshorne’s interpretation depends upon getting the logic right here. In Whiteheadian language, God negatively prehends the self-valuation of every actual entity in its actual world, and thus, every actual occasion.

The second category poses all the same questions as the first, but in less abstract and more complex terms—requiring the introduction of empirical, historical, and epistemological questions. Here, discussion in analogical terms of basic concepts like “God’s love” and “God’s knowledge” must be added to our language about the first level, and our religious experience along with our theology become relevant. Those who would defend God’s actual goodness, for example, must not ignore evidence. In this second level God’s negative prehension of might-have-beens is grounded, because not everything that could have happened actually did—at least not if we analogize divine and human experience. This is to say, God is free, in some sense, because there is a difference, for God, between what was and what might have been (see chapter 12). In level two, abstract logic no longer reigns supreme, and self-consistency is only one among many virtues of discourse. Thus, God, as concrete and consequent, negatively prehends what never happened, but might have. This is contrary to Hartshorne’s many assertions.

The most difficult level to discuss, by far, is the third, which expresses a complex relationship between possibility and actuality, and points to the future. Such discussions presuppose fairly settled answers to the first and second levels, and make use of both abstract, logical and concrete, analogical language. But the third level passes through the logical and empirical (evidential) restraints of discourse and launches itself into a dangerously speculative domain. It is not even clear what could count as “evidence” in a discussion of God’s capacity to absorb new experiences, and it is not clear what authority “logic” (or any kind of language) could ever possess in governing such an idea. Time just is contingency, at least in our experience of it, and the most slippery aspect of time is future time, which is the temporal mode addressed by the inexhaustibility thesis above.

This extreme contingency might be reason enough to stay away from the topic, but we cannot do that if we want to correct an important misunderstanding of Whitehead’s philosophy. Having expended much effort in the interpretation of possibility, actuality, and potentiality, we should not now become coy about the portents of such an analysis—even as it bears upon religion, civilization, or hope and joy.

We notice the Abrahamic religions require such an account of God’s inexhaustibility just as much as the process philosophers do, which is why theology exists. We finite beings do seem curious about matters beyond our ken. The concept of God can never make systematic sense unless we can show how God is related to the temporal world, and in what sense God surpasses that world. To this extent, Hartshorne surely stated the right problem, even if his solutions are not the same, or as plausible, as Whitehead’s.10 If the God of the Abrahamic religions is unaware of the events in the temporal world, then the humans know something God does not know, i.e., what it is like to exist finitely and mortally in time. That we should have such knowledge, while God lacks it, would be contradictory to the classical idea of God, as well as to Hartshorne’s. The God of philosophy, we have argued, has to be conscious (this is the same as saying there is negative prehension in God), and is conscious (at least after “let there be light”—i.e., the primordial nature of God would not be conscious in any important sense, but neither would it make sense to assert the unconsciousness of the primordial nature11).

The classical answer to the riddle about God and time is: God knows as an eternal present all that happens “in time” (from the limited, human point of view). But this idea also places a limit on God—if God experiences as an eternal present what we experience as unfolding in time, then God lacks the experience of having “His” experiences accumulate, clarify, and fill one another out in the course of time. This experience has great value to finite souls. This development is what makes it possible for us to become moral, virtuous, refined, appreciative, reflective, wise, and many other things. If God’s experiences come all at once, in an eternal present, then God lacks an experience of the accretion of value-in-becoming that is basic to finite persons. Such a God is not superhuman but rather subhuman, in our view—a view asserted by Hartshorne, Brightman, and others.

Yet, God’s experience is, traditionally speaking, all the experience there is, and all equally present at every moment. This raises uncomfortable theological questions about the difference between finite, individual experience and God’s. Since nothing changes for God, on such a view, from a finite standpoint, this would make it boring to be God. We must grant that perhaps boredom springs from a deficiency in the human mode of existence that God does not possess or endure. However, it is not only hard to prove the supposition that there is no change in God, it is impossible to do so, because to prove it we have to leave the categories of God’s personhood and personality and enter upon a discussion of divine inexhaustibility. Only at this level does the matter of divine boredom become a concern.

Is God’s future already over, and if so are we are obliged to affirm that God’s inexhaustibility is actually exhausted? The only analogy to this in our experience is to a dead person. Obviously the death of God has been discussed for well over a century, and philosophers and theologians still struggle with it. The close association of the God of philosophy and the God of religion and theology has been a stumbling block to all concerned, regardless of whether the religious people or the philosophers had the upper hand at one time or another. But the death of God doesn’t have to be bad news for religious people, or perhaps even philosophers. Rorty and Gianni Vattimo have argued that getting over the old God opens up some positive space for discussing a God that might play a less destructive role in our cultural future.12

Be that as it may, one can see why the assertion of an eternal present in which nothing changes can become an uncomfortable accompaniment to theism when examined critically. Such problems motivate Hartshorne’s theses of dual transcendence. God is inexhaustible, he argues, not only because God surpasses the created world, but also is self-surpassing. That is, Hartshorne’s God has a future.

The inexhaustibility thesis is in play regardless of whether one conceives of God’s experience as being contained in a single eternal present, or in an on-going development. This is why philosophers such as Ferré and Neville also cannot avoid this issue by treating time as a determination of God, at least so long as they remain theists in the Western tradition. Neither really is a theist in the Western tradition, so we doubt we have posed a problem for philosophers of their sort—we are inclined to think of Neville as a neo-Augustinian, saving eternity for God’s mode of existing and taming time by explaining its plural modes, but not as a theist.

To bring the question into process language, the inexhaustibility thesis requires us to consider: what could possibly count as evidence for God’s boredom or satisfaction or interest in the world, with regard to the totality of God’s experience, or its limits? There is scripture of course, but scripture does clearly support the atemporal or eternalist view of God that classical theists try to defend. Eternity is Augustine’s idea, not a scriptural one, except to the extent that Greek philosophy invaded Hebrew and Christian thought during the 300 years prior to the life of Jesus (and that was a significant invasion). The scriptures overwhelmingly depict a God active in history, changing “His” mind, subject to regret, hearing prayers, making decisions about things, waging a war with competing forces in some cases, commanding the slaughter of Midianites, and taking out vengeance against Onan himself, even making bets with “the enemy” on the likely responses of his favored servants to unmerited suffering. Only a few passages suggest a God existing in an eternal present as contrasted with many thousands that depict God in a temporal mode. We won’t find out about whether the supposedly eternal God is curious or bored by the world from that sort of evidence. The temporal God definitely is not satisfied if scripture is the measure, but even less so if nature is the measure.13

How should we talk about whether God can grow bored with the universe? The reason ontological boredom is a crucial test is because it is suggestive of a being-toward-death in God, whereas if we considered ontological satisfaction or even curiosity, these would not deliver such existential structures. The latter two modes suggest a justified past and an adventurous future for God, while divine ontological boredom points toward divine finitude, specifically, the inability or unwillingness to accumulate new, deeper, and more intense experience. To claim it is impossible that God should grow bored with the universe invokes a kind of necessity that contradicts the idea of God’s personhood and personality, and also the open character of the universe, along with God’s “freedom” (whatever that may mean). Thus, we bring up the issue, i.e., God’s boredom/exhaustibility, as a road to a more provocative topic, namely, the mortality of God (or divine being-toward-death).

There are, it seems to us, three possibilities:

(a) The Ever-growing. Imagine the universe keeps growing to a greater unity under contrast (to use Whitehead’s phrase) within some intelligible (to God) limits: Why, assuming God is a personal being, should it be a priori impossible that God might outgrow, or grow tired of this universe even at that? It should be possible for God to outgrow even an increasingly interesting universe, and if it isn’t possible for God to do that, we couldn’t know it isn’t. No empirical evidence for or against it settles the descriptive adequacy of the exhaustibility thesis, and thus, we may retain as a viable option that God can grow bored regardless of how interesting the universe is becoming.

(b) The Ever-dying. Imagine the universe eventually runs down and burns out (i.e., fails to grow), and this entropy limits God’s capacity for interest in it: Why should it be seen as a priori impossible that this universe, as it runs down, might grow less interesting to God than it now is, regardless of whether God continues growing? (Note that Bergson takes this idea very seriously and says that the élan vital is finite, eventually using itself up as the universe sinks into inertness.) In this case, even a pessimistic view of the natural universe, coupled with optimism about God’s capacity for continued experience, does not eliminate the prospect of ontological boredom, since other things might be boring to God even if God is not limited by the divine awareness of this universe. (See chapter 8, on cosmic epochs.) It wouldn’t be impossible for God to grow bored even if God is not limited or determined by an entropic universe; if it is impossible, we couldn’t know that it is. This way of imagining the universe also doesn’t settle the question of divine exhaustibility. There is no a priori reason and/or evidence for asserting that the created universe determines God’s capacity for ontological boredom.

(c) Homeostasis. Imagine the universe maintains an equilibrium (in cycles or something like it) between burning out and growing more complex and unified: Why is it a priori impossible that God should grow increasingly less interested in such an equilibrium as the general types of experiences God has already had come around again? In short, the theory of cosmic epochs does not rescue God from the peril of being exhausted. This view is close to deism. We might think of it as “the monotony problem.” Let the created universe be as predictable or as unpredictable as it will, there is no reason, a priori, to conclude that God cannot grow bored with it, and no empirical evidence, for or against, can point us in a clear direction, so the exhaustibility thesis is still a problem. Those who want to say God’s experience is inexhaustible (such as Hartshorne) are left with nothing but a possibility. There is no way of defining an inexhaustible God, or universe, in a way that is answerable to human experience, even by analogy.



Therefore, from the above three arguments, we cannot rule out the idea that God experiences being-toward-death—God’s own death, that is.

Thus, thinkers who presume to treat God as process, or, on the contrary, as beyond determination, have no purchase on the question of possibility as it relates to the philosophical God. God is not necessarily our happy (or co-suffering) co-creator. Neither is God necessarily Being or Beyond Being or the Undetermined. None of these views can handle the exhaustibility problem or confirm the inexhaustibility thesis. Hartshorne’s doctrine of dual transcendence comes as close to doing so as any position. We have refuted it. It is incoherent on the exhaustibility of the divine nature.

We discover here the reciprocal to Whitehead’s perpetual perishing of subjective immediacy, which is that being-toward-death has the effect on the future that perpetual perishing has upon the past. If God is a temporal being, with a future, we cannot rule out the likelihood of God’s possessing such an entropic structure. Hartshorne thinks he can rule this out, and he insists Whitehead should have agreed, but Hartshorne is working beyond anything logic, analogy, or experience can warrant. Apart from the three ways of thinking of the universe given above, the ever-growing, the ever-dying, and the homeostatic, what fourth possibility is there for the relation of God and the created universe, from a process perspective? Cosmic punctuated equilibrium is just a version of the first as modified by the third. It doesn’t change the questions about exhaustibility. And finally, given the difficulty with determining God’s level of interest in the universe, how can we know a priori that God never dies? What possible empirical or logical evidence can there be for or against this idea? The everlasting God of traditional theism and even Hartshornean neo-classical theism isn’t philosophically viable.

We think process metaphysics ought to offer answers, however tentative, to these questions, and that the Abrahamic religions need answers also—not simply dogmatic assertions to the contrary. How might we construe the nature of God such that God always transcends the universe (whether by Hartshorne’s dual transcendence or the eternalist thesis of Western theology), and also never grows bored with the universe (i.e., has a future)? No matter what we assert about God, ontological boredom remains a genuine possibility for God.

We think process metaphysics is challenged here in a way the Abrahamic traditions are not, since answers based upon God’s self-sufficiency given in the Abrahamic traditions have been set aside by process philosophers, so as to maintain a meaningful, real relation between God and the universe. The idea of divine self-sufficiency, whether explicated as an unmoved mover, or as the Trinity, does “answer” these questions in a manner consistent with the conceptions of God that these traditions accept. These traditions have their own pitfalls, but process philosophers sacrifice perfect self-sufficiency in God for the idea that God is meaningfully enriched by the experiences of creatures and creation. Hence God, who is “the most indebted being in the universe” on Hartshorne’s account, is also the most endangered (if we follow out the logic of that claim). The desire to attribute to God maximal affectivity cuts off the self-sufficiency strategy for answering the “boredom” question.

The process God is always conceived as able to surpass the universe and lure it in a given direction, and also able to surpass any given state of the divine self. How can the universe be guaranteed never to fail to bore, or disappoint its creator unless it has the same “power”? But if the universe is susceptible of the same infinite variety and contrast as its God, what makes it not God? We may say, with thinkers such as Neville, because the former is created while the latter is creator, that these are two sides of one symbol. But then there is clearly at least one crucial sense, i.e., as source of creativity, in which the universe is not capable of the same infinite sort of self-transcendence as God, and if it be lacking in this sense, what will prevent us from tracing the logic down to the conclusion that the universe may burn out or run in cycles which will bore God?

Thus, not only is Hartshorne’s characteristic move imperiled, so is the move made by Neville, but only on the assumption that the transcendent God is a personal being. If we give up that idea, Neville can have his God, but his God isn’t God, which is to say that Neville doesn’t really disagree with Whitehead, properly interpreted. Perhaps such considerations provide the motive for Neville to dispense with the idea that God has a soul. It is the only consistent thing he could do, and traditional theists don’t have this option. So Neville sidesteps the question of the exhaustibility of divine experience by making the divine experience a derivative determination of Ontological Act of Creation, while “God” is a version of existence that is less than “being itself.” Neville cannot say that “being itself” is personal, but we don’t think it gets him out of proving that being itself is inexhaustible. God by any other name (Oca) is no less a philosophical problem.

Returning to the process conception of God, and adapting an argument from Plato’s Phaedo, shall we require God to give the universe a new push once in a while so “He” doesn’t get bored? How long before God becomes bored of that (i.e., renewing the creative energy so the universe doesn’t run down, or the novelty so that it doesn’t just go around in circles)? It is easier to say that the universe has a self-creative aspect that differs from God’s self-creative aspect in degree or in kind, but if so, it would seem that the universe must be less than God in respect of self-transcendence, or capacity for growth, for otherwise the universe just is God, and panentheism gives way to pantheism for want of distinguishing criteria, as Corrington has argued. Process philosophers cannot allow the universe to be more than its God without risking the failure and death of God (and hence, a cessation of the accretion of value).





Is There a Solution?


The key to this problem lies in two considerations: the “evolutionary” consideration, and the “uniqueness” consideration, both of which ground the claim of unpredictability, within certain limits, for the universe, with the limitations understood in light of “contributionism” (we allow a modified version of Hartshorne’s interpretation of the accretion of value). To avoid the idea of a bored deity, we need a deity capable of being surprised by the universe, and a universe with a creative power of its own, and we must give some determinate sense to what this sort of “surprise” is. First we must pose the problem of God’s boredom in its most pointed terms, which is done from the standpoint of level (b) above, the ever-dying cosmos. We will use both logical/literal language and analogical language.

Hartshorne often argued that finite creatures cannot sustain indefinitely the addition of new experiences to their previous ones. After a certain saturation over time, the capacity of finite beings to take in the full value of these new experiences declines to the point that their variety and uniqueness are unavailable to the finite consciousness, which then grows bored in its monotonous existence, and eventually dies.14 We have all seen this phenomenon in human (and even non-human) old age. Why should this analogy fail to describe the experience of the deity? Granted that no process theist believes it does, on what grounds can it be excluded? Granted that no adherent of the Abrahamic traditions believes God gets bored and dies, what makes the believers so confident?

Let us assume the analogy between divine and human experience is apt when we imagine God as “remembering” the past, but unlike human beings, doing so without loss, and containing, in addition, all the content of experience that was not even available to the consciousness of the experiencers at the time it occurred. This would mean that there is no negative prehension in God. As finite, non-divine experiencers mature, each new experience constitutes a smaller proportion of their total experience. Some people have said that this is why time seems to pass more quickly as we age—each new minute constitutes a progressively smaller proportion of our total experience. Why can we not say that the same is true of God, by analogy, especially if we hold that God is a temporal being (which Whitehead does not, of course)? Assuming God’s experience is cumulative, why isn’t it the case that each new moment constitutes an ever-smaller fraction of God’s total experience? This is the “evolutionary” consideration, where evolution is viewed in light of the tendency of experience to accumulate and build upon previous experience, irreversibly.15

What would exclude a process God, of this non-Whiteheadian sort, from accumulating experience? If God’s experience does accumulate, is it not the case that each new experience constitutes a progressively smaller fraction of the whole? Is God exempt from the idea that 1 + x > 1? The process God is in fact conceived as being exempt from genuine increase, but not from evolving. Even Whitehead’s infrequent mentions of the consequent nature of God clearly include ordered change and accumulation of experience. The absence of “increase” means only that the accretion of value does not add value to the divine experience. How a being can evolve with no accretion of value is a paradox we must consider.

Let us move then to the “uniqueness” consideration. Our sense of proportionality (how each new experience stands in relation to the whole of that finite creature’s experience) depends, in the case of finite creatures, upon there having been a definite time at which a given being came into being (either the moment of conception, or any starting point so long as there is some durational epoch to which commencement belongs). For finite beings the estimation of the proportion of each new experience to total experience may be understood (even calculated) relative to the total collection of experiences that preceded it for that same being. In the case of the process God, since we cannot analogously assert such an empirical starting point within the created universe, we also cannot calculate, in principle, what proportion of God’s total experience is represented in any given unique experience.

This uniqueness consideration may undermine the idea that God’s experience of the universe is cumulative, or that God “evolves.” But it does not. Addition is not increase unless it is addition to a finite set (and here we may include collections, but not constellations of possibilities, which suffer no alteration of any kind—see chapter 9). Adding one “individual” (as a potentiality) to a determinate constellation of possibilities falls short of any reasonable definition of “increase.”16 God might be conceived of as evolving both with and without “increase.”

This result might seem to recommend the traditional solution of seeing God as atemporal. That is Whitehead’s usual characterization of the deity—a point not lost on apologists of the perennial philosophy, whose enthusiasm for Whitehead would be most puzzling were the Claremont theologians right about Whitehead’s God. The traditionalists show no such predilection for Hartshorne’s God, which might be a clue to the wise. Consider the mess the process God has become, in our forgoing analysis. By refusing to be determined as finite beings are, while also being determined by finite beings, the process God becomes a paradox, either unnecessary due to “His” great changeability, or, due to “His” unchangeability; the process God disappears either way into the idea of process itself.

Auxier has argued elsewhere that the traditional view, if it is eternalist, also militates against conceiving God as a genuinely personal being, and hence we are locked on the horns of a dilemma: either we claim that God is eternal, making “His” personal mode of existence problematic (the traditional view), or we allow that God is temporal, i.e., God evolves, and face the issue of a lack of increase in God’s experiences for lack of a starting point in God. In Whitehead’s language, the primordial nature of God is cut off from creativity (a point Neville and others have made). If God has no “starting point,” there is a sense in which each new experience bears no final or definite proportionality to God’s total experience, even for God. We will eventually challenge the traditional view, but for now let us assume that process theists might come up with a way of handling the problems with divine evolution.

There is indeed a promising solution: This absence of proportionality allows the uniqueness of each experience to take center stage in our considerations of God’s experience. No experience is like any other, at bottom, for God, we could say. God does not, therefore have “an actual world” in any sense consistent with Whitehead’s ontological principle. This is Whitehead’s view, in fact. When God experiences event x, there is no reason to think that its proportional relation to all other experiences God has is a governing feature of God’s experience of x. This is because God does not require concepts to mediate a class of experiences, but rather, may have experiences concretely, whole, and unmediated. God, on this view, does not need generalizations, or analogies to “include” x. God experiences x as x!, and not just in its relation to similar experiences that are x-like. Nor does God just have “His” version of x. God has x-as-such-and-as-a-whole, with all of its relations, in its utter uniqueness. Here the analogy between human experience and divine experience can be legitimately limited, since concepts are needed only by beings who cannot take in x in its full uniqueness.

Thus, if we do not attribute conceptual thought to God, then God may experience x immediately as x!, even though God will also experience all the relations of x to other previous experiences, and will also include how x has responded to the contributions of all those other experiences as data for its own synthesis. Thus, where concepts and symbols mediate for us all experiences, this God of process does not require concepts and symbols to experience, include (and ground) x as the unique event it is. Yet, we do not thereby exclude the idea that God might employ concepts and symbols. We are not required to exclude God’s act of thinking from our idea of God, we are only required to see it as a contingent feature of the divine, and to admit we do not know whether it is true that God thinks. We argued in the last chapter that to make it a necessity that God does not think dispenses not only with negative prehension in God, but also God’s personality or “soul.” Hartshorne cannot consistently maintain his idea of God in the face of this consideration. Whitehead can, but only by holding the God of philosophy at arm’s length from the God of religion or theology.





The Self-creative Act


Here we come to appreciate the importance of the idea that in each actual occasion there must be a wholly self-creative phase or aspect unavailable to God in advance, in its specificity. The claim that in each new experience there is a self-creative moment that is more than can be discovered from the contributions to it of all prior experiences, is just another way of saying that each experience just is the experience it is—and no other—precisely because that is how God is affected by it and affects it. The mutual relation of affecting/affected requires conceptual mediation, and hence negative prehension, because exclusion of all that a unique entity is not is prior to its satisfaction as a unique contribution to its actual world.

The finite entity is felt in the mode of possibility as well as actuality by God, and some of the things it might become are excluded for the sake of what it will be. On this view God cannot anticipate with perfect accuracy the self-creative aspect of each or any event until it is completely concrete, i.e., satisfied. Asserting that each event is “unique” implies as much. There must be some valuative character in each actual occasion that was unforeseeable, even by God, and in virtue of which that occasion is irreducible to any other. This argument is the basis of saying God negatively prehends finite wills until they are exercised concretely. The finite will, then, is grounded in the self-creative aspect of each actual occasion.17

The universe is forever open because each event is unique, and is individual in proportion to its self-creative potentiality. No two events have precisely the same potencies because each responds to a different universe as data for its own self-creative activity.18 Obviously, complex societies of actual occasions have an open field of potencies in proportion to the intensity of their immediately preceding synthesis. Still, they might grow or die or equilibrate, but all relevant venues are open ones. The accretion of creative syntheses can either build on earlier activity by actualizing potencies that increase intensity, or by openness to the unification of a greater variety of data in the next act; or it can actualize potentialities that lead it toward an entropic decline, a neutralization of its own energies by diffusion; or it can oscillate with homeostatic effect.

The creative exercise of will, then, is the freedom to become more complex and deeper in actuality, while the entropic act is the letting loose of the creative tension generated by the disequilibrium of energies held together in complex interdependencies—the very diseqilibrium that compels the entity to act, hurls it toward the future. As far as we know, finite creatures (created beings?), eventually cannot hold the center, and the creative tension diminishes, or perishes. The accumulated experiences become too weighty and numerous for the creature to prehend meaningfully. Then conceptual feeling dies (meaning that it becomes negligible), and potentialities contract, since each new experience is an increasingly smaller proportion of the whole, and each past experience is prehended ever more abstractly as new experiences are had. This is a fair definition of death.19

The process God’s case has to be seen as disanalogous in some ways. God’s experience can evidently accumulate without need for a definite starting point in proportion to which each experience is a progressively smaller addition to the whole. Accumulation is not necessarily increase in God’s case. What is missing is not the starting point per se, but the proportionality of new experiences to that point. The primordial nature of God is equivalent to possibility as such, considered in abstraction from all activity. Possibilities do not bear proportion to one another except in relation to a concrete or a posited actuality. So long as we are free to postulate a possibility as an actuality, we can always think of a different God, a different whole to which finite experiences belong, but which does not increase the totality of possibilities in the cosmic order, and does not commit itself to saying God either did or did not create the possibilities (a question we finite beings haven’t the resources to answer, only to ask).

If this view is correct, then we can see that the universe is always novel and unpredictable to God, within limits, and that God will experience every event immediately in its uniqueness—after it happens. Not just anything can happen (i.e., the past qua past cannot suddenly start changing), but each event is just what it is in spite of the contribution of the past, in view of its self-creative act.





Does God Sing the Blues?


But what staves off the charge that God could either outgrow this continual novelty, or become uninterested in it for some reason? What holds a process God in relation to the evolving universe? Hartshorne might say that to assert a bored God is to speak in a way contrary to God’s necessary nature or essence. But this goes only to level one in the first schema laid out above, i.e., God’s personhood—applying only to language associated with the definition of God as governed by theology and logical language. In order to answer the charge completely we must engage levels two and three, especially the latter, the inexhaustibility thesis.

We can receive no final assurance of “ever renewable uniqueness in relation,” always and with certainty, will satisfy divine aesthetic needs. God might grow bored with the universe unless we embrace a pre-established harmony regarding the rate of God’s growth and the growth of the universe, and assert a necessary reciprocity to which we are not philosophically entitled by any evidence. This brings us back to “the evolutionary consideration.”

Assuming that by “evolution” we mean something like “ordered, cumulative change,” and assuming we note the asymmetry and apparent irreversibility of such changes, we have a ground for thinking that a contingent pre-established harmony may not be a hypothesis utterly without warrant in process philosophy. Indeed, Whitehead explicitly embraces it, to the annoyance (and incomprehension) of many of his followers. But by pre-established harmony we no longer mean, as did Leibniz, Malebranche, and Spinoza, a relation between mind and body; we mean that there is an intelligible relation (perhaps contingent, perhaps necessary—we will probably never know) between the pace of change in God’s consequent nature, as a concrete being, and the development of the universe.

Note the asymmetrical character of evolutionary processes. Philosophically speaking, the process God cannot “undo” the past, for to act in such a manner would require an act in the present which takes as its data the past actualities to be “undone” (whether the actual God, if there is one, can “undo” the past we leave aside; our point is that we cannot make sense of the idea philosophically). Even if it were possible to remove from God’s “memory” or concrete being the specific contributions made by an event, x, to all other events subsequent to it, to isolate x metaphysically such that it has no relations to anything real or actual, and thereby annihilate it metaphysically (we assume this is what “undo” means), the act by which these contributions are removed would remain a positive act which does contribute to all subsequent acts, and which has as a part of its content the very data which were to be “undone.” Hence, the act is not really “undone,” it is at most quarantined in a further act. Hence, we cannot understand God as “undoing” the past, and that alone is enough to make temporal processes asymmetrical, or “evolutionary” in the sense we mean. This also affirms Whitehead’s idea that physical prehension is always positive prehension. In short, when your woman left you, you have the blues because she’s gone, not because she never existed. The eternal sunshine of the spotless mind isn’t available, especially to God.





One Damn Thing after Another


By definition, all asymmetrical processes must be cumulative in some way. To show this, assume there is at least one asymmetrical process that is not cumulative (including the accumulation of entropic losses). What then would make such a process asymmetrical and how could we know it? If the past of this process as a whole can simply disappear, and not accumulate in any way, then there is no more reason to call the process asymmetrical than symmetrical. If at least part of the past is always preserved, then the process is cumulative to exactly the degree it is asymmetrical (“impossible to undo”). There might be other ways of conceiving of asymmetry, but our point is not an ontological claim about how processes in the universe actually are, but only about what thinking of them clearly requires us to say. We have laid the basis for this observation in our account of the relation between physical and conceptual prehension.

As we said, the cumulative character of the past may be a problem for God in terms of continued capability to absorb new experiences without growing ontologically bored, but then we answered this with the observation that the immediacy with which God prehends the uniqueness of events, that relational feature of God to events, defies the proportion argument. Here we revisit this issue at a broader level. We assert, uncontroversially, that a cumulative, asymmetrical process, “an evolution,” is also a relational phenomenon. Here we can appeal to the principle of panentheism, that all is in God although this “all” does not exhaust all that God is. But we think there is a better account, closer to Whitehead’s actual view. By “God” we mean actuality of the postulated whole to which all of the “parts” belong, even if we leave open some of the features of the whole. God, so conceived, not only experiences immediately all discrete events in their uniqueness, but also experiences their relations to all other events (the “events” themselves just are configurations of these relations, plus the self-creative contribution of the actual entity—see the introduction to the book). These relations must then be seen as evolutionary in the sense of asymmetrical and cumulative. This move yields the following exceptionless generalization about the empirical universe: as far as we know, all evolutionary (i.e., asymmetrical cumulative) processes, taken as units, are developments within a larger whole. The many become one and are increased by one.

If we supposed there were an evolutionary development that is not a part of a larger whole, we supposed something that can be neither asymmetrical nor cumulative, since there is nothing compared to which it is either asymmetrical and cumulative or not asymmetrical and cumulative. We erroneously imagine here a God experiencing immediately a unique event x without also experiencing its relations to the other events that contribute to it and which it evaluates. That is clearly absurd, since it seems to suggest that either God fails to experience something that exists, or that God may not be aware of some portions of “His” own experience. If we can set these claims aside, it is clear that when God experiences evolutionary processes, God experiences them as evolving. It would also seem, therefore, that God experiences something like the past as over and done (actively contributing, but accomplished), the present as becoming, and the future as anticipated but not actual. The alternative is to say that the universe evolves, but God does not experience its actual evolution. That is the problem with the traditional view, saying along with Aquinas (and the church) that God has no real relation to the universe. This view deprives God of a crucial aspect of experience, and would correspondingly remove “Him” not only from a full understanding of “His” creation, but from an adequate understanding of anything.





Out, Out, Brief Candle!


Now we must ask: does it make any conceptual sense to assert that God’s capacity to experience the universe could change or grow more quickly or less quickly than the universe evolves? We can get past the idea God might grow more quickly than the universe by noticing that the data which affect God just are the universe, as far as we are concerned, and it is more reasonable to suppose growth in God in proportion with these data than out of proportion with them. The theory of cosmic epochs in Whitehead is intended to stake out this territory for our metaphysical thinking, but without ultimately closing off the alternatives we can imagine. It might be possible to learn something about the relation between our cosmic epoch and others, by way of a study of pure possibility, but that study would be of dubious value. In our cosmic epoch, mortal creatures meet their final ends in part because the process of the universe increasingly exhausts their finite capacity to absorb new experiences proportionally to the occurrence and accumulation of the value of events.

Still, one cannot be certain whether the process of God’s growth in capacity for experience may be disanalogous to the destiny of such capacities in other finite beings. Assuming (for the moment) the universe never outruns God’s capacity for experience, that God does not “die” in that sense, we cannot finally rule out that God’s capacity for experience might not outrun the process of the universe, as the universe runs down (entropy), and God might become ontologically bored with the dying universe. While we cannot rule this out, we can say we have no basis for thinking it is true, and some basis for thinking it is false, given that all we know about growth indicates proportionality, and nothing we can ever know about growth could count as evidence for disproportionality between God’s development and the development of the universe (all our evidence comes from the universe). Where there can be no contrary evidence in principle, and there can be positive evidence, it seems fair to believe what the positive evidence suggests. Hence, it is reasonable to conclude God does not outgrow the universe, or that if “He” does, we could never know it.

The idea that God might evolve or grow less quickly than the universe is harder to dismiss; the case is analogous to a situation of divine Alzheimer’s disease. And here we begin to come to the literal “crux” of the issue. Were it to happen that God grows less able to take in the universe as it grows, the universe would become in some sense “more than God.” So why not affirm this idea? It is clear that this is analogous to the idea that we can produce or create things greater than ourselves (e.g., one might have children who become saints), and thus, God might give existence to a universe that outlives “Him,” both physically and in the attainment of value. But this idea only makes sense when one considers “wholes” and “parts” and “greater than” in abstraction. This is not the claim that concerns us. God would be at least objectively immortal in the universe “He” created, and then we would have to find evidence of God’s death or decline or departure in terms of subjectively immediate experience of the concrete universe. That won’t happen. What could count as evidence that God is not experiencing the universe now, but did at some point in the past? Or that God is experiencing the universe in a diminished way now compared to some point in the past, or that God will have a diminished experience the universe at some point in the future, compared with now or the past?

If we invoke evil as evidence that God is “slipping” or losing a grip on the vivid experience of the universe, we risk exaggerating the human condition and its importance in the universe, and of myopia in thinking our own times are worse than other times, when in truth we have no direct, concrete experience of those other times. What is more unbearable? A universe in which there is much freedom being actively misused, or the void? The idea that the universe might become greater than God is not really the issue to worry about.

The metaphysical problem is that insofar as all finite beings work with the available data in their self-creating, and insofar as they are self-creating, then God by definition did not “create” them wholly. The self-creative moment of an actual entity in its actual world does not imply its total independence from other occasions, only its uniqueness. No occasion could achieve its unique synthesis without a context of response set by the data prehended in the response phase of its concrescence. If the universe is seen as an ordered society of occasions, then the only encompassing context of response within which this society can create itself is God’s concrete being. If God’s concrete being is ever less comprehensive than the universe, then the universe would have to become more and more self-creative in proportion as God’s contribution dwindles in importance, and as the previous self-creativity comes to play an increasingly greater role as data in further response.

This situation, if it can be actual, would lead ultimately to the withering away of God, although not to God’s final demise, since God would always play some role and make some contribution to the evolving universe. But as the self-creativity of the universe became more and more important to its further growth, it would have an ever-decreasing energetic basis for this creativity, and thus either would operate increasingly ex nihilo, or fall increasingly into monotonous repetition of what it has done before. In the former case it is fair to say that the universe becomes God in every meaningful sense, to the extent it can sustain and intensify its own ex nihilo creativity. In the latter case, Bergson wins the day—the universe burns out; the élan vital exhausts itself and becomes inert. For repetition would become constant motion, and constant motion (no acceleration in the sense physicists use the term) involves no change of state. One state of the universe eventually would not be distinguishable from the future states. Ontological monotony pushed to the extreme is non-being, insofar as we can make positive sense of the idea of non-being. While this may be the truth about the universe, it cannot be consistent with theism—unless we conceive of God as mortal in all respects.

And this is our point: The process God ought to be conceived as mortal in at least some respects. But we might conceive of this mortality as tied up with the eventual destiny of the universe. What happens in the universe contributes to or takes away from God’s experiential richness and therefore what we might as well called God’s “well-being.” Whatever damages this well-being is something like God’s “mortality,” and whatever contributes to its greater growth is a part of God’s “life.” One might even say that God could “live” longer if we act so as to maximize the energetic ground of existence—act in such a way that increased unity in variety, while variety in unity comes to be actualized. If there is a “categoreal” imperative, this is it.





Life as We Find It


We cannot be certain what activities invigorate the divine life, but we think it is not crazy to suggest that the continuance and accretion of value in the divine life depends in some minute way upon what we contribute to it, recalling that each event is unique and can be the only source of just that value had by it and it alone. We do have the analogy of which activities invigorate and extend our own lives, and which do not. If we are to affirm life, including the value of the divine life, we ought to think seriously about how to contribute to preserving life—to live, to well, to live better. Thus, principles of health, etiquette, aesthetics, and most of all moral ideals and purposes, become energistic metaphysical norms. After all, that is the function of reason. We would have to come to a conception of peace, for instance, that was invigorating and creative, not just placid. One is reminded of Martin Luther King’s conception of peace not as the absence of conflict but as the presence of justice.

The other pole that comes with asserting that there is a “living” God must reckon with the implied mortality of God. A living being, if the idea of its “life” is meaningful, must be thought of as in some sense mortal; we must allow that its life can be meaningful only to the extent that its life may succumb to death. A perfectly secured immortal existence is not “life.” It falls short of producing a generic contrast. Without proposing a full Roycean apologia, this insight about God’s “life” leads us in the direction of one of the Abrahamic traditions, namely Christianity. Unlike Judaism and Islam, Christianity builds in, unconsciously, a notion that God can die. Obviously the idea is pilfered from older traditions, but its power is concealed in its creative relationship with the idea of a God with a will for the world that grounds ethical action. We do not think that the joining of the Abrahamic God with the dying and resurrecting gods of the ancient Near East (Osiris, Dionysus, etc.) renders Christianity superior, and we think that Jews and Muslims are right to suspect that Christians are not, strictly speaking, monotheists. Neither is Whitehead, strictly speaking.

The divinization of Jesus in the pattern of Osiris and Dionysus argues against treating Christianity as a kind of monotheism, as Jews and Muslims understand it, and adding in the Holy Spirit and the Church as the Body of Christ complicates the story even more. We believe Judaism and Islam have a far better chance of coming to a self-consistent account of God, but that they may well miss in so doing a crucial lesson contained in the middle tradition: that even God can die. The traditional view of Christianity also offers a way of seeing, symbolically at least, a way to grasp God’s living mode of existence neither as wholly finite and mortal, nor as, in its entirety, independently infinite (and to that extent impersonal and meaningless). Of course, Islam and Judaism have always held that there was a relation of the world to God, but explaining the relation of God to the world has been trickier. Let us follow the Christian path between the horns, although we don’t know any orthodox Christians who are likely to approve of what comes next.

Indeed, this philosophical view of God’s temporality and relatedness to the world, in the mode of divine mortality, opens up an interesting approach to theology and specifically Christology and soteriology, since it seems we might take the message of the incarnation and crucifixion to be something like God’s saying “if you people think I can’t die, let me show you how wrong you are …” This is a paraphrase of “forgive them for they know not what they do.”20 And indeed, assuming Jesus is fully human, we may point out that he must die as we die, i.e., not knowing for certain whether he will rise again. If Jesus dies in full knowledge of his coming resurrection, then he does not die as we do, in ignorance of what, if anything, comes after. If Jesus does not die as we do, then he is not one of us. If Jesus is not one of us, the blood atonement fails, since the entire point was to show us that it is possible to exist finitely in human form and yet be perfected through a perfect high priest who takes up His place in the celestial Holy of Holies (see Hebrews, chs. 8–10). The atonement does not depend upon the resurrection but upon the finite death of Jesus qua human. So it is crucial to Christian doctrine that Jesus be fully human, even to the point of being fully mortal. We have not run across many Christians who discuss this point.

But for Christianity, Jesus is God also, in some sense of the word “is.” To the extent that Jesus is one with the Father (as he asserts), his death is also God’s death, in some sense of “is.” For Christians to deny that God is mortal, they must therefore deny reality of the cross. Hence, for traditional Christians, an idea of the mortality of God is built in to their conception of God, even if it is not talked about. Of course God is immortal in some respects, for Christians, but not in all respects, which is our point. Jesus is different enough after the resurrection that no one recognizes him, and we may see symbolized in this that it is not easy to recognize or grasp God’s immortal aspects except through the mortal ones. Hence, we shall have to grasp the immortality of the process God by means of “His” mortality. Let us henceforth refer to the mortality of God as “His”21 “soul.”





The Soul of the Matter


We recognize the inversion implied by our move, since we are accustomed to think of our own souls as our immortal part, but we think we can get away with that inversion, because we include the idea that our souls are finite even while they may attain beatitude or eternal survival, or a party at some celestial Key West. At the very least, our souls have a point of origin and are to that extent finite. In the case of a divine soul, the implication of finitude must also hold in some sense, and with finitude, mortality. If God is a personal being, then God exists finitely and prehends negatively the wills of others and the events that were possible but never became actual. These modes of finitude are required for our saying that God has a soul, but not sufficient for saying God exists as a personal being. Personal beings have cumulative experience, which is to say they evolve. Evolving beings reach a point of saturation and can no longer make use of new experiences. They die. If this is not the character of God’s mortality, and if God is not identical to the universe itself (and mind you, we haven’t ruled out either of those), then we are obliged to conceive of God as a living being whose development parallels the unfolding of the universe. Saying that a being is “living” can only be meaningful where the possibility of death is real. Otherwise “God lives” is just a strained metaphor.

Now we may add that if God hasn’t got a mortal soul, then God lacks a soul altogether, since divine mortality is the way through the dilemma Christianity has given us about how God can become human and remain God. Here we may answer the inexhaustibility thesis. God’s personal mode of existence is mortal and exhaustible, as Jesus’ existence was, but there is “the resurrection”—a certain inexhaustibility in God and the universe that is difficult to recognize from a mortal perspective. Yet, by analyzing mortality we come to understand the immortal, to the extent that we can understand it. The task is similar to grasping eternal objects qua eternal, which is no easier. If we attempt to grasp finite, mortal existence as a contraction and limiting of infinite, immortal existence, we never learn the heart of our own finitude; we rather explain it away as a defective instance of life. That is not only unempirical but also unwise. Our path to immortality, in living as in thinking clearly about living, lies in seeing what mortality suggests about the immortal, not the converse. As Whitehead points out:

We cannot understand the flux which constitutes our human experience unless we realize that it is raised above the futility of infinitude by various successive types of modes of emphasis which generate the active energy of a finite assemblage. The superstitious awe of infinitude has been the bane of philosophy. The infinite has no properties. All value is the gift of finitude, which is the necessary condition for activity.22



We do not think we are likely ever to have an adequate understanding of any of the three levels (personhood, personality, and inexhaustibility) through which we speak of the process God, but we do think it is clear that the ground gets shakier as we ascend levels, and that our basis for supposing, for example, the complete inexhaustibility of God is far, far weaker than our basis for supposing that God exists (in a personal mode), and that God has a real relation to the world (actual personality). As articles of faith, the first is clearer and more assured than the second, and the second is more assured than the idea that God has an infinite and inexhaustible future.

That is why the God of philosophy is not of very much use to religious believers, although it is pretty useful to theologians. All this is by way of saying, with Nietzsche’s madman, “I have come too soon.” If God has a “soul,” in the sense of a finite mode of existing that is tied to life, we have little reason to suppose it is immortal, and some analogical grounds for supposing it is mortal. The direction of God’s activity, for process philosophers, is from whole to part (providing the creative context for creative activity by finite beings, which could be called incarnation or catabasis). The activity of finite beings is from part to whole, contribution of a satisfaction to the many, which could be called self-transcendence, contributionism, or even anabasis. To search for the transcendent God is neither necessary nor wise for philosophy. The God immanent in every act is the one we can know something about empirically.

But now, simply assume God’s soul is mortal, that mortality is implied in conceiving of God as living and personal, and that catabasis brings with it some cost to God, and some risk of failure (e.g., Jesus, or Buddha, or Muhammed falls out of a tree and breaks his neck at eleven years old). Now pretend, if you will, to be a Christian for a moment. It becomes even more important that we act so as to increase the vigor and life of God to the greatest extent we can, since there can be no value (at least so far as we can understand or imagine) without God—which is to say, the finite parts point to a whole regardless of whether they constitute that whole. So it is not only true that God helps those who help themselves, it is also true that those who help themselves help God (if “help” is understood as a norm along the lines of greater unity under contrast).

To put this point in traditional religious language, the mortal God, then, is in some sense Christ crucified, and the resurrection not assured, or at least not wholly comprehensible, since it depends on the free and self-creative acts of finite beings, like Jesus, to assist. The only thing assured is that God, once having been always will have been, and so can never be nothing at all. Contra Hartshorne, that is the most we can really know about the necessity of the divine life, from a process perspective. Yes, this looks like incarnational theology, but if we strip away the theological language, it is nothing other than the structure of prehension as we have explained it earlier in the book.

Finally, a connection between God’s immanence in the universe and transcendence of it was thoroughly prefigured in the foregoing discussion. It is now plain that the mortality of God can be associated with modes of immanence and the immortality with modes of transcendence, with the latter subject being highly speculative on our part, and requiring an extensive analysis of the inexhaustibility thesis. Frankly we aren’t interested in carrying that task further. We cheerfully leave it to the next generation of process theologians, if they care to engage it.

We may construe God’s immanence in the universe in numerous ways apart from the incarnation of God in Christ, of course, and indeed, a philosopher has a duty to do so. To name only a few, God may be immanent in the sage, the Enlightened Being, the Prophet, the Lawgiver, the Bodhisattva, or even in the regularity of Nature—the last of which was Whitehead’s particular specialty. All of these modes of immanence portend mortality in different ways. The example of Christ is helpful in its graphic depiction of God’s mortality, illustrating the point to finite beings who cannot get the idea otherwise. Optimally, Christians learn to grasp God’s divinity through Jesus’ humanity, and once they have, the immanence of God in other forms—the Prophet, the Lawgiver, the Sage, the Enlightened Being, the Bodhisattva, and Nature—become no great stretch. To begin with the divinity and immortality of the Risen Christ, and then to attempt to grasp his humanity (or our own) upon that basis, is to take the incomprehensible as a road to the ordinary. The better path, we contend, leads the other direction: from the ordinary to the extra-ordinary, from the mortal to the immortal, from the immanent to the transcendent, from the concrete to the abstract, or, as Aristotle was wont to say, from what is true for us to what is true unconditionally.
