Notes



Introduction


1It is not entirely missing, though. See Bas Van Fraassen’s charming tale of “The Tower and the Shadow,” on pages 132–134 of The Scientific Image (Oxford: Clarendon Paperbacks, 1980). Van Fraassen, of course, is not a Whiteheadian.

2Iris Murdoch, Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals, reprint ed. (New York: Penguin Books, 1994).

3Our uses of narrative techniques and storytelling forms here, while relatively small, are nonetheless essential. We are, for that matter, scarcely unique in observing the primacy of narrative in “making sense,” especially with regard to centering the concept of the self. In this regard, Olav Bryant Smith does a particularly solid job of drawing attention to the works of Kant, Heidegger, Whitehead, and Ricouer in giving narrative a key role in understanding. We find it especially satisfying to see such a careful work as Smith’s explicitly linking Whitehead and Ricouer, and consider much of our own use of narrative to be validated by Smith’s meticulous scholarship. We would situate Smith’s understanding to that of Murdoch’s mentioned above. For her part, Murdoch observes that, “Whitehead said that western philosophy was all footnotes to Plato. The truth of this epigram becomes especially evident in the second half of the twentieth century as we realize how many of our current problems Plato was aware of.” [Murdoch, 3255 Kindle edition]

 Smith takes Plato and Plato’s method of philosophizing for granted, and so goes straight to the issue of narrative intelligibility via what he calls “emplotment,” building on an idea first articulated many years before by Hayden White. “Emplotment,” Smith says, “is the method of storying, i.e., creating a story.” (5) This statement is explicitly made in the context of linking Whitehead and the “missing element—narrative” with Ricouer’s work. We agree with Smith when he says that, “the creation of narrative through emplotment reconstitutes elements of experience in a novel manner to create novel worlds. A narrative synthesizes distinct elements of experience … into a new unity, i.e., a story.” (143) Smith’s primary focus is, as noted, upon “the self.” But in Whiteheadian terms (that will be explained in greater detail as we proceed) even an electron is a “self” that has “experience.” Meanwhile, those higher phases of experience that qualify as human, while profoundly interesting, are really just specifications of these more general cosmological principles. Narrative takes us into those principles as surely—and, sometimes, far more surely—as empirical adequacy and logical coherence.

4See Gary L. Herstein, “Toward a New Metaphysics of Identity,” MA thesis (Chicago: DePaul University, 1992), 63–72.

5See chapter 4.

6See the videos at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfuFSHUeExc and http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Bv6KfnuepA&list=RDMfuFSHUeExc, accessed February 7, 2014.

7Whitehead uses the word “probable” in a sense that is quite independent of his concept of “possibility” (eternal objects), and the latter will come in for much discussion in this book. For Whitehead’s theory of probability, see Process and Reality, corrected ed. by David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne (New York: Free Press, 1929 [1978]), 199–207; one may find his views prefigured and worked out in greater detail by C.S. Peirce and by his followers. Peirce’s most famous articulation of the issue is in “Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis,” which first appeared in his Popular Science Monthly articles of 1877–1878. A revised and improved version was to be included in a book entitled Illustrations of the Logic of Science, now out, ed. Cornelis de Waal (Chicago: Open Court, 2013), ch. 6. It is this version that we recommend.

8For the technical discussion of “event,” see Alfred North Whitehead, Science and the Modern World (New York: Free Press, 1967 [1925]), 72–73, 119–124. We want to stress, however, that with this and every technical term in Whitehead, the context of inquiry dictates the meaning of the term. See Auxier’s discussion of this point in the Fordham edition of Religion in the Making, cited below. In the case of the term “event,” Whitehead uses it most often when he is inquiring into the way science studies nature.

9This distinction might be the essence of our departure from the impressive interpretation of Whitehead given by F. Bradford Wallack in The Epochal Nature of Process in Whitehead’s Metaphysics (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1980). While Wallack never claims to be giving a complete account of Whitehead’s metaphysics, she does attempt to reconcile the theory of the actual entity with physics as it was practiced up to 1980, particularly insisting that Whitehead’s concept of the actual entity was inspired by the quantum revolution in physics in its early days (and we will show hereafter that this claim is historically mistaken), and basically collapsing the idea of the “event” into the idea of the “epochal occasion.” She asserts so many things that are spot on in the course of her book that it is painful for us to dissent so completely on this point. Physics and “natural philosophy” study events, and if those events are transformed into actual entities, it is for the sake of having a unit of explanation, not because Whitehead believes actual entities are part of concrete experience—and he does not assert that they are. So, for example, where Wallack says that “the actual entity is any concrete existent whatsoever” (7), she would have done better to say that the actual entity is the philosophical idea capable of explaining any concrete existent whatsoever. She cites, as the authority for her assertion PR 18, but without including Whitehead’s crucial qualifiers at the beginning of the paragraph that he singles out four “generic notions” because “they involve some divergence from antecedent philosophical thought” (and here he lists the actual entity along with prehension, nexus, and the ontological principle); he re-identifies these as philosophical “notions” before listing the three Wallack cites (omitting the ontological principle), and makes it very clear that these are notions framed exclusively for philosophical discussion that avoids misplaced concreteness. One cannot remove the concept of the actual entity from the philosophical purposes for which it was framed and employ it to do the work of the existents that are studied by physics or any other natural science (i.e., events). See also Jorge Nobo, Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1986), 414–415. The criticism we offer here comes down to saying that reconciling Whitehead’s theory of extension with physics, even when it is done well, is not the same thing as seeking an adequate, applicable and logically rigorous philosophical cosmology. See Wallack, The Epochal Nature of Process in Whitehead’s Metaphysics, 295; and Chris Van Haeften, “Atomicity and Extension,” Process Studies, 32:Supplement 3 (2003), esp. 12–14, and “Extension and Epoch: Continuity and Discontinuity in the Philosophy of A.N. Whitehead,” Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 37:1 (2001), 59–79.

10See especially Whitehead, Adventures of Ides (New York: Free Press, 1967), the opening two paragraphs of chapter 15, 220.

11See for example, Keith Robinson, ed., Deleuze, Whitehead, Bergson: Rhizomatic Connections, (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009); and Keith Robinson, Deleuze, Whitehead, Bergson (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).

12Steven Shaviro, Without Critera: Kant, Whitehead, Deleuze, and Aesthetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009).

13For Harman, his blog is found at: http://doctorzamalek2.wordpress.com/. Also see Matthew David Segall, The Physics of the World Soul: The Relevance of Whitehead’s Philosophy of Organism to Scientific Cosmology, and On the Matter of Life: Towards and Integral Biology of Economics (both eBooks by lulu.com).

14Examples would be Dennis Soelch, Aljosche Berve, and several other young contributors to Beyond Superlatives: Regenerating Whitehead’s Philosophy of Experience, eds. R. Faber, J. R. Hustwit, and H. Phelps (Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Press, 2014).

15Particularly of note is Keller’s newest book, Cloud of the Impossible: Negative Theology and Planetary Entanglement (New York: Columbia University Press, 2015).

16See the account at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_men_and_an_elephant, accessed February 11, 2014.

17See Victor Lowe, Alfred North Whitehead: The Man and His Work, ed. J. B. Schnee-wind, vol. 2 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990), 13–14. See Auxier’s critique of Lowe’s methods and understanding of Whitehead’s development in “Influence as Confluence: Bergson and Whitehead,” in Process Studies, in the special focus section on “Bergson and Whitehead,” 28:3–4 (Fall–Winter 1999), 267; 301–338; 339–345.

18See Isabelle Stengers, Thinking with Whitehead: A Free and Wild Creation of Concepts, trans. Michael Chase (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 4. See also the thorough treatment of these problems in Ronny Desmet, “A Refutation of Russell’s Stereotype,” in Whitehead: The Algebra of Metaphysics, eds. Ronny Desmet and Michel Weber (Leuven de Neuve, BE: Les editions Chromatika, 2010), 127–209.

19See Lowe, Alfred North Whitehead, 12–13, 15–16.

20Our current book project, The Continuum of Possibility, takes this formalization beyond a sketch.

21See Stengers, Thinking with Whitehead, 118–119.

22Most of Stenger’s work has been undertaken with Whitehead in the background or altogether absent. She is not a “Whitehead scholar,” but is rather a thinker whose achievement depends upon Whitehead’s ideas in various ways. The assessments of her Thinking with Whitehead in the Focus section edited and introduced by Keith Robinson, Process Studies, 37:2 (Fall–Winter 2008), 74–189, with Stengers’ response, is a good way to get a sense of her place in Whiteheadian philosophy.

23William Christian, An Introduction to Whitehead’s Metaphysics (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1959).

24Ivor Leclerc, Whitehead’s Metaphysics: An Introductory Exposition (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1958).

25Nobo’s Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity.

26John Lango, Whitehead’s Ontology (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1972). One thing we especially appreciate about Lango’s work is that he seems to recognize just how far off the mark most Whitehead interpretation is. He says: “Although there is virtually no awareness among interpreters of Whitehead’s metaphysics that actual entities are known only through metaphysical speculation, it is generally understood that ordinary human perception does not convey knowledge of an individual actual entity.” (5–6) We shall have reason to take issue with what Lango means by “speculation” in our notes below, but we agree that very few Whitehead interpreters grasp that his method in metaphysics is hypothetical, through and through, and Lango does get this right. He is also right about the half-conscious character of most of Whitehead’s interpreters. If they know not to look for actual entities to appear in their field of vision, it isn’t because they know what Whitehead means by “perception,” which, frankly, is pretty far from the usual meaning (as Lango also points out).

27Wallack, The Epochal Nature of Process. Wallack’s book has not received the attention it deserves. It was dutifully reviewed in Process Studies and in the Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society when it appeared, and Nobo makes respectful reference to it, along with Van Haeften and a few others among the best interpreters of Whitehead, but it seems to have been unduly neglected by most. Stephen David Ross gives Wallack adequate notice in Perspective in Whitehead’s Metaphysics and George Lucas at least mentions her in The Rehabilitation of Whitehead. But among those who ought most to be concerned with Wallack argued, such as Murray Code, Tim Eastman, Michael Epperson, Richard Weidig, and even such humanists as Stephen Franklin, she is never mentioned. Lewis Ford never cites the book in any place we can find (a thorough but perhaps not wholly exhaustive search), and since Wallack calls for a “revolution” in Whitehead interpretation that would undermine Ford’s reading, and since it is impossible that he did not know about the book (he was editor of Process Studies when the review was published), it is peculiar that he does not mention it, at least to argue against it. Its thesis is more than relevant to many claims Ford makes, and Wallack explicitly criticizes Ford in the course of her argument (119, 134, 197, 257), and the criticisms taken together constitute a wholesale repudiation of his entire approach, as it had been articulated to that point in time. Unlike Nobo, with whom Ford was obliged to carry out numerous public disputations, Wallack was not well-placed in academia, was a woman, did not have a Ph.D., and had the bad luck to read Whitehead honestly against the grain for a generation that did not want to entertain the idea that the “actual entity” was anything apart from a little puff of atomic existence.

28Judith A. Jones, Intensity: An Essay in Whiteheadian Ontology (Nashville: Vanderbilt Press, 1998). Our current book project engages Jones more thoroughly.

29Victor Lowe, Understanding Whitehead (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1962).

30Auxier undertook an extensive refutation of Lowe’s assertions about the Bergson-Whitehead relationship in an earlier independent article. “Influence as Confluence,” 267, 301–338, 339–345.

31See Donald W. Sherburne, A Key to Whitehead’s Process and Reality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966); Elizabeth Kraus, The Metaphysics of Experience: A Companion to Whitehead’s Process and Reality (New York: Fordham University Press, 2nd ed. 1998); and John Cobb, Jr., Whitehead Word Book: A Glossary with Analytical Index to Process and Reality (Claremont, CA: P&F Press, 2008), available on-line at: http://processandfaith.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/WordBookWeb.pdf, accessed February 11, 2014.

32See Richard Weidig, The Creative Advance: From History to Mystery (Berkeley, CA: Berkeley West, 1987); and Ralph Pred, Onflow: Dynamics in Consciousness and Experience (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005).

33Michael Epperson, Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead (New York: Fordham University Press, 2004). We have mentioned earlier that Epperson neglects the book that is perhaps closest to his own project and, to our thinking, comes far closer to addressing it constructively, which is Wallack’s The Epochal Nature of Process. Perhaps there is still time for a valuable corrective to Epperson’s ideas available here, and we note that since both Wallack and Epperson refer often and affirmingly to Henry Stapp, that might be a fruitful place for a dialogue to begin.

34Michael Epperson and Elias Zafiris, Foundations of Relational Realism (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2013).

35Ibid., 21.

36See Ibid., 25–27, in particular.

37See Epperson and Zafiris, Foundations of Relational Realism, 211.

38Granville C. Henry and Robert J. Valenza offer an interesting example of an algebraic tool (graph theory) applied to some Whiteheadian ideas in “The Principle of Affinity in Whitehead’s Metaphysics,” Process Studies, 23:1 (Spring 1994), 30–49. See also Granville Henry, Forms of Concrescence: Alfred North Whitehead’s Philosophy and Computer Programming Structures (Canbury, NJ: Associate University Presses, 1993).

39Murray Code, Order and Organism: Steps to a Whiteheadian Philosophy of Mathematics and the Natural Sciences (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1985).

40See Timothy E. Eastman and Hank Keeton, Physics and Whitehead: Quantum, Process, and Experience (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2004).





Chapter 1


1Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920), p. v.

2See the edition of Whitehead’s Religion in the Making that contains Auxier’s comprehensive glossary (New York: Fordham University Press, 1996), edited and introduced by Jude Jones. This example from p. 182. The glossary exhaustively cross-references and defines all technical terminology and fills pp. 161–251 of this edition.

3Ibid., 128.

4Ibid., 93.

5Ibid., 100.

6An extreme example of this maddening habit comes in The Concept of Nature when Whitehead explains speculative as distinct from logical “demonstrations,” and gives one example of how a lecturer (in biology presumably) “demonstrates by the aid of a frog and a microscope the circulation of the blood for an elementary class of medical students. I will call such demonstration ‘speculative’ demonstration, remembering Hamlet’s use of the word ‘speculation’ when he says, ‘There is no speculation in those eyes.’ ” (6) Not only does Whitehead define speculation by telling us when it is absent, but relies on our immediate recognition of the context—an accusing ghost that knows who killed him does not speculate. But even more annoyingly, Whitehead misremembers who said this—it was Macbeth screaming at Banquo’s accusing ghost in Act III, Scene IV, but at least he did accurately recall that this was said of an angry ghost and written by Shakespeare!

7It is common for Whitehead to comment at various stages on the relation of the current work to previous works, and these comments are nearly always “supplementary” in nature—i.e., if a reader wants more information about this or that, see an earlier work. Sometimes Whitehead does make more substantive comments, such as the following in The Concept of Nature:

This volume on the ‘Concept of Nature’ forms a companion book to my previous work An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge. Either book can be read independently, but they supplement each other. In part the present book supplies points of view which were omitted from its predecessor; in part it traverses the same ground with an alternative exposition…. On the other hand, important points of the previous work have been omitted where I had nothing fresh to say about them…. . I am not conscious that I have in any way altered my views. Some developments have been made.”

(vi–vii)



This statement applies to the relationships among all of Whitehead’s works, and such statements are frequently repeated through the corpus.

8This tendency is prevalent among what is commonly known as the “genetic” interpretation of Whitehead’s development.

9Whitehead says that “the very purpose of philosophy is to delve below the apparent clarity of common speech.” Adventures of Ideas (New York: Macmillan, 1967 [1933]), 222.

10This point is made nicely by Lango in Whitehead’s Ontology, 5, 8–11.

11We take up this topic of the role of predication in some detail in our forthcoming book, The Continuum of Possibility.

12A very astute account on the purposes and methods in Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge and The Concept of Nature is found in Robert D. Mack, The Appeal to Immediate Experience (New York: King’s Crown Press, 1945), 27–32. Mack anticipates the account of naturalism we will offer in chapters 10 and 11. However, Mack (as with so many others) does not appreciate how important is the difference between the kinds of inquiry natural philosophy requires in the triptych and cosmology or metaphysics requires in Process and Reality. Mack reads the shift in topic of inquiry as a shift in viewpoint, which is not correct, but also as a shift in emphasis, which is correct.

13The choice here has philosophical importance, since “to express” allows externalization without requiring that what is expressed actually evacuates the entity, whereas to egress denotes leaving the entity empty. In the case of Whiteheadian expression, Elvis never leaves the building, the building only expresses its Elvis value. We will add and rehabilitate the word “egress in our next study, but see the opening paragraphs of Poe’s “The Masque of the Red Death” for a poignant use of ingress and egress.

14See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 24. See Category of Explanation xvi, and 29–30.

15See Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh, The Mathematical Experience (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981), 136–151.

16It is good to remember that many of Whitehead’s books were based on various series of lectures he presented, and the amount of effort he devoted adapting those lectures to the format of reading was variable to say the least. It is difficult to believe, for example, that Process and Reality, the book, was the Gifford Lectures. How many people sat through that? What on earth did they think Whitehead was talking about? Heaven only knows.

17Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 220.

18See Paul Arthur Schilpp, ed., The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead (LaSalle, IL: Open Court Press, 1951 [1941]); and Wilbur Urban, “Cassirer’s Philosophy of Language,” in The Philosophy of Ernst Cassirer (LaSalle, IL: Open Court Press, 1958 [1949]), 437–438.

19Urban, “Cassirer’s Philosophy of Language,” It is interesting that Urban was also referred to by Langer as setting her problem up in the preface to the first edition of Philosophy in a New Key.

20Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 235.

21Whitehead, Process and Reality, 4.

22Whitehead, Process and Reality, 4. As a guide to the role of metaphor in metaphysics, see Murdoch, Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals.

23Whitehead, Process and Reality, 4.

24For a fuller account of what is meant by “radical empiricism” here and Whitehead’s relationship to it, see chapter 2.

25An exception to this is the various articles published by James Bradley in Process Studies. See the bibliography.

26This is our shorthand designation for the three major works in natural philosophy Whitehead published between 1919 and 1922, namely, An Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge (1919), The Concept of Nature (1920), and The Principle of Relativity (1922). For an account of the relevance of these works to Whitehead’s later work, see Gary L. Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2006), esp. 11 ff.

27Ford has been talking about Whitehead’s alleged discovery of “temporal atomicity” for many years, and others besides us have challenged his thesis, but his most recent defense of the idea is “The Indispensability of Temporal Atomism,” Process Studies 38:2 (Fall–Winter, 2009), 279–303. As with all of Ford’s defenses, this one depends on his own imaginative reconstruction of the development of Whitehead’s metaphysics.

28Many thinkers have misunderstood Whitehead’s use of the term “organism.” For example, in Norirtoshi Aramaki: “A Critique of Whitehead in Light of the Buddhist Distinction of the Two-Truth Doctrine,” Process Studies, 36:2 (Fall–Winter, 2007), 294–305, Professor Aramaki treats “organism” as literal and ontological, rather than logical and explicative, and criticizes Whitehead for, in effect, not knowing enough biology. (See, for example, Aramaki, 296–297.)

29Contra Ford and Stengers, Isabella Palin argues for a continuity of themes and methodologies in Whitehead. See Palin, “On Whitehead’s Recurrent Themes and Consistent Style,” Process Studies, 37:2 (Fall–Winter, 2008), 78–97.

30Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 221.

31This point will be treated in detail in chapter 7.

32John Lango complains about this when he realizes that in order to confirm a formal definition of the “actual entity,” he must be able to produce at least one example of the thing itself. As he says:

… the fundamental entities in Whitehead’s ontology—the actual entities—are purely hypothetical, postulated by his metaphysics, but not known in any other way. We cannot observe an actual entity with our senses; we cannot infer an actual entity through introspection. We must therefore obtain an understanding of actual entities through speculation.

(Whitehead’s Ontology, 5)



This is correct as stated, but it shows how many people expect Whitehead’s ontology to be about stuff we might find in the world if we could examine the world with enough subtlety. Obviously Lango knows better (6). Yet, he is in a sense wrong about whether we can observe the actual entity. If the ontology succeeds on Whitehead’s own criteria, it would be closer to the truth to say that there is no instance of experience in which the actual entity fails to be exemplified.

33Whitehead, Religion in the Making, Preface (unnumbered page). Unfortunately, the Fordham University Press edition of this book (1996) accidentally omitted the Preface (even though it appears in the Table of Contents), so one must consult an earlier edition for these extracts.

34Whitehead, Process and Reality, xi. This may strike some readers as an odd characterization of the book, but if we understand that Whitehead thinks philosophy took a wrong turn with Kant (see the Introduction to this book), due to Kant’s over-generalizing of presentational space, and if we recall that prior to Kant, philosophers did not make a clear distinction between psychology and epistemology, it is easier to understand why Whitehead would seek to rehabilitate Enlightenment epistemology. For Whitehead, the actual and the possible resolutely remain on equal footing—see the categoreal scheme, where “actual entities and eternal objects stand out with a certain extreme finality.” (Process and Reality, 22). For a relevant and convincing account of the tendency in the Enlightenment to mix psychology with epistemology, see Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy of the Enlightenment, trans. C. A. Koelln and J. P. Pettegrove (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951), ch. 3. Other interpreters have noticed but misconstrued the importance of this sentence from Whitehead’s Preface to Process and Reality about “Modern” thought. Donald Sherburne thinks it does not matter “whether one thinks that this particular phase of thought ended with Hume, with Santayana, or with Sellars, Quine, and Davidson.” Sherburne believes that “the main point is that Whitehead sees himself as writing at the end, not of philosophy, but, as he says, of a phase of philosophy.” (Donald W. Sherburne, “The Process Perspective as Context for Educational Evaluation,” Process Studies, 20:2 (Summer 1991), 80. The word “recurrence” means that something is coming back, not that something is over. It makes a very great difference that Whitehead marks the end of the phase he mentions with Hume because, as he explains, Kant changed the questions after Hume and set philosophy on the wrong course.

35The further elucidation and explanation of the unusual use of the term “theory” is later offered in Whitehead’s account of propositions in Process and Reality:

[W]ith the growth of intensity in the mental pole, evidenced by the flash of novelty in appetition, the appetition takes the form of a ‘propositional prehension’. These prehensions will be studied more particularly in Part III. They are the prehensions of ‘theories’. It is evident, however, that the primary function of theories is as a lure for feeling, thereby providing immediacy of enjoyment and purpose.”

(184)



Whitehead is thinking about theories along lines similar to Peirce, in the latter’s theory of abduction (which he also calls “hypothesis”).

36Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 103. See also the “Epilogue” to Part I on p. 100.

37Ibid., 284.

38Ibid., 284.

39See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 3–4.

40We aim here to present Whitehead’s view of “adequacy” accurately, but we are aware that this strong claim about adequacy could be questioned. The inquiry into something sui generis might yield results that are unrelated to the results of other inquiries even for the same inquirer. We have mentioned this problem in our discussion of the ontology of events in the Introduction.

41See chapters 7 and 8 for a very detailed account of this structure.

42See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 19.

43See ibid., 235.

44Almost all Whitehead scholars and commentators confuse these different levels of generality. The examples would be limitless, but we take one from John Lango, largely because he is an astute reader of Whitehead. But he says:

Causal perceptions of objects external to the perceiving human mind may indeed be vague, but surely the human mind, a linear series of actual entities (PR 163–167) can be conscious of a single “occasion” (i.e., finite actual entity) of its own self.

(Lango, Whitehead’s Ontology, 7)



The passages cited are from the theory of concrescence. They have nothing directly to do with the theory of perception; further, the only place that Whitehead says anything remotely similar to what Lango claims here is embedded in his discussion of propositions (and hence, the theory of judgment, PR 198—he is talking about how 1+1=2 fails in metaphysical generality), and has no direct application to the problem of perception, which is far more abstract. If by “human mind,” Lango means something like “personal route,” he needs to revisit what a personal route is for Whitehead (again, see PR 198), which involves nothing so complex as human experience, let alone a human mind. In this one sentence, Lango conflates nearly every level of generality Whitehead distinguishes. The problem is a common one.

45This topic will be taken up in detail later in the book, but the relationship between definiteness and determinateness is an important and difficult area of interpretation. Leemon McHenry made the interesting suggestion that the difference between the categories of explanation and categories of obligation in the Categoreal Scheme of Process and Reality is that explanations tend toward definiteness (showing how occasions concresce), while the obligations show the law-like tendencies among entities, revealing their determinateness. We may be reading more in to McHenry’s article than he intended, but this interpretation of definiteness and determinateness in Whitehead agrees with ours in this book. See McHenry, “The Axiomatic Matrix of Whitehead’s Process and Reality,” Process Studies, 15:3 (Fall 1986), 172–180, esp. 178–179. Also valuable in this respect is the way Whitehead explains these terms in the 1927 essay “Time,” collected in The Interpretation of Science: Selected Essays, ed. A. H. Johnson (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1961), 240–247. In speaking of “categories” of supersession, prehension, and incompleteness, in that essay, the interplay of which gives rise to “the concept of time,” Whitehead argues that the elements at issue are of two kinds, “other occasions” than the actual entity in its actual world, and “universals—or, as I prefer to call them, the eternal objects; these eternal objects are the media of actuality, whereby the how of each actual occasion is determinate. Because the other occasions are each in a definite way required for the organization of any one occasion A, the world is called a system. The definite way in which A includes other occasions in its concretion is here called ‘Prehension’.” (241, bold ours, italics Whitehead’s) We will take some trouble to explain in a later note pertaining to Jorge Nobo’s interpretation of Whitehead, that the way the term “Prehension” as used here is different from its standing in Process and Reality, and since the concept of time is Whitehead’s real concern in the 1927 essay, the model for understanding this inquiry is that provided by The Concept of Nature. We are looking for a concept. Concepts are the basic organizational structures of natural knowledge, or knowledge of nature. Time is treated within that framework in this 1927 essay. Whitehead presupposes, in effect, the same thing he says in The Concept of Nature, which is:

Our knowledge of nature is an experience of activity (or passage). The things previously observed are active entities, the ‘events.’ They are chunks in the life of nature. [So much for the supposed “later discovery” of temporal atomism in Lewis Ford’s “compositional analysis”] These events have to each other relations which in our knowledge differentiate themselves into space-relations and time relations. But this differentiation between space and time, though inherent in nature, is comparatively superficial; and space and time are each partial expressions of one fundamental relation between events which is neither spatial nor temporal. This relation I call “extension.”

(Concept of Nature, 185, our emphasis)



To get a handle on the concept of time as related to natural knowledge is to frame an inquiry that shows how time expresses extension in our knowledge. The category of supersession provides the main idea in this essay. It is mainly physical prehension and physical time, understood in abstraction of the mental pole, and thus not wholly concrete (see 240–241) that contribute to the concept of time, insofar as that concept contributes to our knowledge. The mental pole is discussed in the 1927 essay only insofar as it enters into physical existence. The mental pole, from this point of view, is, as he says, “merely analytic.” (The Interpretation of Science, 242) Still, the habit of using the term “determinate” and determinate order to describe the way in which eternal objects are present in actual entities, and the term “definite” to describe the presence of “other actual occasions” in an actual entity is consistent in Whitehead’s inquiries in this 1927 essay, and in Process and Reality, and in Science and the Modern World. These inquiries do overlap, and the inquiry into “Time” is consistent with the other longer inquiries. The distinction between determinate order and definiteness will do a good deal of work in our book, subsequently, so we will return to it with further arguments and explanation. For now it is sufficient to note its importance and provide some initial exposition from that 1927 essay.





Chapter 2


1See Whitehead, Process and Reality, xii.

2We are not the first to notice that Whitehead is a radical empiricist. For example, Victor Lowe states: “Whitehead was probably acquainted with James’s Psychology and perhaps heard much of the ingenuity of the concept of the specious present from McTaggart and others. From this point of view it is clear that his early empiricism was more radical than atomistic.” Alfred North Whitehead: The Man and His Work, ed. J. B. Schneewind, vol. 2 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990), 105. Lowe takes for granted that Whitehead evolved away from this view toward an atomistic view, which we are here disputing. Whitehead’s familiarity with James increased as his writing went forward, such that James became a regular touchstone and reference. See also Robert M. Palter, Whitehead’s Philosophy of Science (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), 24–25; and Nancy Frankenberry, Religion and Radical Empiricism (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1987). There are many other commentators who have said similar things, and not merely about Whitehead’s early writings. Undoubtedly, informed readers will think of the book by Craig Eisendrath, The Unifying Moment: The Psychological Philosophy of William James and Alfred North Whitehead (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971), in this connection. But Eisendrath is hostile to radical empiricism (see 67–68) because he is so taken with the subjectivist principle (and none could deny that Whitehead has an amazingly powerful defense of it). Radical empiricism works otherwise. Our subjective experiences are examples of the structure of possibility (eternal objects) in our immediate epoch, and beyond this we cannot generalize their peculiarities in desire (appetition), consciousness, knowing, judging, or any other category that most people would interpret in a psychological way. We explain Whitehead’s reconciliation of his radical empiricism and realism under the heading of what we call, later, his “radical realism.” We believe this to be Whitehead’s actual view.

3See Auxier, “Influence as Confluence,” in the special focus section on “Bergson and Whitehead,” Process Studies 28:3–4 (Fall–Winter 1999), 267; 301–338; 339–345. See also Auxier, Time, Will, and Purpose: Living Ideas from the Philosophy of Josiah Royce (Chicago: Open Court, 2013), chs. 4 and 7.

4Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 222 (our emphasis).

5See ibid., 222–223.

6See ibid., 223.

7The problem with philosophy trying to overreach the limits of logic to make it a basis for ontology is as old as Plato’s appeal to geometry, although some philosophers, such as Descartes, were always suspicious of the syllogism as a basis for ontology, preferring mathematics. The problem of the unholy trinity is the same as the one Kant warned against. Radical empiricists insist upon the irreducible relevance of the real, but do not insist upon a single ontology of the real, even ideally.

8The relationship between Whitehead and the tradition of “substance metaphysics” is subtle. In no way do we wish to oversimplify it. We speak almost more of the effect of the tradition on professional philosophical discourse of the last two centuries than of substance metaphysics itself. For a subtle story about how Whitehead relates to this tradition, and one in line with our interpretation, see Reto Luzius Fetz, Whitehead: Prozessdenken und Substanzmetaphysik (Freiburg: Verlag Karl Alber, 1981), Section 3. We are appreciative of the translation of the relevant parts of this outstanding book by James W. Felt, in Process Studies, including: “In Critique of Whitehead.” Process Studies, 20:1 (Spring 1991), 1–9; and most importantly, “Aristotelian and Whiteheadian Conceptions of Actuality: I,” Process Studies, 19:1 (Spring 1990), 15–27; and “Aristotelian and Whiteheadian Conceptions of Actuality: II,” Process Studies, 19:3 (Fall 1990), 145–155. Also, Auxier has addressed this issue in some detail in Time, Will, and Purpose, ch. 2.

9Whitehead is fairly impatient with scientists who persist in treating “law” as if it were a guarantor of necessary knowledge. He wryly notes: “Nature is patient of interpretation in terms of Laws which happen to interest us,” Adventures of Ideas, 136. See also the discussion in Whitehead, The Function of Reason (Boston: Beacon Press, 1958 [1929]), 48–53. We will take up this question in greater detail in chapter 10 in the sections dedicated to how “bad metaphysics” does not make for “good science.”

10A good overarching critique of the failed project of analytic philosophy is Nicholas Capaldi, The Enlightenment Project in the Analytic Conversation (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998). For an accessible account of the end of necessitarian science, see Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Order Out of Chaos (New York: Bantam, 1984). We shall have much more to say about this issue in the course of this book, and our next book deals with these issues in still greater detail.

11The classic text, G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell, An Introduction to Modal Logic (London: Methuen & Co., 1968), simply starts out by saying that logical necessity is a “topic which bristles with philosophical difficulties,” but then proceeds to make necessity the most basic modal notion, followed by impossibility, contingency, and possibility, which they do not even attempt seriously to define, saying rather that “the sense of these expressions should be sufficiently clear from what we have said in the case of necessity.” (22–23). These other notions are not sufficiently clear from what has been said of necessity, and to define any of these in terms of necessity, even much subtler accounts of necessity (such as Kripke frames), is simply archaic. All these accounts take for granted the basic gesture of extensional logic, where “extensional” here must be carefully distinguished from Whitehead’s use of that term. Whitehead’s logic proceeds in the opposite direction, “intensionally,” where grouping precedes selection, and selection has no bottom “element.” See Whitehead, A Treatise on Universal Algebra, 35–38, for an example of intensional elements.

12Our detailed arguments concerning possibility will be taken up in chapters 8 and 9.

13In Process and Reality, Whitehead makes a point of noting how realistic philosophies have been vulnerable to positing vacuous actualities (see 29).

14The distinction between living and inert ideas is explained by Whitehead in The Aims of Education and Other Essays (New York: Free Press, 1929), 1–2.

15See Whitehead, Science and the Modern World, 159–160. Here he makes clear that what he means by an “eternal object” is a possibility for an actuality, but there are varied modes of ingression, and while an eternal object “cannot be divorced from its reference to other eternal objects, and from its reference to actuality generally … it is disconnected from its actual modes of ingression into definite actual occasions.” (159) This “disconnection” is a principle of discontinuity between actual and possible. The relation between possible and actual is pluralized and made contingent, while necessity is reinstated (in multiple modalities) among possibilities independent of their relation to particular actualities. We formalize this dependence/independence relation in chapter 9. Whitehead restates this same basic point in The Function of Reason (Boston: Beacon Press, 1958 [1929]), 9, with explicit reference to possibility. We will spend significant time on this difficult relationship in chapters 8–11.

16See Whitehead, The Function of Reason, 78–79.

17See ibid., 71. For an earlier affirmation of this viewpoint, see The Principle of Relativity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922), 63.

18William James, Writings of William James, ed. John J. McDermott (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 136.

19We find Whitehead’s statement of his radical empiricism in a number of places (including the passage with which we began this chapter), but an especially important one is the following: “It must be remembered that just as the relations modify the natures of the relata, so the relata modify the nature of relation. The relationship is not a universal. It is a concrete fact with the same concreteness as the relata,” Adventures of Ideas, 157. See also the same work, where he extols us to “interrogate experience for evidence of the interconnectedness of things.” (220) One of the reasons these are important passages is that they were written in 1933, late in his career. See also The Principle of Relativity, 49, for the observed character of concrete relations and relata, and also the reinforcement of his radical empiricism; cf., ibid., 73–74. We will point out numerous statements of Whitehead’s radical empiricism in the course of the book. The case does not rest solely with this chapter or section. If one desires a more precise description of “particular experience,” we would offer Husserl’s account (which descended from James): “The living S that is still fresh, still exercising an affection, coincides with the property that has been drawn from it. But then we do not have a unity of knowledge, then the S is not characterized as the substrate of a determination for the ego, and the determination itself is not characterized as a determination. Should this be the case, then the identification must be one that is actively carried out, it must be an act running through the thematic unity of both terms, an act that we can describe the following way: The S as theme initially undergoes a general examination that is lacking any determination. An affecting moment α, which is passively ‘enclosed in S,’ now penetrates to the active ego. But this ego is abidingly interested in S; as such it ‘concentrates’ its interest that is, its S-interest in α. The fullness of givenness of the S is enriched in the grasping; but this takes place because it itself is given to consciousness as S only in its particularity. The concentration on the particularity therefore fulfills and enriches the interest in S.” Husserl, Edmund, Husserl, Edmund, Analysis Concerning Passive and Active Syntheses, trans. Anthony J. Steinbock (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001), 295. We thank Matthew Donnelly for bringing our attention to this passage.

20See Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 220 and following.

21Whitehead, Process and Reality, 61.

22Ibid., 35. It is advisable to read the entire passage with which this famous phrase is contextualized. It is clearly not a claim about concrete fact, but a claim about how we can use extensive abstraction to think about the problem of physical space and time (recalling that the entire concept of physical space and time is a product of the extensive method, not the experience with which it begins, concrete fact).

23Confusion concerning temporality in Whitehead’s philosophy is not hard to find in the literature. See for example Edgar Towne’s essay, “All Causality Occurs in a Present: G.H. Mead’s Proposal to Process Philosophy,” Process Studies 39:1 (Spring-Summer 2010), 87–105. The first sentence of his abstract and the first sentence of his main text should be compared. The abstract reads: “G. H. Mead and A. N. Whitehead agree that all causation occurs in a present….” As stated, this is true enough. But then Towne asserts: “Alfred North Whitehead … and George Herbert Mead … agree that all actual causation occurs in the present….” (87, our emphasis.) The difference between the indefinite article (in the abstract) and the definite article (in the main text) is vital. Unfortunately, this error undermines Towne’s argument, since the word “present” has two different, and perhaps irreconcilable, meanings throughout.

24Such injuries can and do occur, although the consequences of them have been slightly different than the Nolans present in their story. The British musicologist and conductor Clive Wearing is a famous example. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clive_Wearing, accessed September 26, 2012.

25Vonnegut makes it very clear that he is only playing around with time, since he keeps repeating that he is writing about the timequake in 1996, which is not possible on his own schema, since no one would have known in (the first) 1996 the timequake would occur in 2001, and no one would have been free to write about it during the rerun. His constant repetition of the date of its writing is a challenge to the reader either to think of him as a Tralfamadorian, or a joker.

26In a way, Dedekind was not only the Professor Marvel who peddles irrational numbers, but he is also the “man behind the curtain” when it comes to the self-awareness of our invention of numerical continuity—pull back the curtain and we find just the human will. As Leopold Kronecker famously said, “God made the natural numbers; all else is the work of man.” See Richard Dedekind, Essays on the Theory of Numbers: Continuity and Irrational Numbers, auth. trans. Wooster Woodruff Beman (New York: Dover, 1963 [1901]), 8–19.

27See the “Duality” and “Logic” sections of the article on CMOS (complementary metal-oxide semiconductors) here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CMOS, accessed February 12, 2014. For CMOS systems, 0 and 1 are insufficient; there has to be a value for “inactive” as well.

28This is far from being the last readers will see of Zeno’s paradoxes, which play a surprising and formidable role in our account of the theory of extension. See chapter 4.

29See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 55, for clear confirmation on the issue of particular experience, and the same point is found in many other places.

30Parts III and IV of Process and Reality model continuity (i.e., overcome discreteness) in different respects. The theory of prehension implies, finally, that the entire universe is prehended from each perspective in it. In Part IV, the whole of the universe particularizes itself in modes of connection for every actual entity—increases the world by one. That is an event. Our next book develops this point in great detail.

31For example, eternal object (i.e., possibility) x for Entity 1 and x for Entity 2, while discontinuous on the basis of the genetic analysis of the prehensions of either 1 or 2, is still structurally x. Recall where Whitehead says he cannot demonstrate that x is x in some final sense, but he can think of no empirical hypothesis that is advanced by its denial. See Whitehead, Principle of Relativity, 69. He admits that the evidence for a hypothesis of x’s identity here is “slight,” but it is the simplest hypothesis. It does not matter whether the x is an eternal object for each entity in question, or a physical object in the actual worlds of entities 1 and 2, since entities 1 and 2 occupy different actual worlds. The point is that we will treat x as intersecting with x in the possible worlds of any and all actual entities we compare. This is a minimal logical continuity, hardly the assertion of “temporal atomicity”—the evidence for which is not only slight but wholly absent. We will treat this issue in greater detail in chapters 7–9.

32See McConnell, Bowne, 277–278.





Chapter 3


1Alfred North Whitehead, The Aims of Education and Other Essays (New York: Free Press, 1967), 77–89.

2Alfred North Whitehead, The Interpretation of Science (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1961), 187–203. For the record, we explicitly avoid drawing on Code’s seminal work, Order and Organism (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1985), despite its at least superficial relevance to our project here. However, Code himself has expressed serious reservations about his work to one of us (Herstein) in conversation.

3Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 4.

4Alfred North Whitehead, Modes of Thought (New York: The Free Press, 1968 [1938]), 174.

5Dewey, Democracy and Education, (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, [1916]), 328.

6Whitehead, Aims of Education, 115.

7Ibid., 53.

8See Alfred North Whitehead, “Indication, Classes, Numbers, Validation,” in Essays in Science and Philosophy (New York: Philosophical Library, 1948 [1937]), 240. He knew Principia Mathematica failed in its central aim.

9See Whitehead, Aims of Education, 80.

10Ibid., 77.

11Ibid., 78.

12Ibid., 79. Particular attention should be paid to Whitehead’s use of the word “logical” here. We will say more on this momentarily.

13Ibid., 80 (our emphasis).

14See ibid., 81.

15Ibid., 79.

16Ibid., 84.

17See, for example, Morris Kline, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, 3 vols (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990); and Edna Kramer, The Nature and Growth of Modern Mathematics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983).

18See Whitehead, Aims of Education, 80.

19Alfred North Whitehead, An Introduction to Mathematics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1958 [1911]), 48.

20Whitehead, Aims of Education, 84.

21Examples abound, but misinformation about climate science, healthcare cost and effectiveness, economic and educational studies, and many others, undermine the likelihood that policy decision will be made intelligently.

22See Whitehead, An Introduction to Mathematics, 183 ff.

23In mathematics, the terms “measure” and “measurement” have very distinct and precise meanings. For the purposes of this book, however, we will be using the terms interchangeably, corresponding to what mathematicians mean by measurement.

24See Gary L. Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2006); and Whitehead, Principle of Relativity, ch. 3.

25David H. Krantz, R. Duncan Luce, Patrick Suppes, and Amos Tversky, Foundations of Measurement, 3 vols. (Minneola, NY: Dover Publications, 2007 [1971]).

26Whitehead, Aims of Education, 84.

27For further details, see Herstein, “Toward a New Metaphysics of Identity,” section 2, 39–58.

28Whitehead, The Interpretation of Science, 187.

29Ibid., 194, our emphasis.

30James Bradley nicely summarizes this advantage of favoring the algebraic view. He says:

… since the time of [J.H.] Lambert and Kant (cf. Cassirer Substance and Function), the concept of the function offers a model of analysis that avoids the abstractness of the concept of genus, which, considered in itself, neglects all specific difference. Here, for Whitehead, the particular significance of the algebraic-logical function resides in the notion of ‘any’ or the variable (see Essays in Science and Philosophy, 104; cf. Modes of Thought, 106–107)…. the function is able to ‘express the concurrence of mathematical-formal principles with accidental factors,’ which Whitehead also describes as ‘the suffusion of the connective by the things connected’ (Essays in Science and Philosophy, 128). More explicitly: the function represents the rule of connection which, in virtue of the different values the variable can take, contains within itself all the particulars for which it holds. This is clearly intended to be the character of the categoreal scheme.

(PR 20)



This is from Bradley, “Transcendentalism and Speculative Realism,” Process Studies, 23:3–4 (Fall–Winter 1994), 166–167.

31Whitehead, The Interpretation of Science, 194.

32Ibid., 196.

33Ibid., 197.

34Ibid., 196.

35Ibid.

36Ibid., 197.

37Ibid.

38Whitehead, Aims of Education, 85 (our emphasis).

39Ibid., 86.

40Ibid. This may not sound like the trigonometry you learned in school. On the other hand, it illustrates the problem with mathematical pedagogy pointed out above. Your teacher also did not tell you that a square route was a formula for making any number into a geometrical square, or that a line is a moving point, while a plane is a moving line. You were not told that concepts of “shortness” and least distance change whenever the moving point is on a curved surface. In sum, mathematical pedagogy is carried out by people who typically haven’t been trained to think about mathematics in these deeply relational and algebraic terms.

41Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 197.

42Ibid., 198.

43John Dewey, Logic the Theory of Inquiry, the Later Works of John Dewey, ed. Jo Ann Boydston, vol. 12 (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1986 [1938]).

44See Jaakko Hintikka, “Is Logic the Key to Good Reasoning?” Argumentation, 15 (2001), 35–57.

45See Michael Friedman, The Parting of the Ways (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 2004). See also Nicholas Capaldi, The Enlightenment Project in the Analytic Conversation, for histories of the analytical movement that do not presuppose its immediate superiority.

46On the importance of formal logic, see Whitehead, Modes of Thought, 106–107.

47See Hintikka, “Is Logic the Key to Good Reasoning?”.

48The classic introductory work in model theory remains C. C. Chang and H. Jerome Keisler, Model Theory, 3rd ed. (Amsterdam: North-Holland Press, Amsterdam, 1990); also (New York: Dover Publications, 2012). The application of constructive game methods to model theory is treated in detail in Wilfrid Hodges, Building Models by Games (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985). A more basic introduction that emphasizes the game technique is Kees Doets, Basic Model Theory (Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, 1996). For the connections between model theory and modal logic, which includes an overview of Kripke frames, see Valentin Goranko and Martin Otto, Model Theory of Modal Logic, http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/~otto/papers/mlhb.pdf, accessed February 3, 2014.

49See, for example, Wilfrid Hodges, Building Models by Games (New York: Dover Publications, 2006).

50Jaakko Hintikka, “Is Logic the Key to All Good Reasoning,” Argumentation, 15 (2001), 45.

51Sara Negri and Jan von Plato, Structural Proof Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). In particular, the section entitled “Structural proof theory” lays out the context and purpose the approach, Kindle edition, locations 60–106.

52An early and comprehensive survey of the prospects was provided by Henry in Forms of Concrescence. Obviously computing has developed since that time, and Whitehead’s relevance to it has increased. Henry makes many of the points about Russell and Whitehead we have made (see esp. 121–122).

53Paul Bogaard makes the point that Lewis Ford, “enthused by [Ivor] Leclerc’s reliance upon the Aristotelian distinction between actual and potential” then advocated treating molecules as actual occasions “of a larger scope.” But as Bogaard rightly observes, “it remains a tug-of-war between the desire to preserve the actuality of the constituents and to acknowledge the actuality of the complex whole they comprise. Ford’s suggestion that we simply reapply the full Whiteheadian analysis at the level of the molecule … brings all the sophistication of Whitehead’s treatment to bear on these opposing requirements, but at the cost of locating its full significance at the molecular level.” This is just the sort of forced dichotomy—that the “full significance” of Whitehead’s treatment must be found at one particular level of the physical world—we argue against in this book. Bogaard continues, saying that “not even Ford, I trust, wants to apply the ‘actual occasion’ analysis at every level.” We do want to apply that analysis at every level, at least insofar as explanation is what we aim at. We shall expend great effort showing how possibility, actuality, and potentiality operate in Whitehead’s philosophy (see especially chapter 8, 9, and 11). See Bogaard, “Whitehead and the Survival of ‘Subordinate Societies’,” Process Studies 21:4 (Winter 1992), 220–221.

54See for example, Anthony G. Cohn and Achille C. Varzi, “Mereotopological Connection,” Journal of Philosophical Logic, 32 (2003), 357–390; Stephen Blake, A. N. Whitehead’s Geometric Algebra, http://www.stebla.pwp.blueyonder.co.uk/Whitehead.html, 2005, accessed February 3, 2014; Ian Pratt and Dominik Schoop, “Expressivity in Polygonal, Plane Mereotopology,” Journal of Symbolic Logic, 65:2 (June 2000), 822–838; D. A. Randell and A. G. Cohn, “A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and Connections,” in Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, eds. B. Nebel, C. Rich and W. Swartout (Proceedings of the Third International Conference [Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1992]), 165–176.

55Herstein discusses the relation between Whiteheadian narrative and Finnegans Wake at greater length in his Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy article on Whitehead: http://www.iep.utm.edu/w/whitehed.htm, accessed January 18, 2017.

56Paul Halmos, Algebraic Logic (New York: Chelsea Publishing Co., 1962), 17 (our emphasis).

57Interest in algebraic logic evaporated with the work of Frege, Dedekind, and Peano, and did not come back into favor until the work of Tarski in the late 1930’s and after. Even then, Halmos’ book was still rather apologetic in his defense of the algebraic approach in 1962.

58Note the basic definition of algebra only emphasizes structure-preserving transformations. A “group” is a more specific type of transformation since it can be undone or reversed. See Hermann Weyl, Symmetry (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952).

59See Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, especially ch. 3 and ch. 6, sec. 3.

60As noted, one of the best routes of entrance into any area of mathematical study is through the history of that subject. This is certainly true of abstract algebra, and its contemporary expression in category theory. The best such history to date is Leo Corry, Modern Algebra and the Rise of Mathematical Structures (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 2004). The least technical introduction to category theory currently available is the excellent volume by F. William Lawvere and Stephen Hoel Schanuel, Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to Categories (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). The classic mathematical treatise on the subject of category theory is Saunders MacLane, Categories for the Working Mathematician (New York: Springer Verlag, 1971). Notable for its explicit developments of the connections among category theory, logic, and generalized spatial reasoning is Saunders MacLane and Leke Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First Introduction to Topos Theory (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992). Also worth mentioning here are Michael Barr and Charles Wells, Toposes, Triples and Theories (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985); and Andrea Asperti and Giuseppe Longo, Categories, Types and Structures (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).

61For a basic introduction, see John L. Kelley, General Topology, 2nd ed. (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985). In addition, Steven Vickers has demonstrated the substantive relationship between logic and topology; see his Topology via Logic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).

62See Leo Corry, Modern Algebra and the Rise of Mathematical Structures, 2nd ed. (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 2004), esp. Introduction.

63See Robert Goldblatt, Topoi: The Categorial Analysis of Logic (New York: Dover Publications, 1984); and J. L. Lambek and P. J. Scott, Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986); and J. L. Bell, Toposes and Local Set Theories (New York: Dover Publications, 2008).

64The name deliberately invoking the connection to topology.

65See Goldblatt, Topoi, xi.

66We want to make clear that we are not endorsing (indeed, are not even interested in) Russell’s metaphysical theory of types, and we endorse Whitehead’s decision to dump that part. If we retain the term “type,” we hope it will not mislead anyone. See Whitehead’s use of the term in “Indication, Classes, Number and Validation” (1937), in Essays in Science and Philosophy, esp. 229.

67See J. L. Bell and A. B. Slomson, Models and Ultraproducts (New York: Dover Publications, 2006), 72.

68Michael Dummett, The Logical Basis of Metaphysics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991).

69Quite aside from the fact that he devoted an entire major division of Process and Reality to each, one can see this in such things as the interplay between atomicity/actuality and continuity/potentiality (for example Process and Reality 61, 62, 67, 69, 71), and internal vs. external forms of relatedness (287–288).

70See Whitehead, Modes of Thought, 174: “Poetry allies itself to metre, philosophy to mathematic pattern.”

71See for example, Whitehead, Process and Reality, 289. We dedicate this paragraph to Don Sebastian and Don Pedro.

72See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 287–288.

73Whitehead’s “solidarity thesis” at Process and Reality, 40, is here intended. The full importance of conceiving the whole as “the universe as a solidarity” is nicely brought out by Nobo in Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity.

74See Whitehead, Interpretation of Science, 192–193.

75See John von Neumann, Continuous Geometry (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998 [1936]).

76As evidenced in Whitehead’s UA, and his The Axioms of Projective Geometry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1906 and 1907), and his entry “Mathematics,” in the Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed., vol. 17 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1911), 878–883.

77See Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, ch. 4, esp. pp. 130–138.

78Although the logician and computer scientist Giangiacomo Gerla has commented on these analogies in a variety of places. See Giangiacomo Gerla, “Pointless Geometries,” Handbook of Incidence Geometry, ed. F. Buekenhout (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1995), ch. 18, 1015–1031.





Chapter 4


1See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 294.

2The reasons for the scare quotes will become evident soon enough. See R. Kirby Godsey, “Relation and Substance in Whitehead’s Metaphysics,” Tulane Studies in Philosophy, Studies in Process Philosophy II, 24 (New Orleans: Tulane University, 1975), 12–22. If extension plays a lesser role in Process and Reality than in the Triptych, as Godsey claims, why, then, does Part IV exist? In addition, what Godsey asserts as Whitehead’s repudiation of extension as a fundamental concept in Process and Reality, (Godsey, 21) is, in fact, only Whitehead’s shift from a primary logic of mereology to one of mereotopology.

3See, for example, Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 167, 189.

4See Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 162.

5Ibid., 5.

6See chapter 1 above, and also, for example, Whitehead’s care regarding the context sensitivity of the ideas of equivalence, addition and subtraction in his Universal Algebra, 5, 18–19, 24.

7See Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 3–4.

8Whitehead, Process and Reality, 35–36.

9Ibid., 36, our emphasis. As we shall see shortly, the corpuscular form is a kind of personal order.

10See chapter 1 for the relation between the theory of cosmic epochs and the other levels of generality in Process and Reality. See also chapters 8 and 9.

11See part one of chapter 3 above. Whitehead’s mathematical usages, for example, were often maddeningly archaic.

12See Ronny Desmet, “Whitehead’s Cambridge Training,” in Whitehead: The Algebra of Metaphysics, eds. Ronny Desmet and Michel Weber (Leuven de Neuve, BE: Les editions Chromatika, 2010), 91–125. Desmet traces the careers and predilections of Whitehead’s mathematical mentors at Cambridge, which sheds great light on his habits of thinking and expression.

13See the biography of Clerk Maxwell, for example The Man Who Changed Everything by Basil Mahon (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2003). One does not need the Copenhagen School to account for Whitehead’s reference to the problem of the quantum.

14See Gerald Holton, Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought: Kepler to Einstein (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), 268–269. Also see Herstein (2006), ch. 2.

15The extent to which Whitehead was influenced by contemporary quantum theory is brought into doubt by recent histories of physics detailing the fifth Solvay Conference, in 1927, where homey mythology has it that the contemporary quantum interpretation was “settled.” See Guido Bacciagaluppi and Antony Valenti, Quantum Theory at the Crossroads, reconsidering the 1927 Solvay Conference (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009). There was still considerable confusion about how one ought to approach microphysical quanta, and there was no clear consensus about what the principal data even meant. Experimental results were coming in as the conference was being planned, thus adding speakers to address these new results. At the time Whitehead was forming the lectures that became Process and Reality. The conference proceedings were not published until 1928, and then in French, a language in which Whitehead was never very comfortable. The imposition of quantum mechanics upon Process and Reality is a case of scholars reading backwards upon the text their own inherited assumptions.

16The idea here of the “quantum of explanation” bears some analogy to Epperson’s ideas about “logical causality.” See Michael Epperson, “Quantum Mechanics and Relational Realism: Logical Causality and Wave Function Collapse,” Process Studies, 38:2 (Fall–Winter 2009), 340–367, esp. 340–341. Epperson’s realism remains quite orthodox, even in acknowledging relations as genuinely real, versus the decidedly radical realism that we will be advocating here. In addition, Epperson at times seems to ontologize the logical aspect rather more than we are prepared to do with the quantum (see Epperson, 357 ff.).

17Entanglement did not come on the scene until 1935; see A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” Physical Review, 47:10 (1935), 777–780. This paper was intended to refute quantum mechanics. It failed.

18Also see Whitehead’s discussion of atomism (Lucretius) in Adventures of Ideas, 123 ff.

19See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 8. Whitehead points out that all schemes of philosophical categories are “false” by logical standards.

20See Auxier, “Dream Time,” in Inception and Philosophy, ed. Theo Botz-Bornstein (Chicago: Open Court, 2011), 279–300.

21Again see Whitehead, Process and Reality, 8.

22Ibid., 4, our emphasis.

23Ibid., 13.

24Ibid., xii, our emphasis.

25See ibid., 35. For an illuminating discussion of Whiteheadian “societies,” see Joseph Bracken, “Energy Events and Fields,” Process Studies, 18:3 (Fall 1989), 153–165. Bracken defends the right sort of becoming of continuity, rejecting both Hartshorne’s view of actual occasions as micro-entities forming compound individuals (explicitly), and Ford’s temporal atomism (implicitly). Bracken is also critical of Sherburne and John Cobb in ways we would endorse (see 159), and also George Wolf (160–161). Ivor Leclerc is similarly misguided in believing that the question of “compound individuals” is a serious problem for process philosophy (see The Nature of Physical Existence). But Bracken is still wedded to the idea that an actual occasion has to be some sort of entity that natural science (especially physics) can describe (in this case, he favors events within fields). We do not deny that Whitehead’s cosmology includes this sort of field-event relation, under a coordinate analysis, and we do not deny that “societies” can be thus characterized, but the physicalizing of Whitehead’s cosmology is a misleading way to present it. Along with Whitehead, we have restricted the use of the term “actual occasion” to the level of generality associated with the theory of transition and concrescence, reserving the broader term “actual entity” (i.e., the quantum of explanation) for the most general use, applying equally at all levels of generality. Bracken’s motives are (as he states) not the same as Whitehead’s. Saving a place for the Trinity within process philosophy is one of those motives alien to Whitehead’s thought.

26Whitehead, Process and Reality, 67. For the meaning of “perspective standpoint,” see ch. 7.

27Ibid., 66.

28See ibid., 283 ff., and our chapter 8 for a more detailed treatment.

29Ibid., 66; this is just one example.

30Ibid., 67.

31The use of the word “nature” here is deliberate both for its irony and greater accuracy than, say, the term “character.”

32Joseph Bracken illustrates both errors—the conflation of Whitehead’s naturalism with physicalism, and the conflation of Whitehead’s atomism with microphysics—in an article, “Proposals for Overcoming the Atomism within Process-Relational Metaphysics,” Process Studies, 23:1 (Spring 1994), 10–24. He says: “Alfred North Whitehead aligns himself with quantum physicists in the belief that physical reality is made up of discrete units (for physicists, packets of energy; for Whitehead, momentary subjects of experience) which have to be combined both spatially and temporally in order to produce the continuously existing ‘things’ of common sense experience.” (10) It seems fairly clear that Bracken is not using the term “moment” in Whitehead’s sense, as a purely ideal product of extensive abstraction; so it seems safe to assume he means a tiny temporal slice of “nature.” Such a position takes for granted the very logic of measurement that is a formally emergent property of nature and time, and not something to be found within the metaphysics itself.

33Whitehead, Process and Reality, 128–129.

34Ibid., 214. We will have more to say about the relationship between the merely real and the determinate when we discuss the algebra of negative prehension, later. For now it should be sufficient to note that the macroscopic order is determinate and belongs to the theory of transition and concrescence in terms of its level of generality, when that level is expressed in the theory of extension.

35Ibid. This is a restatement of the distinction between definiteness and determinateness in Process and Reality 25, (the xxth Category of Explanation).

36See Holton, Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought, 302; and Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, 68 ff.

37Whitehead, Process and Reality, 67. We have cited this passage before, but perhaps now the scope of its significance is becoming clearer.

38Ibid., 283. Kant’s use of coordinate analysis is similar. See Critique of Pure Reason, B112.

39Whitehead, Process and Reality, 289; for a full account of the distinction between division and divisibility, both genetic and coordinate, see chapter 7.

40Notably Sherburne or George Allan, but recently one might mention Michael Heller’s chapter on Whitehead in Philosophy in Science: An Historical Introduction (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2011), ch. 10, 101–112.

41Whitehead, Process and Reality, 20.

42Ibid., 22 (Category of Explanation iv).

43Ibid., 22.

44Ibid., 23 (Category of Explanation vi).

45Ibid., 23, original emphasis.

46An author who goes astray on this point Duane Voskuil, “Entanglement, Slits, and Buckyballs,” Process Studies, 36:1 (Spring-Summer 2007), 23–44. Voskuil assumes that Whitehead’s quantum is microphysical.

47Epperson and Zafiris have recently published a significant contribution to the philosophy of physics that goes well beyond conventional interpretations while avoiding the pitfalls that have dogged so many previous attempts to bring Whiteheadian ideas to bear upon microphysics. See Epperson and Zafiris, Foundations of Relational Realism. This book is important on its own account for its contribution to the philosophy of physics. But for our purposes it is especially significant for the coherently developed algebraic approach in which this particular application of Whiteheadian thought is brought to bear. The authors explicitly employ category theory in the development of their ideas.

48Whitehead, Process and Reality, 36.

49This way of using the term “personal” is idiosyncratic, and different from the way the term is used in discussing the “societies of actual entities.” See Process and Reality, 34 as compared to 89–90, and both of these are different from his discussion of “person” in Religion in the Making, 62–68. Our concern here is not to unify all of these uses but merely to alert readers.

50Whitehead, Process and Reality, 36.

51Ibid., 92.

52Ibid., our emphasis.

53Ibid., 115–117.

54See ibid., 99. See also our earlier extended note on Whitehead’s theory of propositions.

55For example, Daniel Athearn: “Toward an Ontological Explanation of Light,” Process Studies, 34:1 (Spring–Summer 2005), 45–61, aims at reviving the idea of natural philosophy and natural language explanation. Athearn emphasizes the holistic character of the physical world, and the problematic nature of certain naively “physical” terms. (For example, see Athearn’s discussion of “spin” on pages 49–50). Athearn does not indicate anything quite as sweeping as we advocate here with our idea of the quantum of explanation, but his essay is, in our opinion, in sympathy with the kind of position we defend.

56See for example, Process and Reality, 51–52, 219–220, 257–258.

57The exception here is God.

58Such creative advances have occurred, but it has taken a very long time for them to accumulate, and they added nothing in the way of structure to the CMBR. We are referring here to the statistical “noise” which now permeates the CMBR. We will have a little more to say about the nature of statistical information in chapter 6.





Chapter 5


1Jorge Nobo is an obvious exception to this criticism. See Nobo, Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity.

2Lewis Ford, The Emergence of Whitehead’s Metaphysics: 1925–1929 (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1984), 1.

3The following is a complete list of Whitehead’s references to the triptych in Process and Reality.

Concept of Nature References:

Pg. 128, footnote: “In The Concept of Nature these two loci were not discriminated, namely, durations and strain-loci.”

Pg. 243, footnote: “Cf. The Concept of Nature, Ch. I.”

Pg. 258, footnote: “Cf. my Concept of Nature, Ch. I, for another exposition of this train of thought.”



_____________________

Combined Concept of Nature & Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge References:

Pg. 125, footnote: “Cf. my Principles of Natural Knowledge, Ch. XI, and my Concept of Nature, Ch. V.”

Pg. 287, footnote: “Cf. The Principles of Natural Knowledge, 1919, and The Concept of Nature, 1920, Cambridge University Press, England.”



_____________________

Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge References:

p. 298: “This definition practically limits abstractive sets to those sets which were termed ‘simple abstractive sets’ in my Principles of Natural Knowledge (paragraph 37.6).” [We observe that this comment of Whitehead’s appears in the main text and ix a very minor criticism of his earlier theory.



_____________________

Principle of Relativity References:

p. 20, footnote: “In this connection I may refer to the second chapter of my book The Principle of Relativity, Cambridge University Press, 1922.”



 In Adventures of Ideas, p. 254n., Whitehead references both The Concept of Nature and Process and Reality, jointly, as support for the claim that “a particular actuality can be abstracted from the mode of its initial indication, so that in a later phase of experience it is entertained as a bare ‘It’ ” (254). He then indicates that both Parts II and III of Process and Reality are to be consulted along with The Concept of Nature on this point. If Whitehead had indeed “discovered” temporal atomism after 1925, this reference would be extra-ordinary, implying, as it does, the same view of particulars and abstraction in both prior works. Furthermore, the citations in Process and Reality indicated above would be simply inexplicable if Ford’s hypothesis was correct.

4See Gary Herstein, “Alfred North Whitehead,” in The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://www.iep.utm.edu/w/whitehed.htm, accessed January 18, 2017. James Fieser Ph.D., founder and general editor; Bradley Dowden, Ph.D., general editor; David Boursema, American Philosophy editor.

5Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 202.

6Ford, The Emergence of Whitehead’s Metaphysics, 24–25, 246.

7Ibid., 25.

8Whitehead, Science and the Modern World, 126.

9Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 23.

10See Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 61 ff.

11Ibid., 61.

12Whitehead, Process and Reality, 289. We will have much more to say about this in chapter 8.

13Even a mathematically sophisticated interpreter of Whitehead like Murray Code can be misled by the Fordian argument. In addition to misconstruing the nature of eternal objects (discussed in great detail in chapters 8 and 9), Code misses the algebraic modes of Whitehead’s thought as applied to narrative forms of explanation, which Code correctly identifies as essential characteristics of Whitehead’s thought. See Murray Code, “On Whitehead’s Almost Comprehensive Naturalism,” Process Studies, 31:1 (Spring–Summer 2002), 3–31, esp. p. 25 (where Code explicitly endorses Ford). Code’s 1985 book Order and Organism, was, evidently, not influenced by Ford’s claims about Whitehead’s development (since Ford is not mentioned in the book anywhere), but it seems that Code’s revisions of his earlier book may have been motivated by Code’s willingness to believe Ford’s theories.

14Whitehead, Process and Reality, 288 (our emphasis).

15Problematic interpretations of Whitehead’s metaphysics are, or course, neither recent nor simply due to Lewis Ford’s aggressive reconstructions of Whitehead’s philosophy. In this same issue, Patrick Madigan conflates space with “the extensive continuum,” which is a fairly common mistake (Patrick S. Madigan: “Space in Leibniz and Whitehead,” in Tulane Studies in Philosophy, 24, ed. Robert C. Whittemore [New Orleans: Tulane University, 1975], 48–57.)

16Robert M. Palter, “Preface,” Whitehead’s Philosophy of Science, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970).

17See Bowman L. Clarke, “A Calculus of Individuals Based on ‘Connection’,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 22:3 (1981), 204–218; and “Individuals and Points,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 26:1 (1985), 61–75.

18See for example: Ian Pratt and Oliver Lemon, “Ontologies for Plane, Polygonal Mereotopology,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 38:2 (1997), 225–245; Ian Pratt, and Dominik Schoop, “A Complete Axiom System for Polygonal Mereotopology of the Real Plane,” Journal of Philosophical Logic 27 (1998), 621–658; and Pratt and Schoop, “Expressivity in Polygonal, Plane Mereotopology,” Journal of Symbolic Logic 65:2 (2000), 822–838; D. A. Randell and A. G. Cohn, 1992. “A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and Connections,” Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, eds. B. Nebel, C. Rich and W. Swartout (Proceedings of the Third International Conference, Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1992), 165–176; P. Roeper, “Region-Based Topology,” Journal of Philosophical Logic 26 (1997), 251–309; and Achille C. Varzi, “Boundaries, Continuity and Contact,” Nous 31:1 (1997), 25–58. This list is representative only; there are many other references to Whitehead’s theory of extension as completed by Clarke’s articles.

19Whitehead says “logic presupposes metaphysics.” See Modes of Thought, 107.

20In his earlier publications, Ian Pratt-Hartmann simply went by “Ian Pratt.” See above.

21Alfred Tarski, “Foundations of the Geometry of Solids,” in Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, trans. J. H. Woodger, 2nd ed. (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983 [1929]), 24–29.

22Theodore de Laguna, “Point, Line, and Surface, as Sets of Solids,” The Journal of Philosophy 19:17 (1922), 449–461.

23Mary Tiles, The Philosophy of Set Theory (New York: Dover Publications, 1989). See especially ch. 2.

24See Peter Simons, Parts: A Study in Ontology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987), esp. ch. 1.

25Max Jammer, Concepts of Space, 3rd ed. (New York: Dover Publications, 1993 [1954]), xiii.

26Paul R. Halmos, Algebraic Logic (New York: Chelsea Publishing Co., 1962), 17 (our emphasis).

27Whitehead, “Axioms of Projective Geometry,” 4.

28See Leo Cory, Modern Algebra, 380–398. Also, specifically, issues regarding homology and Čech cohomology, see Saunders Maclane, Categories for the Working Mathematician (New York: Springer Verlag, 1971), 29.

29J. Lambek and P. J. Scott, Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

30Giangiacomo Gerla, “Pointless Geometries,” Handbook of Incidence Geometry, ed. F. Buekenhost (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1995), ch. 18, 1015–1031.

31See Patrick Blackburn, Maarten de Rijke, and Yda Venema, Modal Logic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 1.

32Ibid., 28.

33Whitehead, Process and Reality, 333, n. 2.

34Whitehead had developed a similar account of equality twenty years before in the Universal Algebra.

35G. Gerla, “Mathematical Features of Whitehead’s Pointfree Geometry,” in Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought, eds. Michel Weber, Will Desmond,(Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2008), 507–519, 533–536.

36See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 287.

37Negri and Plato, Structural Proof Theory, Kindle location 697–705 (end of section 2.3).

38Hintikka: “Is Logic the Key to All Good Reasoning?” 35–57. (In addition, Hintikka emphasizes a model-over a proof-theoretic approach.)





Chapter 6


1We will sometimes shorten this phrase to just the “standard model.” It will be obvious from the context that we are referring to gravitational cosmology and not to the standard model of micro-physics. This standard model is often referred to as “Big Bang Cosmology.” We will cite numerous instances in what follows.

2One couldn’t find a better or more thorough critique of this decision by Einstein than Jimena Canales’ recent book The Philosopher and the Physicist: The Debate That Changed Our Understanding of Time (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014), in which she details how Einstein came to the very unscientific decision to claim his work replaced philosophy.

3Ricouer, Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning (Ft. Worth: Texas Christian University Press, 1976), 67.

4Ibid., 67–68.

5In addition to Canales’ excellent history cited above, see Hans Ohanion’s, Einstein’s Mistakes: The Human Failings of Genius (New York: W.W. Norton, 2009). Many of the great physicists of Einstein’s day, including Poincare and Michelson (and philosophers Cassirer and Bergson) insisted that General Relativity was an interpretation of the mathematical discoveries and that other interpretations were not only possible, but nothing in GR requires us to interpret the world in its terms. It is mathematics, not physics. See Timothy Eastman, who advocates a position he characterizes as “cosmic agnosticism,” and tentatively concludes, “that there is no current model in physical cosmology that adequately meets all key observations.” (Timothy Eastman, “Cosmic Agnosticism,” Process Studies, 36:2 [Fall–Winter 2007], 181–197.) Michael Disney notes that, “to explain some surprising observations, theoreticians have had to create heroic and yet insubstantial notions such as “dark matter” and “dark energy,” which supposedly overwhelm, by a hundred to one, the stuff of the universe we can directly detect. Outsiders are bound to ask whether they should be more impressed by the new observations or more dismayed by the theoretical djinnis that have been conjured up to account for them…. What one finds, in my view, is that modern cosmology has at best very flimsy observational support.” (“Modern Cosmology: Science or Folktale?” American Scientist 95:5 [September–October 2007], 383.) Elsewhere, Disney observes that the number of free parameters necessary to force cosmological theory (what he refers to as “BBC” or “Big Bang Cosmology”) to fit observations substantially exceed the number of genuinely independent observations, rendering confidence in the theory significantly negative. (M. J. Disney, “Doubts about Big Bang Cosmology,” in Aspects of Today’s Cosmology, ed. Prof. Antonio Alfonso-Faus [2011], ISBN: 978-953-307-626-3, InTech, Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/aspects-of-today-s-cosmology/doubts-about-big-bang-cosmology, accessed January 18, 2017) Reginald Cahill has gone so far as to argue that fundamental experiments such as that of Michelson-Morley deserve to be re-evaluated. (Reginald T. Cahill and Kirsty Kitto, “Michelson-Morley Experiments Revisited and the Cosmic Background Radiation Preferred Frame,” http://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0205065v1.pdf) Cahill’s views are certainly controversial, but such radical challenges to the reigning paradigm are being made by scientists working in the field. There are also studies conducted on a purely sociological level, investigating the intransigence of so many scientists who are caught up in the model-centrism of the standard model of gravitational cosmology. See, for example, Martin Lopez-Corredoira, “Sociology of Modern Cosmology,” http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.0537v2. In short, just because many working physicists ignore the problems with GR doesn’t make them go away and does not remove the problems associated with creating models.

6There are primarily three different families of theories challenging the model of gravity developed in general relativity. These go under the headings of “Mond” (for “Modified Newtonian Dynamic”), the “bimetric” approach (which we’ll say more about), and a group widely referred to as “TeVeS” (“Tensor Vector Scalar.”) The technical details of how these approaches work need not concern us here.

7See Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, 2006.

8Bogdan Rosu and Ronny Desmet incorrectly situate Whitehead’s revision of Einstein’s theory of relativity when they characterize the triptych by saying, “Whitehead attempts to recover Minkowski’s space-time geometry from hypothetical entities, that are themselves the result of abstraction and generalization, from what we are aware of in perception.” See Rosu and Desmet: “Whitehead, Russell and Moore: Three Analytic Philosophers,” Process Studies, 41:2 (Fall–Winter 2012), 214–234, 222. This statement places Minkowski’s work near the center of Whitehead’s concerns. Minkowski brought Einstein’s special theory to the attention of the physics community by embedding that work in a 4-dimensional framework, providing an interpretive structure for special relativity. (See Gerald Holton: Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought: Kepler to Einstein (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988.) Whitehead’s own mathematical interests moved in a direction entirely contrary to the Minkowskian formulation (even without the geometric interpretation). Rather than developing his ideas along lines stemming from Gauss and Riemann, Whitehead’s work was rooted in the approaches of Cayley and Klein which prioritized projective geometry and the choice of polarities, rather than directly modifying the postulates of geometry as is found in the former pair. (See Blake, A. N. Whitehead’s Geometric Algebra, chapter 5 especially; http://www.stebla.pwp.blueyonder.co.uk/papers/Euclid.pdf verified February 3, 2014.)

9Even this indeterminate situation for measuring, problematic as it is, barely scratches the surface of the concrete issues associated with specifying genetically those coordinate relations that are required for even the simplest concrete alterations of scale and place that might be encountered in seeking full metaphysical exemplification of a categoreal scheme. We will address some other aspects of this challenge in chapter 8.

10See Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, 185, for a description of the kind of paradoxes brought on by the measurement problem, referencing the Galaxy NGC 7319 and its embedded quasar.

11The apparent confirmation of GR in the observations of the pulsar PSR B1913+16 still depends upon the use of sidereal time to mark the periodicity of the pulses and chart observations. Using the earth’s rotation as a measuring rod for phenomena projected at such distances either requires us to ignore the relativistic effects of the distances we estimate, or to reason in a circle with regard to the accuracy of our “measuring rod.” If an observer objects that the relativistic effects have been taken into account, one need only ask where the estimate of relativistic effects originated in that path of reasoning.

12For a fairly recent technical treatment of the subject, see, for example, Sean Carroll, Spacetime and Geometry: An Introduction to General Relativity (San Francisco: Pearson Education Inc./Addison Wesley, 2004). For a popular account, see Brian Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004).

13Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 81–86.

14See Arthur S. Eddington, “A Comparison of Whitehead’s and Einstein’s Formulae,” Nature, 113:2832 (February 9, 1924), 192.

15Clifford Will, “Relativistic Gravity in the Solar System II: Anisotropy in the Newtonian Gravitational Constant,” The Astrophysical Journal, 169 (1971), 141–155.

16For example, Rosen and Moffat both emphasize the linearity of their respective bimetric theories. See J. W. Moffat, “Bimetric Gravity Theory, Varying Speed of Light and the Dimming of Super-Novae,” International Journal of Modern Physics D, 12:2 (2003), 281–298; and Nathan Rosen, “General Relativity and Flat Space I & II,” Physical Review, 57 (January 15, 1940), 147–153.

17Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, v.

18For an accessible discussion of the connections between symmetry and groups, see Hermann Weyl, Symmetry (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980). Standard references on the subject of spaces of constant curvature are Sigurdur Helgason, Differential Geometry and Symmetric Spaces, 2nd edition (New York: Academic Press, 1964) and Joseph A. Wolf, Spaces of Constant Curvature (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967). For a discussion of the role of (maximally) symmetric spaces in contemporary cosmology, see Carroll’s Spacetime and Geometry, 139–144, 323–329). Maximally symmetric spaces are, in essence, the highest degree of uniformity possible in a space.

 From the beginning of his mathematical career, Whitehead was intimately familiar with the contemporary work on the subject of uniformity and symmetric spaces. Whitehead’s Universal Algebra has numerous citations of the principal figures and their publications on these developments. See Moritz Epple, “From Quaternions to Cosmology: Spaces of Constant Curvature, ca. 1873–1925,” Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, 3 (August 20–28, 2002), 935–946, for an overview of the early history of the subject.

19For the former, see Bas van Fraassen, Laws and Symmetry (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989). See Ernst Cassirer, “Reflections on the Concept of Group and the Theory of Perception”; the English version is found in Symbol, Myth, and Culture (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979 [1945]), 217–291. Also see J. J. Gibson, The Senses Considered as a Perceptual System (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1966), highlighting the connection between groups and perception (Gibson 1966).

20In addition to Herstein’s Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology, see Hilton Ratcliffe, Timothy E. Eastman, Ashwini Kumar Lal, and R. Joseph, The Big Bang, a Critical Analysis (Cambridge: Cosmology Science Publishers, 2011). See also Hilton Ratcliffe’s The Virtue of Heresy (Central Milton Keynes: Author House, 2008). For a solid impression of the scientifically credible dissent to ΛCDM by surveying the article abstracts located in the newsletter of the Alternative Cosmology Group. These are to be found at http://www.cosmology.info/newsletter/index.html, accessed July 19, 2016.

21Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 3.

22Whitehead, Process and Reality, 22.

23See John Dewey, The Quest for Certainty, in Later Works of John Dewey, ed. Jo Ann Boydston, vol. 4 (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984 [1929]), 19.

24Green, The Fabric of the Cosmos, 141.

25See Eastman, “Cosmic Agnosticism,” 181–197. Eastman, a working physicist who spent many years at NASA’s Goddard Space Center, enumerates some of the more salient problems with the Standard Model of Cosmology.





Chapter 7


1This is not to say that Whitehead dismissed proof-theoretic techniques as lacking value in all domains. See Whitehead, “Indication, Classes, Numbers, and Validation,” 240.

2We do not take up the question here of whether the mereotopological structure is or is not a “possible” space, in the sense of having some determinate relation to created spaces. We don’t wish here to prejudice the ontological issue in advance. See our forthcoming The Continuum of Possibility.

3See Hintikka’s The Principles of Mathematics Revisited (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).

4Peter Douglas, in “Whitehead and the Problem of Compound Individuals,” Process Studies, 33:1 (Spring–Summer 2004), 80–109, accuses Whitehead of a kind of reductionism with actual occasions: “Now even though Whitehead’s ‘reductionism’ is quite different from that of physicalism, in both cases there is a failure to allow for the higher-level existents that could account for emergent causal powers,” (Douglas, “Whitehead and the Problem of Compound Individuals,” 81.) Douglas here has missed the point of the quantum of explanation: one must choose as a basis of explanation an actuality which can be analyzed, but which cannot be reduced, in order for any explanation to be possible, much less actual. He is correct to think that Whitehead is not trying to provide an account of emergence, but Whitehead allows the higher level existents to function as societies of actual occasions in an actual world, and these can be analyzed as if they were a single indivisible actual entity in a single actual world just as surely as simpler kinds of occasions can. (See Adventures of Ideas, ch. 13).

5See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 214.

6Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, trans. Ralph Manheim, vol. 2 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1955 [1925]), xv.

7Obviously this is David Hilbert’s characterization, but for the sense we mean to give it in a historical context, see Ernst Cassirer, The Problem of Knowledge, Volume 4: Philosophy, Science, and History, trans. Ralph Manheim, ed. Charles Hendel (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1950), 26.

8The history of the term and its varied meanings is nicely explained in the opening chapters of James R. Goetsch, Vico’s Axioms: The Geometry of the Human World (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995).

9In his brief discussion of the intensional logic of Frederic Castillon (written between 1797 and 1805), C.I. Lewis suspects Castillon of having worked out all of his transformations empirically and discarding those that did not work. Lewis takes this as a self-evident condemnation of Castillon’s success in creating intensional functions that capture all of the valid syllogisms in Aristotelian logic. Granted, Castillon of worked out his system empirically, but Lewis is wrong to consider this a flaw in his method. We think Whitehead adjusts his coordinate whole to his genetic parts empirically in a similar way, and it is not a flaw. See C. I. Lewis, A Survey of Symbolic Logic: The Classic Algebra of Logic (New York: Dover Books, 1960 [1918]), 35–38.

10Max Black says that there is a fundamental difference between scale, analogical, and theoretical models. We will be offering two versions of what Black would call a scale model in what follows (Fenway Park and Neil Young’s trains), but we must set aside Black’s distinctions. First, our aim includes metaphysics and is not limited to the epistemological interpretation of scientific models. Second, we have offered a completely different account of “explanation” as the quantum in any coordinate and genetic analysis, and this falls well outside the terms Black could accept, ours being broader and metaphysical, while not sacrificing either radically empirical science or the realism appropriate to it. Thus, our account of models, and of model-centrism, assumes that scale, analogical, and theoretical models are inter-related, and that a scale model is a concentration and selection of a theoretical model framed by finding a unit of measure. In turn, the unit of measure is not either a metaphor, or a model, in Black’s sense. It is a quantum, in the sense explained in this book. See Black, Models and Metaphors: Studies in Language and Philosophy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University press, 1962), chs. 3, 13; see also Paul Ricouer’s use and critique of this view in Interpretation Theory, esp. pp. 65 ff.

11In spite of the difficulties associated, Auxier actually has solved the problem with the Cubs empirically. See his article “The Curse (of the Curse) of Babe Ruth,” http://radicallyempirical.com/2013/10/09/picktures-and-pieces-3-the-curse-of-the-curse-of-babe-ruth/, accessed January 18, 2017.

12Empirical measurements have been taken to discover whether successful major leaguers had faster reflexes than average people. Major league hitters have very sharp reflexes and reaction times. But studies show that major leaguers have better than 20/20 vision. Even those who wear glasses are correctable to better than 20/20. The reason aging hitters begin to fail is not necessarily that they slow down, it is that they can’t see as well as when they were younger. There are many sources, but see Brian MacPhereson’s article in the Providence Journal from March 2012 here: http://www.providencejournal.com/sports/red-sox/content/20120316-baseball-vision-when-20–20-eyesight-just-wont-cut-it.ece, accessed February 23, 2014.

13See Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, ch. 3, esp. 42–48; and Treatise on Universal Algebra, 6.

14Whitehead, Religion in the Making, 131.

15The bases in Little League are sixty feet apart, two-thirds the size of a major league distance, but the pitcher’s mound is further back and not normally elevated. Were the two-thirds ratio to hold, the pitcher would be 40 feet, 4 inches from the batter, but the rules require the pitcher to be 46 feet away. For a full comparison of approximations, see http://www.littleleague.org/leagueofficers/fieldspecs.htm, accessed February 9, 2017. Also, in days of yore, Little Leaguers were allowed to “take a lead” to the next base when they got on base. But stealing bases was so easy that it distorted the game, since catchers and middle infielders could not prevent base-stealing as in the majors. Nowadays, Little Leaguers are not allowed to leave the base until the pitched ball reaches the batter. This rule also distorts the game, since stealing bases is no longer a part of the game. The forbidding of stealing in Little League remains controversial among purists.

16See Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game (New York: W.W. Norton and Co. 2003).

17Naturally, this idea of a small scale Fenway is too tempting not to have been tried. There is a whiffle ball version of Fenway in Essex, Vermont described here: http://littlefenway.com/site/, accessed July 25, 2016. It was built from a sketch on a coffee-stained napkin (we are surprised it was not beer or wine). And yes, a Little League version has been built near Cincinnati. See it here: http://www.tcyosports.org/LittleFenway.html, accessed January 18, 2017. This was built with closer attention to adaptation, but even so, it is advertised as “virtually to scale.” We would guess they encountered some of the problems we described. But it “looks right.” Still, that is insufficient for a cosmology that never fails of exemplification in any experience, which is Whitehead’s goal.

18Auxier has presented this more poetic question with some thoroughness in “The Sacred Geometry of Fenway Park,” in The Red Sox and Philosophy, ed. Michael Macomber (Chicago: Open Court, 2009), 267–282.

19In the Fenway example, the geometry was more affine than projective, since the angles remained constant. The important point was that the algebra was limited by the geometry because we wanted a physical model.

20Neil Young, Waging Heavy Peace: A Hippie Dream (New York: Blue Rider Press, 2012), 43 (our emphasis).

21Ibid., 105–106.

22Ibid., 106.

23Whitehead, Process and Reality, 67–68 (our emphasis).

24The use of the term “perspective standpoint” in this passage is difficult to sort out. At this point it is sufficient to note that Whitehead has distinguished perspective from standpoint just prior to this passage: Perspectives are objectified actual occasions as they are available for the percipient actual entity by which they are being felt. The feeling of the objectification is not the same as the simple physical feeling of another actual occasion by the percipient actual entity. A perspective involves a certain mutuality that a standpoint lacks. (See Process and Reality, 67, 236.)

25Lewis Ford does take a stab at a “middle path” (our term) between temporal and non-temporal becoming that he uses in an attempt to save his claims concerning “temporal atomicity” by, he says, “considering genetic passage a different form of time.” See Lewis Ford: “Temporal and Nontemporal Becoming,” Process Studies, 38:1 (Spring–Summer 2009), 5–42.

26See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 58.

27We will discuss this issue further in chapter 12, but see Process and Reality, 214, for the relevant distinctions. We endorse the account of Nobo showing the distinctness of transition from concrescence. Nobo’s discussion is difficult, combining language from Whitehead’s 1927 essay “Time” (collected in The Interpretation of Science, 240–247), in which the “supersession” of actual entities is the favored vocabulary. Whitehead acknowledges that he is abstracting the physical from the mental poles in that essay, and when we abstract either one of these from the other, they “are each of them devoid of the full concreteness of the dipolar occasion.” (240) Thus one cannot invoke the categories used in “Time” to explain and analyze material in Process and Reality without some adjustment. Neither “incompleteness” nor “supersession” is a category in Process and Reality, but Nobo combines this verbal usage from “Time” with the discussion of prehension from Process and Reality in which Whitehead uses different terms for similar work (e.g., superjection). These terms are different enough to make a difference (see Nobo, Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity, 144–151). Nobo is more interested in the problem of time and possibility itself than in nice distinctions of vocabulary from fine-grained textual interpretation, as demonstrated by the fact that he cites Process and Reality, 378–379 (from the original edition, 247–248 of the corrected edition) as support for his view of transition as supersession. The term “supersede” never appears in those passages. The difference in the “categories” in the 1927 essay, as compared with Process and Reality, ought to serve as a clue that care will be required to adapt the sense of the term “prehension” to an analysis in which the actual entity is treated in its full concreteness, instead of simply in its contribution to the concept of time as time plays a role in our natural knowledge.

 Nobo makes it clear that he thinks of the process of concrescence as “microscopic” (148, 167), while transition is “macroscopic.” We agree, but this terminology is misleading, since readers are likely to believe that it means concrescence is small while transition is big. In a way, that is true, since the actual entity is always only a part of its actual world. We think Nobo knows that size is irrelevant and he ought to choose less misleading vocabulary.

28Whitehead, Process and Reality, 289. We have quoted this passage above in chapters 4 and 5, but perhaps here its meaning is becoming clearer.

29We will explain our usage of the term “constellation” subsequently. See Process and Reality, 58 (at the bottom of the page), for the basis of our new term. “Constellation” is what we call the first type of presentational objectification.

30We call this usage “infelicitous” because it invites confusion with what mathematicians such as Hermann Weyl would call a “group.” Whitehead’s usage has no relation to that specific definition.

31Whitehead, Process and Reality, 22; but remember that a relation is a mode of being, a kind of “entity.”

32See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 219: “The philosophy of organism is a cell-theory of actuality. Each ultimate unit of fact is a cell-complex, not analyzable into components with equivalent completeness of actuality.”

33Whitehead, Process and Reality, 245.

34Ibid., 235; final emphasis is ours, as are bracketed clarifications.

35Ibid., 235.

36We are using the term “constellation” to avoid confusion with terms that were later well defined in mathematics after Whitehead’s time such as “group” or “set.” Whitehead exemplifies the English tradition, which was only slowly abandoned, of using terms as they descended from Newton in preference to the Continental conventions. As late as The Principle of Relativity, Whitehead is still using Newtonian notations, and this has contributed to his formalizations being ignored.

37Whitehead, Process and Reality, 220.

38See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 112. The way Whitehead uses the term “chaos” is very much of a piece with the way René Thom developed the notion later in the unhappily named “catastrophe theory.” See his Structural Stability and Morphogenesis: An Outline of a General Theory of Models (New York: W.A. Benjamin, 1994) See also Stengers, Thinking with Whitehead, 386–387.

39See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 220.

40See ibid., 214.

41See ibid. As far as we know, the first serious argument anyone made for the relative independence of transition and concrescence is Nobo’s argument in “Transition in Whitehead: A Creative Process Distinct from Transition,” International Philosophical Quarterly, 19:3 (September 1979), 265–283. The view is repeated in Nobo’s book, in the sections we have discussed in the earlier lengthy note on Nobo.

42Jorge Nobo is among those few intrepid interpreters who has stepped into the breach and acquitted himself well. See his Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity. Also see Fetz, Whitehead), Section 3. This is translated by Felt, in Process Studies, including: “In Critique of Whitehead,” 1–9; and most importantly, “Aristotelian and Whiteheadian Conceptions of Actuality: I,” Process Studies, 19:1 (Spring 1990), 15–27; and “Aristotelian and Whiteheadian Conceptions of Actuality: II,” Process Studies, 19:3 (Fall 1990), 145–155.

43Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283.

44We will not here go into the relationship between possibility and contrast, but we find Nobo’s discussion of it congenial. See Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity, 191–195.

45Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283.

46Ibid., 35.

47Ibid., 283.

48Lewis Ford offers another attempt to justify temporal atomism in “The Indispensability of Temporal Atomism,” 279–303. Here he changes the details of his book. We simply disagree.

49Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283, first three emphases are ours.

50Ibid.

51Ibid.

52Ibid., 26 (the Category of Subjective Unity).

53Ibid., 283–284 (our emphasis).

54Ibid., 284.

55Ibid.

56Ibid. (original emphasis).

57Ibid., 238.

58Ibid.

59Ibid., 237. Cf. Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 62 (14.3).





Chapter 8


1Whitehead, Process and Reality, 263. We want to thank Myron M. Jackson for drawing our attention to this passage and its obvious richness.

2Ibid., 219.

3Ibid.

4Ibid., 220; pages 219–220 might be regarded as almost as tough as 283–284, but there you are. Each is the opening of a major division of the book.

5See ibid., 235.

6We have earlier given the genealogy of Whitehead’s theory of extension from his first writings, through the Universal Algebra and the Principia and into his explicitly philosophical work. By the time it appeared in Process and Reality, it was quite advanced.

7Whitehead, Process and Reality, 219.

8Ibid.

9Ibid., 58.

10Ibid.

11Ibid.

12It is often forgotten today that a great amount of Leibniz’s most important work in logic (and hence, concerning possibility) was unavailable until the end of the nineteenth century when C.I. Gerhardt’s edition of Leibniz’s Philosophische Schriften was published in seven volumes (Berlin: Weidmansche Buchhandlung, 1887–1890), especially volume seven (1890). Immediately some of the finest minds of the day went to work on these “new” writings, including book-length treatments by Russell, Cassirer, and Dewey. Leibniz’s writings revolutionized the growing algebra of logic. See C. I. Lewis in his A Survey of Symbolic Logic, 5–37. Lewis’s account is unduly weighted to the praise of extensional logics.

13Even Spinoza can be read as giving to possibility a serious, independent standing. See Richard Mason, “Spinoza on Modality,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 36:144 (July 1986), 313–342; and Jonathan Bennett, A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1984). Jon Miller provided an account of Spinoza’s view of possibility that is very much like the view we will defend here. See Jon Miller, “Spinoza’s Possibilities,” The Review of Metaphysics, 54:4 (June 2001), 779–814.

14See the collection, Whitehead: Points of Connection, eds. Janusz Polanowski and Donald W. Sherburne (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2004).

15William L. Reese, the collaborator with Hartshorne on Philosophers Speak of God, has some tantalizing suggestions in his “The Structure of Possibility,” see the paper at the Paideia site, https://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Onto/OntoRees.htm, accessed July 27, 2016.

16See Herstein’s essay, “Whitehead, Intuition, and Radical Empiricism,” in Intuition in Mathematics and Physics, ed. Ronny Desmet (Anoka, MN: Process Century Press, 2016), 165–181.

17See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 75–76. See also 288.

18Ibid., 93–94.

19Ibid., 125.

20This is the problem faced by Eugene Wigner in his famous essay “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in Modern Science,” which was the Richard Courant lecture in mathematical sciences delivered at New York University, May 11, 1959. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 13, 1–14.

21Whitehead tells the story with admirable brevity in chapter 2 of Science and the Modern World. What is meant by the term “natural philosophy” is best exemplified when mathematics and the study of nature are kept in close proximity, as they were during the height of classical Greek thought and again in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In the nineteenth century, Whitehead notes that the influence of mathematical thinking on philosophy “waned” (see especially pages 29–32).

22See our discussion of radical empiricism in chapters 1 and 2.

23See Georg Gasser, ed., How Successful Is Naturalism? (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2007).

24See for example David Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds and Possibility and Counterfactuals. The views expressed in these books are exotic. One of the notable problems we have with David Lewis’ approach to possibility is that it is fundamentally contrary to the standards and criteria of radical empiricism. See Counterfactuals (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973) especially, 84–95; and On The Plurality of Worlds (London: Blackwell, 1986) especially, 2–3.

25Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 206.

26Ibid., 206–207.

27Whitehead, Process and Reality, 35.

28In fact, Whitehead is a radical realist—see chapter 10.

29Whitehead, Process and Reality, 35–36.

30Sherburne, A Key to Whitehead’s, 217.

31Whitehead, Process and Reality, 36.

32See Herstein’s Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology for the full argument.

33Michael Epperson has recognized that Whitehead is of limited use to his way of tackling the problem. But we still think Epperson needs a theory of cosmic epochs if he wants to address the full problem of physical reality. The generous expansion of the concept of “potentiality” he offers is really just a way of side-stepping the vexing problem of possibility. The physical world is but one aspect of the real world. See Epperson and Zafiris, Foundations of Relational Realism, esp. 199–209.

34Sherburne, A Key to Whitehead’s, 217.

35Sherburne and numerous others have been chopping off pieces of the philosophy of organism for decades. The most popular targets for depopulating Whitehead’s ontology are the eternal objects and God. See especially Sherburne’s “Whitehead without God,” in Process Philosophy and Christian Thought, eds. Delwin Brown, Gene Reeves and Ralph James (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1971), ch. 16. See also Nicolo Santilli, “Flux and Openness: Dissolving Fixity n Whitehead’s Vision of Process,” Process Studies, 41:1 (Spring-Summer 2012), 150–170. Santilli is convinced that all of the aspects of Whitehead’s philosophy that are postulated as stable are problematic and have to be revised. But there is a difference between postulated, functional stability and fixity.

36Whitehead, Process and Reality, 36. See chapter 4.

37The recent revival of interest in panpsychism is fueled partly by these sorts of concerns in the philosophy of science, but Whitehead’s solution has not been well enough understood to be included as a vital part of that discussion. See for example, David S. Clarke, Panpsychism and the Religious Attitude (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2003); and Galen Strawson, et al., Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? ed. Anthony Freeman (London: Imprint Academic, 2006).

38Whitehead, Process and Reality, 91. Whitehead has in mind here the perfect generality of Maxwell’s equations in anything we can experience, so far as we know. That is the universal character of our cosmic epoch, if it has any such character in physical terms.

39Whitehead, Process and Reality, 288, our emphasis. Whitehead is not advocating a multiverse theory of nature. He is quite sincere about what is (probably) actual in our universe, even if not in our cosmic epoch, let alone our immediate epoch. The multiverse theory is a parochial and logically indefensible attempt to treat relations as parasitic on relata.

40Whitehead, Process and Reality, 288. The term “important” is doing some work here for Whitehead. See Ross Stanway’s discussion of this idea throughout Whitehead’s work in “Whitehead on the Concept of ‘Importance’,” Process Studies, 21:4 (Winter 1992), 239–245. The concept of importance cannot be completely defined, according to Whitehead, but “concerns the ‘final unity of purpose’ (Modes of Thought, 12) as grounded in the ‘unity of the Universe’ (Modes of Thought, 8),” according to Stanway (240). Details about the universe that are unrelated to its purpose are “trivial.” (Stanway, 244–245).

41Whitehead, Process and Reality, 333 (our emphasis).

42Ibid., 288.

43Wolfgang Smith, “Sophia Perennis and Modern Science,” in The Philosophy of Seyyed Hossein Nasr, eds. Lewis E. Hahn, Randall E. Auxier, and Lucian W. Stone. (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 2001), 472–473. The Whitehead quote is from The Concept of Nature, 30.

44Smith, “Sophia Perennis and Modern Science,” 474. See also Wolfgang Smith, The Quantum Enigma (Peru, IL: Sherwood Sugden Publisher, 1995), and Science and Myth: What We Are Never Told (San Raphael, CA: Sophia Perennis, 2010).

45Smith, “Sophia Perennis and Modern Science,” 478.

46Whitehead, Process and Reality, 238–239 (our emphasis).

47Whitehead is clear about the primacy of the physical throughout his work, not just in Process and Reality. For example, he says in 1927 that “the physical pole must be explained before the mental pole, since the mental pole can only be explained as a particular instance of supersession disclosed in the analysis of a fully concrete occasion.” (The Interpretation of Science, 241). See also William J. Garland’s interpretation of physical concrescence in “Whitehead’s Theory of Causal Objectification,” Process Studies, 12:3 (Fall 1982), 180–191. Garland provides helpful summaries of commentators on the question of concrescence and physical prehension/feeling, and calls attention to the idea that the elimination of physical feeling “makes possible the movement from the initial data to the objective datum.” (185) More accurately, this elimination makes the movement actual, not just possible, but the insight that Garland reports (and attributes to Sherburne) seems right, as does the Garland’s subsequent analysis, as it bears on concrescence and physical prehension. Garland’s account of “negative prehension” (188–189), for all its brevity, is among the best in the literature, although he conflates determinateness and definiteness.

48Whitehead, Process and Reality, 206.

49Ibid., 22.

50Ibid., 210, original emphasis.

51See ibid., 214.

52Ibid., 184–185.

53This is the topic of our forthcoming book, The Continuum of Possibility.

54Ibid., 185–186, our emphasis. As a reminder, we are using the word “collection” instead of “set” for the form of order here. When we speak of possibilities independent of their ingression, we use the term “constellation.”

55Ibid., 186, our emphasis.

56See ibid., 214. We will have more to say about this kind of “possibility” in chapter 12.

57See our earlier note about Whitehead’s use of the “determinate” in the context of eternal objects and “definite” in the context of “other occasions” from his 1927 essay “Time,” in The Interpretation of Science, 140–147. Susanne Langer picked up the distinction between definite and determinate order in her Symbolic Logic (New York: Dover Books, 1967 [1937); see pp. 135, 138, 151, etc. Langer employs the term “constellation” in a fashion similar to our usage; see p. 65.

58See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 65 f.

59This is the principal topic of our forthcoming book The Continuum of Possibility.

60See ibid., 115, where this point is expressed in the language of transition: “the realization of a pattern necessarily involves the concurrent realization of a group of eternal objects capable of contrast in that pattern.” On page 148, the analogous point is made in the language of concrescence: “There is interconnection between the degrees of relevance of different items in the same actual entity. This fact of interconnection is asserted in the principle of compatibility and contrariety. There are items which, in certain respective gradations of relevance, are contraries to each other; so that those items, with their respective intensities of relevance, cannot coexist in the constitution of one actual entity. If some group of items, with their variety of relevance, can coexist in one actual entity, then the group, as thus variously relevant, is a compatible group.” Whitehead’s use of the term “group” here is not to be conflated with Weyl’s “group theory.” This is one reason we choose the terms “collection” and “constellation” for definite and determinate order, respectively.

61See James Bradley’s argument for the superiority of the concept of function as a model for analysis over its competitors, ancient, modern, and contemporary in “Transcendentalism and Speculative Realism,” 166–168. Bradley criticizes Whitehead (168–169) for strictly delimiting function so as to exclude what we call “operations,” and what Bradley associates with the “foundationalist” theories of propositions adopted by Frege and Russell. We agree that Whitehead’s limits would be a problem if Whitehead did not build back into his philosophy of organism a way that universals are related to each other independent of concrescence. We think Whitehead addresses universals in the way he describes transition. Bradley is right about the problem, and in his reading of Whitehead’s different inquiries in light of the limitations he sets on them, individually. Bradley is also on the right track, seeing a strong connection between Cassirer’s and Whitehead’s philosophies of science. But eternal objects do not, in Process and Reality, pose a problem for Whitehead he hasn’t solved. The distinction between transition and concrescence, for us and for Nobo, solves the problem. Bradley actually uses the term “operative” in a kindred fashion without seeing its prospects on page 170.

62William Christian’s discussion in An Interpretation of Whitehead’s Metaphysics (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1959), 132–140 covers the same basic problems. We agree with his view regarding the elimination of physical feelings. But he does not draw the same conclusion about the relation of the actual entity to its immediate predecessor, and Christian’s sense of the role of eternal objects in this discussion is impoverished. Christian says that “some theory of universals seems to be required” (140) but he limits himself to “several observations” about the problem of the “relational function of eternal objects” (140). Here he confuses the theory of transition and concrescence with the problem of causal efficacy (perception) and with that of prehension (indivisible relatedness), as throughout his book. Still, he stays as close to the text as he can, doesn’t fudge or fabricate, and (examining his final paragraph, 140) knows he hasn’t gotten the role of eternal objects worked out. We believe we do have it worked out. In process philosophy, we do not seek an explanation of how the principal actual entity came to exist as it does, so no account of the flow of feeling from the past into the present is needed. Rather, the actual entity in its actual world is the reason and thus the ground of any explanation. Our questions must be adapted to whatever an analysis of that actual entity yields. Christian doesn’t maintain consistently the categoreal primacy of the actual entity as the reason and the world as explained by that entity.

 Leclerc, Whitehead’s Metaphysics emphasizes the idea of “form” in Whitehead and tries to get it to do the work of bringing possibility, actuality, and potentiality together. This is not supportable within Whitehead’s text. Leclerc fails, like Christian, to understand that the theory of prehension is more concrete than the theory of transition and concrescence, and attempts to use the latter to account for the former. Eternal objects are not “forms of definiteness,” as Leclerc claims. They are determinations of form. Definiteness has a relation to actuality to which eternal objects are wholly indifferent, as we will explain. Yet, Leclerc does use the terminology of definiteness and determination correctly most of the time. His habitual phrase is that eternal objects are “determinants of the definiteness of the process of acting of actual entities.” (94; cf. 95) Still, he is thinking of acting as a process, which at the level of prehension is irrelevant. The relation of prehension is the act in its most concrete sense, not a process of acting. But Leclerc does not recognize that determination of definiteness is not the same thing as definiteness. Eternal objects determine, but making a “determinant” character definite in the objectifications of the prehending actual entity is quite beyond their scope or power. Leclerc Platonizes Whitehead, even slipping away from the language of “eternal objects” into that of “eternal forms”—a phrase Whitehead never uses in Process and Reality (see Leclerc, 95).

 Every serious investigation of Whitehead’s metaphysics has to include some interpretation of the relations of actuality, potentiality and possibility. Leclerc takes up the problem again under his own authority in Nature and Existence. His solution is beyond our present scope, along with the solutions of Justus Buchler, John William Miller, Harold N. Lee, Archie Bahm, and a number of other original mid-century, process-friendly metaphysicians. More recently Ralph Pred and Frederick Ferré, have made attempts, but their interests lie closer to funding experienced value than to solving old metaphysical problems.

63See Auxier, “Complex Negation, Necessity, and Logical Magic,” in The Relevance of Royce, eds. Kelly Parker and Jason M. Bell (New York: Fordham University Press, 2014), 89–131, for an account of how a nuanced logic of negation affects metaphysics. Whitehead’s view of this was at least as subtle as Royce’s.

64This diagram and the subsequent analysis is essentially a commentary on Part III, chapter 1, Section V of Process and Reality, 223–227, which is one of the two most important discussions of negative prehension in the book.

65Whitehead, Process and Reality, 226–227.

66Compare with Adventures of Ideas, 211, where Whitehead rejects the principle that any actual entity is wholly determined by its predecessor.

67See ibid., 203–204, where the society explains the nexus, not the other way around.

68This is a technical use of the word “influence.” See Auxier, “Influence as Confluence,”, 301–338.

69An admirably comprehensive study is in Jones’ Intensity: An Essay in Whiteheadian Ontology.

70See Process and Reality, 26, and the relevant discussion at 224–227. These are elucidations of the Ontological Principle.

71This is the sort of distinction that is often overlooked when Whitehead scholars struggle with the difficult idea of negative prehension. Adam Scharfe confronts the same problem:

Pointing to the significance of negative prehensions, which posit and attribute nothingness to actual entities in Whitehead’s cosmology, it would seem that while there are many elements involved in the creativity of organisms, it is largely by way of negative prehensions that the organism acquires its experiential perspective, namely, the contrast of experienced finitude and experienced infinitude necessary for physical and conceptual appetition and realization.



Scharfe: “Negative Prehension and the Creative Process,” Process Studies, 32:1 (Spring–Summer 2003), 94–105 (104). He is surely correct that negative prehension is at the bottom of what Whitehead calls “standpoint” (not “perspective”), but looking at negative prehension as concrescence only, and not also as transition, leads to an overly physical (and not adequately logical) reading of the idea of negative prehension. It is clear that Scharfe, like others, is thinking of biological beings as the model for negative prehension. That simply isn’t Whitehead’s concern. Elimination operates at every level.

72See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283.

73See Jones, Intensity, 94.

74Again, see Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283.

75See ibid., 285.

76See Bryson Brown and Graham Priest, “Chunk and Permeate, A Paraconsistent Inference Strategy, Part 1: The Infinitesimal Calculus,” Journal of Philosophical Logic, 33:4 (August 2004), 379–388. The authors show the self-contradictory character of the infinitesimal calculus, both assuming and denying the existence on infinitesimals. They employ a technique similar to that of Rescher and Brandom in The Logic of Inconsistency. The seventeenth-and eighteenth-century thinkers quarantined this inconsistency to keep it from interfering with the development of physical theory. The logical tools employed are both modal and model-theoretic.

77See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283.

78In contrast Sherburne’s account, Whitehead never says that a prehending or percipient actual entity has unmediated access to its “immediate predecessor.” The term “immediate” only refers to the actual entity which is most pervasive in the achievement/satisfaction of the actual entity whose world is under consideration. Finding the immediate predecessor of a given actual entity requires effort, and even when it is inferred, it ought not persuade ourselves we have experience of that predecessor as an individual. Sherburne’s assumption that the presence of the past in the actual entity is explained by the past history. Whitehead says the reverse: the actual entity under consideration is the explanation of the past. The past is mediated by the effort of the actual entity to evaluate it in concrescence. The account of that immediate predecessor in transition might look something like Sherburne’s account, but such stories would be beyond the limits of the philosophy of organism. See Sherburne, “The Process Perspective as Context for Educational Evaluation,” Process Studies, 20:2 (Summer 1991), 82. Sherburne confuses “memory” in a Bergsonian sense with Whitehead’s sense of the term “history,” as in the “history” of a physical route. This history may have a relationship to memory in a Bergsonian sense, it would require a great deal of effort to explain it.

79Whitehead, Process and Reality, 292, our emphasis.

80See Stephen J. Gould, The Structure of Evolutionary Theory (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 484–492.

81Whitehead, Process and Reality, 283.

82For a crucial instance of Whitehead’s use of the term “evolution” in this sense, see Process and Reality, 229. He does not always use the term in just this sense.





Chapter 9


1See Lewis, A Survey of Symbolic Logic, 5–37. Lewis was hostile to the idea of intensional logic and disdained treating logic as having an empirical basis, but his story will suffice as a summary. A detailed account of Castillon’s efforts (whose papers of 1797–1805 are being translated from French) is described by Arthur Shearman in The Development of Symbolic Logic (London: Williams and Norgate, 1906), 91–142. Unfortunately, Shearman, taken with the extensional thinking of Russell, dutifully “refutes” Castillon. We think he does no service to logic in the attempt.

2See Lewis, A Survey of Symbolic Logic, 10–11.

3See C. I. Gerhardt’s edition Gessamelte Werke von Leibniz, various publishers, 1859–1890; and Louis Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz (Paris: Felix Alcan, 1901).

4Charles Sanders Peirce, The Writings of Charles Sanders Peirce: A Chronological Edition, eds. Nathan Houser, et al. vol. 6 (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2000), 360–362.

5David Robert Crawford, “The Role of Diversity in Peirce’s Objections to Necessitarianism,” 5. This is an unpublished manuscript provided by Crawford to the authors, September 29, 2011. It is distilled from Crawford’s dissertation project at Duke University, 2011. This paper was presented at the Midwest Pragmatism Study Group in Indianapolis, September 25, 2011.

6Derek Malone-France does a solid job of marking out the distinction between what is “definite” and what is “determinate” within the modalities of actuality and possibility in Whitehead’s thought. See Malone-France, “Between Hartshorne and Molina: A Whiteheadian Conception of Divine Foreknowledge,” Process Studies, 39:1 (Spring-Summer 2010), 129–148.

7For Whitehead “type-token” ordering just repeats the errors of intuition that move extensionally from universal to particular. If Whitehead were to make the distinction, it would be “token-type,” since Whitehead’s thinking is intensional. We wouldn’t know what a type was at all without working outward from particular experience.

8Crawford, “Diversity,” 6. This distinction touches on the difference between cardinal and ordinal relations. See Cassirer, Substance and Function, 44–54. Russell admits his approach can’t handle ordinal relations and opts strictly for cardinal relations in Principles of Mathematics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903), chs. 24–25, esp. section 242. This discussion has an interesting relation to the difference between intensional and extensional logics. By 1938, Whitehead expressed serious doubts. See Modes of Thought, 105–108. Justus Buchler’s principle of ontological parity is, for us, restricted to possibilities as such.

9See Negri and Plato, Structural Proof Theory, especially the section entitled “Structural proof theory,” Kindle locations 60–106.

10We merely mention forcing as an illuminating example. “Counting” the layers of infinity is a perspectival matter that depends upon the tools that one allows in inquiry. The kinds and “countings” of infinity, when considering the structure of possibility, is the sort of idea that cannot be reduced to set theory plus the continuum hypothesis. For example, Melvin Fitting offers a more extended treatment in the context of intuitionistic logic in Intuitionistic Logic Model Theory and Forcing (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, 1969).

11We scare quote “semantics” here having no commitment to contemporary theories of truth. We do not expect a formalized concept of truth to do any heavy lifting. “Semantics” is a name for the relation between the language and the universe, however either happens to be defined. See Auxier, “On Klaus Ladstaetter’s ‘Liar-like Paradoxes and Meta-language Features’,” Southwest Philosophy Review 29:2 (July 2013), 25–28.

12See Abraham Robinson, Non-Standard Analysis (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1970).

13See Lewis, A Survey of Symbolic Logic, chapter V ff. For a more recent survey of modal logics from a mathematical perspective, see Robert Goldblatt, “Mathematical Modal Logic: A View of Its Evolution,” found in Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 7, eds. D. M. Gabbay and John Woods (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006), 1–98. For a detailed examination of the varieties of ways that have been developed within the theories of relevance logics moving beyond strict implication, see Alan Anderson and Nuel Belnap, Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and Necessity, 1 and 2 vols (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990 and 1992).

14Brown and Priest, “Chunk and Permeate,” 379–388.

15See Jouko Väänänen, Models and Games (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011); also Doets, Basic Model Theory, esp. ch. 3.

16“The line between universal algebra and model theory is sometimes fuzzy; our own usage is explained by the equation

universal algebra + logic = model theory.”



From Chang and Keisler, Model Theory, Kindle location 267. Note that Chang and Keisler use the term “universal algebra” in the later form standardized by G. Birkhoff, as the mathematical development of Boolean algebra plus lattice theory. While there are analogies with Whitehead’s universal algebra, these analogies are limited and the two are best viewed as different studies.

17See J. C. Beall, Logic: The Basics (New York: Routledge, 2010). Also see Auxier’s algebraic modeling of seven distinct senses of negation in his “Negation, Necessity and Logical Magic,” cited above. This is the style of analysis we adopt for explaining negative prehension.

18To avoid unnecessarily prejudicing matters, we avoid the use of the verb “to predicate.”

19The distinction is between the size of the natural numbers, as opposed to the higher order infinities, such as that of the real numbers.

20Whitehead, Process and Reality, 228.

21Ibid.

22See ibid., 248.

23This representation can be made subtler by incorporating a fuzzy logic into the characteristic function χ, so that there is a numerical continuum between the positive physical prehension and negative physical prehension. We content ourselves presently with only mentioning it in this note. See our forthcoming The Continuum of Possibility.

24Defenders of “strong emergence” may find our account unsatisfying because strong emergence implies something like χ(Γj[α]) with nothing before—it isn’t a contrast of anything. There is no Γj of which Γi is an arrangement. We don’t think strong emergence is ruled out by anything we have asserted, but it could not be experienced by complex societies of actual occasions (including humans). It would destroy them. So, strong emergence is not merely a diversity of status, in Whitehead’s terms, and if it belongs to our cosmic epoch, it is cataclysmic, an absolute disruption. For an account of strong emergence, see John Symons, “Physicalist Arguments against Emergence,” in The Future of Systematic Philosophy, eds. Randall E. Auxier and Douglas R. Anderson (forthcoming). See also our discussion of Terrence Deacon’s work on emergence in the notes below.

25Nicholas Rescher and Robert Brandom, The Logic of Inconsistency (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc., 1979).

26See for example, James W. Garson, Modal Logic for Philosophers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).

27On computer-oriented modal logic, see Patrick Blackburn, Maarten de Rijke, and Yde Venema, Modal Logic (Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). On complexity, see Hartley Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987).

28Whitehead, Process and Reality, 230.

29Ibid.

30Ibid., 290.

31Ibid., our emphasis.

32We suppose that this is another argument against strong emergence as a character of finite experience.

33Ibid., 290–291, our emphasis.

34Ibid., 266. There is much more to be said about the way that our interpretation illuminates Whitehead’s theory of judgment, but we will address that in our subsequent work.

35See our earlier reference to Wigner’s “Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in Modern Science.” Perhaps this point will satisfy defenders of strong emergence, and Peircean fans of abduction.

36Whitehead, Process and Reality, 291. We think that this is what Nobo was explaining in his book, that book is perhaps denser that Whitehead’s own account. We very much hope that Nobo was saying what we are saying.

37See for example, Samuel R. Delany’s essays in The Jewel-Hinged Jaw: Notes on the Language of Science Fiction (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2009 [1978]).

38Whitehead, Process and Reality, 291 (our emphasis).

39Ibid.

40Ibid., 292.

41For an accessible discussion of this aesthetic aspect of mathematics, see Davis and Hersh, The Mathematical Experience (Boston: Mariner Books, 1999). Among Whiteheadians, George Allan, for example, seems to miss this dimension in summarizing Modes of Thought. He emphasizes the aesthetic, quoting from Modes that, “philosophy is akin to poetry,” or that “philosophy is analogous to imaginative art.” See “Creating the Future,” Process Studies, 38:2 (Fall–Winter 2009), 225. But Allan misses the most salient part of Whitehead’s statement: “In each case there is reference to form beyond the direct meanings of words. Poetry allies itself to metre, philosophy to mathematic pattern.” (Modes of Thought, 174, our emphasis) Many overlook the aesthetic dimension of mathematics, and its role in Whitehead’s own modes of thought.

42Whitehead, Process and Reality, 220.

43Ibid., 221.





Chapter 10


1They probably do include a few pictures so that the technicians can recognize the parts of various systems beyond just their purely functional characteristics and connections. Such pictures play a small role in technical documentation.

2NASA’s official Voyager website contains many such breathtaking images: http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/imagesvideo/imagesbyvoyager.html, accessed April 23, 2013.

3See ch. 9.

4Hintikka: “Is Logic the Key to All Good Reasoning?” 35–57.

5See, for example, Jaakko Hintikka, “The Logic of Science as a Model-Oriented Logic,” Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association, 1 (1984), 177–185.

6On the failures of set theory, see Jaakko Hintikka, “Truth Definitions, Skolem Functions and Axiomatic Set Theory,” The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 4:3 (September 1998), 303–337. On the problems with proof-theoretic approaches see Hintikka, “Game-Theoretical Semantics as a Challenge to Proof Theory,” Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, 4:2 (2000), 127–141.

7Stephen Hawking, The Grand Design (New York: Bantam Books, 2010), 5.

8Whitehead, The Function of Reason, 58–59.

9Hawking, The Grand Design.

10Hawking mentions a few philosophers approvingly, John W. Carroll of North Carolina State University being the sole contemporary example. One assumes they have been kinder to him than he earned.

11Stephen Hawking, Black Holes and Baby Universes (New York: Bantam Books, 1994), 42–43.

12Stephen Hawking, A Brief History of Time (New York: Random House Publishing Group, 1988); Charles Sherover, The Human Experience of Time (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2000).

13Hawking, The Grand Design, 7.

14Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos, 5.

15Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, 127. An irony came to light many years later: the mass of Pluto is too small to cause the orbital anomalies that led to the search for Pluto. Instrumental measurements by the Voyager spacecraft revealed that the estimated masses of Uranus and especially Neptune were inaccurate. With these corrected estimates, the need for a “planet X” to account for the supposed discrepancies vanished—Perceval Lowell’s discovery was a matter of dumb luck. However, the method by which the error was discovered and fixed is within the explanatory framework Whitehead set out above. It was not enough to find a “better” description; adding a new parameter was not an option; what scientists wanted was a true and accurate explanation.

16See, for example, Lee Smolin, The Trouble with Physics (Boston: Mariner Books, 2007).

17Hawking, The Grand Design, 8.

18There are many critics of string-theory, but see for example Peter Woit, Not Even Wrong: The Failure of String Theory and the Search for Unity in Physical Law (New York: Basic Books, 2006), Woit opposes “model-centrism” as manifest among the string-theory enthusiasts currently dominating the field. See especially 93, 185, and 231–234. While Woit’s criticisms are philosophical in character, Woit is a working physicist, and his critiques are those of an established insider.

19Recall that the Lucasian Chair at Cambridge that Hawking held is in mathematics, not physics.

20Such triumphalism is not hard to find in the popular press. This story, from The Guardian, is a typical example: http://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2013/mar/21/european-space-agency-astronomy, verified January 15, 2015.

21Joseph Bracken speculates on ways of building connections between Whitehead’s metaphysics and string theory. See “Whiteheadian Metaphysics, General Relativity, and String Theory,” Process Studies, 43:2 (Fall–Winter 2014), 129–143. This is an unwise idea on many levels. The assertion that an actual entity (or in Bracken’s case, the achieved superset of a pretending occasion (133–135) is a physicalization of occasions, and we have argued is one of the primary errors interpreters of Whitehead have committed. Bracken’s connection of vibration in Whitehead’s thought with physics is unsatisfactory. For Whitehead “vibration” is fundamental form for creating organic identity. (One might recall the final chapter of his Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, Rhythms. See above, our chapter 3, on rhythm and periodicity.) Vibratory phenomena in physics have no such generative function, and stand out as only an empirical feature of our immediate epoch. A far greater problem with Bracken’s move is his choice of an untestable (empirically vacuous) collection of mathematized speculations as string theory for such a physicalization. Whitehead’s speculative philosophy is not bad physics.

22Bas Van Fraassen, The Scientific Image (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980), 8.

23Ibid., 10 (original emphasis).

24Ibid.

25See Bas Van Fraassen, The Empirical Stance (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002).

26This stance should be called “Humean” in this instance, since Van Fraassen’s stance is informed by the Kantian critiques of metaphysics. See ibid., Lecture 1.

27Cf. Van Fraassen’s Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991); contra Hawking, Van Fraassen does understand the relevant mathematics, even though he is a philosopher.

28Fraïssé’s work goes back to the early 1950’s, and Ehrenfeucht to the early 1960’s; the large-scale investigation of these methods in model theory did not really begin until the late 1980’s, almost a decade after The Scientific Image. See the bibliography of Doets, Basic Model Theory, cited above.

29See Doets, Basic Model Theory, 21.

30Van Fraassen, The Scientific Image, 11.

31Leemon McHenry argues that Whitehead’s cosmic epochs correspond to alternative “universes” as these are currently conceived in physics as part of the “multiverse” theory. See his “The Multiverse Conjecture: Whitehead’s Cosmic Epochs and Contemporary Cosmology,” Process Studies, 40:1 (Spring–Summer 2011), 5–24. We disagree. Cosmic epochs as Whitehead conceived them were not deployed in some higher-dimensional “space.” McHenry accepts the multiverse theory at face value, whereas Whitehead would be critical of such an approach. The multiverse theory was created by physicists laboring with a primitive metaphysics, treating relations as parasitic, while only relata are genuinely real. With such a view, the only way one can treat relations as significant is by reifying relata in the form of parallel universes. But once one takes relations themselves seriously, as Whitehead does, one does not need to hypostatize whole universes of “things” to account for those relations. Real relations of possibility and potentiality, for example, are sufficient unto themselves and do not require “trans-empirical support,” in James’s phrase.

32Whitehead, Process and Reality, 259 (our emphasis).

33Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 5.

34See Whitehead’s The Concept of Nature, The Tarner Lectures delivered at Trinity College 1919, published 1920.

35Philosophers are hardly innocent in this regard. Having inherited a mangled interpretation of Aristotle’s theory of the possible and the actual, they have extended it into the most absurd extremes. Today’s radical nominalists advance a “trope” theory that ignores of Peirce’s critiques of nominalism, even advancing the notion of “bare particulars” as empirically valid. See, for example, Relations and Predicates, eds. Herbert Hochberg and Kevin Mulligan (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2004), especially Donald W. Mertz’s “Objects as Hierarchical Structures: A Comprehensive Ontology,” 113–148. Mertz’s serious approach to relations is admirable, but needs a metaphysics to ground that relational approach.

36A phrase we take from Ernst Cassirer.

37Whitehead, Process and Reality, 3.

38Ibid., 22.

39See ibid., 4.

40Whitehead, Science in the Modern World, ix–x, our emphasis.

41An exception to this rule is the recent publication of Mark Dibben and Thomas Kelly, eds., Applied Process thought I: Initial Explorations in Theory and Research (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2008). Many of the contributions in this volume ranged beyond physics and into chemistry, biology, and the social sciences as well.

42Murray Code problematically attempts to “naturalize” Whitehead’s philosophy by shoe-horning everything “inside” nature. See Code, “On Whitehead’s Almost Comprehensive Naturalism,” 3–31. Code’s discussion slides back and forth between Whitehead’s natural philosophy and his metaphysics without properly bracketing the varying topics within their appropriate contexts. (Code, “On Whitehead’s Almost Comprehensive Naturalism,” 7–17.) Code embraces Ford’s attempt to temporalize eternal objects (Code, “On Whitehead’s Almost Comprehensive Naturalism,” 28.) Code misses the logical function of eternal objects, and the fact that they are eternal precisely because temporality has no bearing upon them. The temporal is purely natural in its significant limitations, having no role in the broader considerations of Whitehead’s metaphysics. The same error dogs many Whitehead interpreters who make time explanatory of process, rather than process explanatory of time. This is a kind of “naturalistic fallacy,” which attempts to move the quantum of explanation inside nature, and thus make process parasitic upon that which is to be explained. A philosophical naturalism that takes nature as given, in any but the radical form we are arguing for, is guilty of, as Russell famously quipped, evincing all the “advantages of theft over honest toil.” (Bertrand Russell: Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, [New York: Macmillan, 1919], 88.) While Code acknowledges that Whitehead’s thoroughgoing “radically revised” empiricism is “evident” (Code, “On Whitehead’s Almost Comprehensive Naturalism,” 11–13), he fails to see that this is radical empiricism which, in Whitehead’s philosophy of science, expresses itself as what we are calling here “radical realism.” So Code is ultimately trying to force Whitehead upon a procrustean bed whose “nature” is not even of Whitehead’s own making.

43See Michael Friedman, A Parting of the Ways: Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 2000).

44Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 32. For an example of space as an arbitrary convention, see Hans Reichenbach, The Philosophy of Space and Time (New York: Dover Publications, 1957).

45Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, 91, our emphasis.

46Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 22.

47Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 40.

48Ibid., 45.

49Van Fraassen himself notes that the idea of “literal” meaning is originally a theological one, and thus argues that a rough and ready (our phrase) understanding of the term is sufficient. See The Scientific Image, 10. We consider this a serious flaw in his argument.

50Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 39.

51Ibid., vi.

52Whitehead, The Interpretation Of Science: Selected Essays, 29.

53Ibid., 192.

54Ibid., 193.

55Ibid., 194. See our discussion of the relation between theory and hypothesis in chapters 1–2, and the role of “intention” in establishing a model in this chapter.

56Whitehead, Enquiry into the Principles of Natural Knowledge, vii.

57Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 3. We will take up the far-reaching implications of this view in the next chapter.

58Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 5.

59Ibid., 20.

60William James, Essays in Radical Empiricism (New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1922), 42 (original emphasis).

61Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 13.

62Ibid., 14.

63Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 15, (our emphasis).

64Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 14.

65Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 62.

66Ibid., 63. These two quotes face one another on opposite pages. Whitehead consciously said each in the context of the other.

67Ibid., 4.

68Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 20. This passage bears heavily upon the kind of naturalism we are advocating.

69Ibid., 5.

70“Sense-awareness” is that component of sense perception that has a brute “there-ness” that is in no way a part of thought; see The Concept of Nature, 4. When we use the term perception, please bear in mind that we never mean to include awareness. But the presence of this brute factor is obviously caught up with the realism of Whitehead’s philosophy.

71Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 13.

72Whitehead uses the example of a yardstick between York and Edinburgh; see ibid., 50.

73Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, chapter III. Numerous objections might be raised to this part of Whitehead’s argument. Our experiences of the uniformities of time and space might be an artifact of the local nature of those experiences (recalling the difference between our immediate epoch and our cosmic epoch). But does Whitehead need anything more than the epistemological necessity of such uniformities and their “pragmatic a priori”? We think not. Were it shown that such uniformities do not hold on a cosmological scale, then the possibility of knowledge of such cosmological relations would collapse (which is Whitehead’s point). We need a theory of cosmic epochs to do cosmology. For a more detailed discussion of this subject in its scientific context, see Herstein, Whitehead and the Measurement Problem of Cosmology.

74Whitehead notes the difference between these particular necessary and contingent relations track very closely those between internal and external forms of relatedness. In Process and Reality, the theory of extension takes over the development of the formal uniformities, and Whitehead explicitly identifies it as the theory of internal relations—more precisely, the theory of the internalization of relatedness.

75See the first two chapters of The Concept of Nature, chapter 2 of The Principle of Relativity, the first half of Science in the Modern World.

76Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 13.

77Van Fraassen, The Scientific Image, ch. 5.

78Whitehead addresses this without naming names; see Adventures of Ideas, 128 ff.

79Peter Achinstein, The Book of Evidence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 148 (our emphasis).

80Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 13.

81Ibid., 13–14.

82Getting traction from vague terms is essentially the topic of Achinstein’s book. However (Achinstein 2001, chapter 7) is especially relevant. Whitehead’s discussion in chapter one of The Concept of Nature is extremely sensitive to the issues of context and the ways in which terms succeed or fail to refer to real features of the world.

83Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 40.

84The notion of “simplicity,” is deeply intertwined with the ideas of relevance and abstraction. One of Whitehead’s most repeated epigrams was “Seek simplicity, and mistrust it.” See also W. V. Quine, “On Simple Theories of a Complex World,” Synthese 15:1 (1963), 103–106.

85Tarski enthusiasts to the contrary notwithstanding.





Chapter 11


1Richard Ely, The Religious Availability of Whitehead’s God (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1942). See also Paul G. Kuntz, “Can Whitehead Be Made a Christian Philosopher?” Process Studies, 12:4 (Winter 1982), 232–242. Kuntz makes a thorough survey of the debate up to the time this article was written. Also see R. Maurice Barineau, “Whitehead and Genuine Evil,” Process Studies, 19:3 (Fall 1990), 181–188. The issue of radical evil is a serious test case for process philosophy. See also the work on Whitehead in the American Journal of Theology and Philosophy by Donald Crosby, George Allan, Jerome Stone, Jerry Sonneson, Nancy Frankenberry, David Connor, and others, have been careful not to over-stretch Whitehead’s religious connections.

2See William T. Myers, “Hartshorne, Whitehead, and the Religious Availability of God,” The Personalist Forum, 14:2 (Fall 1998), 172–190.

3Per the distinction between process theology and Whitehead’s concept of god: Process theology can enter into a dialogue with, say, evangelicalism, as has been exemplified in a special focus section of Process Studies, 37:1 (Spring–Summer 2008), 104–183. However, none of the five authors in this section mentions or makes any reference to Whitehead, and rightly. This is only one among many issues that arise from conflating process theology and Whitehead’s discussions of “God.” When Whitehead mentions the God of religion, it is usually with a sense of horror rather than hope.

4See Auxier’s analysis of Robert C. Neville’s book Ultimates: Philosophical Theology, Volume 1 (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2013), called “The Sherpa and the Sage: Neville on Possibility and Determinateness,” American Journal of Theology and Philosophy 36:1 (January 2015), 37–50.

5This point has been very well made by John Shook. We will take it up shortly.

6There are many competing versions of evolutionary naturalism. Most get the concept of “evolution” wrong, in our view. See Auxier, “The Death of Darwinism and the Limits of Evolution,” in Philo, 9:2 (Fall–Winter 2006), 193–220; also “The Decline of Evolutionary Naturalism in Later Pragmatism,” for Pragmatism: From Progressivism to Postmodernism, eds. D. DePew and R. Hollinger (New York: Praeger Books, 1995), 180–207; and “Evolutionary Time, and the Creation of the Space of Life,” in Space, Time, and the Limits of Human Understanding, eds. Shyam Wuppuluri and Giancarlo Ghirardi (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2016), ch. 31. Dewey’s evolutionary naturalism is really the model. We think Larry Hickman’s interpretation of Dewey’s “evolutionary naturalism” is actually better than Dewey’s view, which is more varied and confused than Hickman’s rendering. See chs. 1 and 2 of Hickman’s Philosophical Tools for Technological Culture (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2001).

7Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), 380.

8See Royce, The Religious Aspect of Philosophy (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1885).

9Among the non-religious, even Larry Hickman sees this as consistent with Dewey’s view. See Philosophical Tools, 109–110. In this regard Hickman departs from many admirers of Dewey.

10See Whitehead, Religion in the Making, 116–117.

11This level of generality is called “contributionism” by Hartshorne; he aims to be describing both his own and Whitehead’s view with that term. We think Hartshorne is conflating transition and concrescence with something more “ultimate” in Whitehead’s account. See Hartshorne discusses this in numerous places, but a clear and brief account is in the original “Introduction” to Philosophers of Process, Hartshorne, “The Development of Process Philosophy,” in Philosophers of Process, eds. Douglas Browing and William T. Myers (New York: Fordham University Press, 1998), esp. 400–402. See Kant, Prolegommena to Any Future Metaphysics, trans. Lewis White Beck (Indianapolis: Bobbe-Merrill, 1962), sections 14 and 17.

12Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 14–15.

13Whitehead, The Principle of Relativity, 39. Cf. Enquiry, 15.

14Some additional discussion on this topic that bears upon our argument is found in the essays in How Successful Is Naturalism? ed. Georg Gasser (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2007).

15John Shook, “Varieties of Twentieth Century American Naturalism,” The Pluralist, 6:2 (Summer 2011), 14.

16Shook, “Varieties of Twentieth Century American Naturalism,” 14.

17Royce is an example. He rejects naturalism because of a deflationary view of the scope and authority of philosophical reflection. See Randell Auxier, Time, Will and Purpose (Chicago: Open Court, 2013), chs. 2–4.

18See Whitehead’s discussion in The Concept of Nature, esp. 3–6.

19Shook notes the proximity of Nagel to synoptic pluralism; see “Varieties of Twentieth Century American Naturalism,” 14.

20Mystical experience provides an interesting test case, but it is beyond the scope of the current chapter. See Auxier, Time, Will and Purpose, chs. 3, 5, and 6.

21Shook, “Varieties of Twentieth Century American Naturalism,” 15.

22Ibid.

23Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, vi–vii.

24Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, 2 (all italics and bold italics are ours).

25Shook’s seven viable naturalisms are: Eliminative physicalism, Reductive physicalism, Exclusivist liberal physicalism, Non-reductive physicalism, Exclusivist liberal pluralism, Perspectival pluralism, and Synoptic pluralism. We are concerned with the first three, since they offer interpretations of Darwinism.

26Thomas Nagel’s Mind and Cosmos (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012) provides a sad example of what happens to a thinker who dares to question the orthodoxy of dogmatic narrow naturalists. The vehemence of his subsequent mobbing in print and in gossip is both shameful and revealing. Philosophers of the mainstream are nothing if not superstitious about the limits of nature. Nagel was an unlikely martyr and evidently failed to anticipate this contumely and vituperation. For scientifically respectable challenge to Darwinian orthodoxy, see, Robert G. B. Reid, Biological Emergences: Evolution by Natural Experiment (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007).

27Michael J. Behe, Darwin’s Black Box (New York: The Free Press, 1996). Auxier responds to these sorts of arguments in “The Death of Darwinism,” cited above. See also in Magda Costa Carvalho and M. Patrao Neves, “The Bio-Philosophical ‘Insufficiency’ of Darwinism for Henri Bergson’s Evolutionism,” Process Studies, 41:1 (Spring-Summer 2012), 133–149.

28This is a long-standing (but repeatedly debunked) favorite of intelligent design enthusiasts. See for example http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CB/CB200_1.html, accessed August 17, 2016.

29An issue we do not have space to deal with directly is that of “emergence.” While this topic has always simmered in Western thought, it has recently come back to the fore with Terrence Deacon’s Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2012). While Deacon Acknowledges that his background in Whitehead’s thought is minimal, he does offer some comments which merit a reply, but which exceed our available space.

30Nagel’s argument was hardly an anti-scientific bromide. Michael Chorost, in a rare thoughtful review of Nagel’s book, says that in Mind and Cosmos the argument is weaker than it should have been. Chorost mentions numerous scientists, who are publicly hostile to creationism and intelligent design, have argued for points similar to Nagel’s. Yet Nagel makes no use of such scientists or their arguments. See Chorost, Michael, “Where Thomas Nagel Went Wrong,” Chronicle Review, Chronicle of Higher Education, 13 May, 2013. http://chronicle.com/article/Where-Thomas-Nagel-Went-Wrong/139129/, accessed August 19, 2016.

31McDermott, Works of William James, 136. See Auxier’s discussion of the relation between conjunctive and disjunctive relations in James in Time, Will, and Purpose, ch. 7.





Chapter 12


1Hartshorne says, for example: “I never cared for [Whitehead’s] ‘eternal objects’, as a definite yet primordial multitude of ‘forms’ of feeling or sensation.” We think Hartshorne is deeply confused as to what an eternal object is for Whitehead. Unfortunately, he passed both his confusion and his disdain on to several generations of Whitehead scholars. Hartshorne, Whitehead’s Philosophy: Selected Essays, 1935–1970 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1972), 2. Hartshorne similarly rejects certain other central doctrines of Whitehead in this place and elsewhere.

2With the Claremont theologians there are conventions of the “empirical,” “rational,” and “speculative” methods of Whitehead interpretation. Our notion of “radical empiricism” (as related to radical realism) does not conform to these (now) orthodox categories. But William James radicalized these categories almost a century before the Claremont convention was framed. See the special issue of Process Studies, eds. Delwin Brown and Sheila Devaney, 19:2 (Summer 1990), esp. 75–77, in which these categories were articulated and debated. We respect the Claremont discussion and grant that Whitehead’s interpreters do fall into these categories, but we disagree that any of these categories adequately represents Whitehead’s actual views.

3This phenomenon of denying negative prehension in God followed Hartshorne wherever he went—students at the University of Chicago, Emory, and the University of Texas adopted Hartshorne’s predilections. For example, see the article by Rem B. Edwards, a student of Hartshorne at Emory in the early 1960s, who explicitly attributes this style of reading Whitehead to his training under Hartshorne, in “Process Thought and the Spaciness of Mind,” Process Studies, 19:3 (Fall 1990), 156–166, esp. 160. Edwards, like so many others, confuses space and extension. This confusion is related to his understanding of possibility.

4The Claremont School includes Marjorie Suchocki, John Cobb, and David Ray Griffin, among those who will say “no negative prehension in God,” although they differ in many ways. Hartshorne contended that it should have been Whitehead’s view, allowing it was not. We think it matters very little whether Whitehead thought there was no negative prehension in God, since, in our view, Whitehead’s God was never intended to be the God of religion or a personal being. Hartshorne’s God, on the other hand, is at the least “religiously available,” to use the phrase of Bill Myers, if not quite the God that would appeal to a devout Calvinist. See Myers, “Hartshorne, Whitehead, and the Religious Availability of God,” 172–190. Myers surveys the literature on this debate from 1942 to 1998. The reach of Hartshorne’s influence includes the University of Chicago professors of Divinity Bernard Meland and Bernard Loomer, who had many students themselves, including Creighton Peden, Frederick Ferré, Delwin Brown, William A. Beardslee, and Edgar Towne, who, wise in their own way, are well removed from Whitehead. See, for instance, Beadslee’s narrative, “Process Thought: On the Borders of Hermeneutics and Theology,” Process Studies 19:4 (Winter 1990), 230–234. See also Jan Van der Veken’s narrative about his indebtedness to this school in “Process Thought from a European Perspective,” Process Studies 19:4 (Winter 1990), 240–247.

5See Robert C. Neville, God the Creator: On the Transcendence and Presence of God (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968), 16–22, 138–140 (for analogy). Neville employs substantially the same account of analogy in The Truth of Broken Symbols (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1996), see xvi n; and in Ultimates: Philosophical Theology Volume 1, 173–184.

6See Robert C. Neville, Creativity and God: A Challenge to Process Philosophy (New York: The Seabury Press, 1980), chs. 1 and 2. Neville makes it clear that he basically agrees with Ford’s interpretation, as it applies to theology at least, in these chapters.

7Neville indicates his awareness that Whitehead can be read (contra Ford) as a radical empiricist, who “could give up the task of [necessitated] ontology and limit himself to [descriptive] metaphysics.” (God the Creator, 131). But Neville chooses to engage Whitehead primarily through the mediation of the most popular interpretations of the time (in 1968, that was Christian, Lowe, and Ford was beginning to make his influence felt), leaving aside the very important question of whether Whitehead was ontologically committed, in the sense of metaphysical necessity, to the narrative he provided in various works. As Neville puts it: “Metaphysics without ontology would prohibit a philosophical account of a transcendent God, for God would be construed either as one of the elements of the metaphysical system or as beyond it altogether.” (Ibid., cf. Eternity and Time’s Flow, 67–68). We could not agree more. Still theologians cannot afford to be ignorant of philosophy, but philosophers are engaged in an entirely human activity which needs no assistance from theology. Relative to Neville’s categoreal scheme, then (summarized in his The Cosmology of Freedom [New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974], 30–51, and revised for in Ultimates, 193–244), he takes metaphysics to have broader application than the study of cosmology, due to the exemplification of metaphysical categories in every experience, actual or possible. We take cosmology to be the broader field of investigation because it is not restricted by the order of human reflective thought (as philosophy is, including metaphysics), but only by the idea of nature, as argued in the previous chapter. Cosmology is empirical

8See Auxier’s “Note on God” in the appendix to the 1996 edition of Religion in the Making.

9See Neville, God the Creator, 264–266; and also his Creativity and God, esp. ch. 4, 48–76.

10See Auxier’s essay “God, Process and Persons: Charles Hartshorne and Personalism,” Process Studies 27:3–4 (Fall–Winter 1998), 175–199.

11See Whitehead, Religion in the Making (New York: Fordham University Press, 1996), 66, 74–75, 86–87.

12Whitehead’s discussions of personal and impersonal “groupings” of occasions leaves us with more questions than answers. See especially Process and Reality, corrected edition (New York: Free Press, 1979), 34–36; and Adventures of Ideas, 201–208.

13See Neville, God the Creator, 264–273.

14The crucial passages from Process and Reality show that Whitehead did not assume or assert unity as a requirement for personal order, or even person. There is no way to reconcile such an assumption with what Whitehead does say about enduring objects that “enjoy” a personal order, or are persons. He says that enduring objects, such as “the life of an electron or a man” are subordinate to the actual entities that are associated in them, and that “personal order” comes in strands in enduring objects with such genetic relations (see Process and Reality, 92). He denies the immediate unity of any personal order with its past (Process and Reality, 105). “Person” is relational all the way down, so there is no problem of the unity of the person. Person isn’t unified. See also Process and Reality, 34–35, 90, 107, 119, 161, 181. The one statement that Whitehead makes in Process and Reality that seems contrary, appears on the next to last page of the book (350). It must be read in light of all of these earlier discussions of personal order; note that “peculiar completeness” does not require or imply unity, and leaves open the mystery of person.

15R. J. Connelly, Whitehead vs. Hartshorne: Basic Metaphysical Issues (Washington, DC: University Press of America, 1981). See also Connelly’s “Necessary Order in the Primordial Nature of God in Whitehead,” Philosophy Research Archives, 8 (1982), 513–519; and “Creativity and the Eternal Object in Whitehead,” Philosophy Research Archives, 5 (1979), 587–610.

16For instance, see Process and Reality, 350.

17Connelly, Whitehead vs. Hartshorne, 137.

18See Auxier, “Why 100 Years Is Forever: Hartshorne’s Theory of Immortality,” Personalist Forum, 14:2 (Fall 1998), 109–132; discussion 133–140. Daniel Dombrowski responds to that account as if Auxier actually holds the view there described. Auxier does indicate that the view is not his own but is rather the view he thinks Hartshorne should have defended so as to be consistent with his own deepest principles. See Dombrowski, Divine Beauty: The Aesthetics of Charles Hartshorne (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2004), 185–189.

19See Auxier “Why 100 Years Is Forever: Hartshorne’s Theory of Immortality,” cited above. Hartshorne hammered out the details of this issue with Edgar Sheffield Brightman in their correspondence; see Hartshorne and Brightman on God, Process and Persons: The Correspondence, 1922–1945, ed. R. E. Auxier and M. Y. A. Davies (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2001).

20Connelly, Whitehead vs. Hartshorne, 158.

21See Robert C. Neville, Eternity and Time’s Flow, 67ff.

22For greater detail, see Auxier’s essays “Concentric Circles: An Exploration of Three Concepts in Process Metaphysics,” Southwest Philosophy Review, 7:1 (January 1991), 151–172; and “Bowne on Time, Evolution and History,” The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 12:3 (1998), 181–203. Aristotle has a robust account of negation that gives it ontological authority. That view is resisted by radical empiricists.

23Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1015b10–15.

24Aristotle, De Interpretatione, 22b8–9.

25For example, in De Interpretatione, Aristotle works out the notion of logical possibility in terms of “possible to be” and “impossible to be,” thereby establishing the connection between logical possibility and existence. This connection is the one whereby “possibility” gets its metaphysical weight. See 22a1–40.

26See Neville, God the Creator, 90 ff.

27Richard Creel rightly attributes this view of Hartshorne’s to his strong reliance on Peirce’s views regarding continuity. The view is not Whiteheadian, since Whitehead, with James, Bergson, and other radical empiricists, does not privilege continuity over discontinuity (nor vice versa). Creel also rightly notices the unsatisfactoriness of Hartshorne’s view of possibility as “vague.” Vague possibility is supposed to do the work of making a metaphysical continuum, but Whitehead never suggests possibility is vague. Eternal objects have a high degree of structure. See Creel, “Continuity, Possibility, and Omniscience,” Process Studies 12:4 (Winter 1982), 209–231.

28See Auxier’s “Immediacy and Purpose in Brightman’s Philosophy,” in The Hartshorne-Brightman Correspondence (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2000), 132–154.

29See Larry Hickman’s article “Why Pierce Didn’t Like Dewey’s Logic,” Southwest Philosophy Review, 3 (1986), 178–189.

30Neville acknowledges also that whether possibilities are created or uncreated is the crux of the argument. See God the Creator, 145–146. Lango has an interesting take on this issue, with which we agree, in part. He says:

Each eternal object [individually] in the actual world of an actual entity has the potentiality for being prehended by that actual entity (application of the category of universal relativity to eternal objects). Whereas each created entity is created (i.e., comes into being), each eternal object is eternal (i.e., does not come into being but is always in being). Therefore, although not all created entities are in the actual world of that actual entity (because not all created entities have come into being when that actual entity comes into being), all eternal objects are in the world of that and every actual entity (because all eternal objects are always in being). (PR 34) However, since some eternal objects are more relevant than others to that actual entity, each eternal object is prehended either positively or negatively by that actual entity.

(Lango, Whitehead’s Ontology, 25)



As far as this goes, it is in agreement with our argument given earlier in chapters 7–9, although Lango neglects the important fact that eternal objects ingress only in ordered groups. Lango wanders away from this solid summary when confronting the difficult matter of what it means for eternal objects to be “uncreated.” He continues: “Moreover, an eternal object is a derivative entity because it cannot exist apart from actual entities but must ingress into some actual entity somewhere.” (Ibid.) This assertion is (1) unknowable to us, even if it were correct (we would need a position outside of actuality in order to know whether possibilities can exist or cannot exist apart from actuality); and (2) Lango here contradicts Whitehead’s insistence upon the independence of eternal objects from both God and the actual world of any given actual entity. Whitehead never makes assertions about the whole of actuality as such—it is forbidden both by his method and by the ontological principle, including the requirement that we refrain from making assertions about the whole of eternal objects relative to the whole of actuality. Lango then says, “A conceptual prehension is abstracted from physical prehensions of actual entities into which that eternal object ingresses.” (Ibid.) It is true that this is the method whereby we (inquirers) get at eternal objects, as we have demonstrated in our discussion of physical prehension in chapter 8, but it does not imply that what we learn about possibilities thereby exhausts the whole of what possibility is. Then Lango says: “In short, each eternal object has the potentiality for and realizes a determinate bond of positive or negative conceptual prehension with every actual entity.” (Ibid.) Here Lango uses the term “determinate” where “definite” would have been correct, and he defines the possible by way of its connection to the actual by potentiality. This is the view we have shown to be inadequate in chapter 9. The uncreated character of the possible, and Whitehead’s insistence that the order exhibited in possibilities is determinate order (what we have called “constellations” of eternal objects, as distinct from mere definite “collections,” which can be reduced to their relation to the actual in the fashion Lango has done), together indicate an irreducible independence of the possible from the actual that should render us ontologically contrite and which demands the greatest care when possibility is under discussion. Lango asserts that Whitehead “neglects the relations of eternal objects to one another.” (27) We do not agree, entirely; one could say that Whitehead gives less attention to this than he should, or is less explicit than one might hope, but our view is that Part IV is understandable as an analysis of possibilities in relation. So, when Lango asks “Can the problem of finding a general relation [among eternal objects] be dealt with in abstraction from particular instances?” (27), we reply, “yes, and only in that way, and that is Part IV.”

31Whitehead uses the terms “general potentialities” for possibilities, and “real potentialities” for what we are calling “potentialities.” See Process and Reality, 65. In several places Hartshorne also makes this same distinction between “real potentialities” or “real possibilities” (he uses potentiality and possibility interchangeably), and logical possibilities. See for example, Reality as Social Process (New York: Hafner, 1971), 97–100.

32See Process and Reality, 22, 219.

33See Process and Reality, 214. Here Whitehead connects what we have said in earlier chapters about transition and concrescence with the relative independence of eternal objects: “To sum up, there are two species of process, macroscopic process, and microscopic process. The macroscopic process is the transition from attained actuality to actuality in attainment; while the microscopic process is the conversion of conditions which are merely real into determinate actuality. The former process effects the transition from the ‘actual’ to the ‘merely real’; and the latter process effects the growth from the real to the actual. The former process is efficient; the latter process is teleological.” Notice that Whitehead uses the term “merely real” to include what we are calling the “might-have-been,” or any other possibilities considered apart from their relations to the actual (i.e., their determinate order, which is not yet definite). He is not asserting the absolute independence of possibility (eternal objects), but insisting that possibilities are real, even if “merely” so, when we consider them without actively relating them to the actual.

34See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 41, for the fast explanation of negative prehension; see our chapters 8 and 9 for the longer account.

35There is an important sense in which the might-have-been is immediately experienced, within the unfolding of a single durational epoch. But to discuss the unfolding of such a durational epoch, one also needs a phenomenological or descriptive method that Whitehead does not provide. It isn’t clear whether such a description could easily be brought into any kind of Whiteheadian metaphysics, and certainly not into his cosmology. We think he would probably deny any immediate experience of the might-have-been. Excluded conceptual feeling is about as absent from immediate experience as anything can be. Whatever excluded conceptual feeling is, it isn’t theory. Taking theory to be a substitute for excluded conceptual feeling is what model-centrists do, as does anyone else who assumes an abstraction can compensate for what is missing in conceptual feeling.

36See Process and Reality, 226–227, 248.

37The modal structures under discussion here are much richer than the stripped-down propositional form called “counter-factuals.” We are speaking of constellations of such, and in their determinate independence (as “merely real) of the actual. No theory of counter-factuals attempts such breadth.

38We have adapted this example from Josiah Royce in The Principles of Logic (New York: Philosophical Library, 1961), 17–18.

39For more detail, see Auxier, “Dewey on Religion and History,” Southwest Philosophy Review, 6:1 (January 1990), 45–58.

40See Process and Reality, 199–206.

41Whitehead, Process and Reality, 317.

42Ibid., 237; cf. 85, 232.

43Ibid., 161.

44Ibid., 243; cf. 267.

45See C. S. Peirce, Collected Papers, eds. C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1931–1935), 1.52–53, 1.183. Philosophers have great difficulty with this aspect of mathematical thinking. Compare Peirce’s point with what Cassirer says:

In the field of mathematics itself the new conception [of non-Euclidean geometries] made its way quite rapidly and, it would appear, without any violent internal dissension. By contrast, however, the misgivings encountered in the realm of philosophy were all the stronger. Notable thinkers not only entertained serious doubts as to the admissibility on non-Euclidean geometry, but even declared it an absurdity which philosophy must resist at all the means at its command. These different attitudes can be explained by the distinctive character and the traditional assumptions, respectively, of mathematical and philosophical thought. Mathematics is, and always will be, a science of pure relations, and in its modern form it is precisely this feature that has become more and more pronounced. When figures of any sort are mentioned and their nature is investigated the inquiry is never into their actual existence but into their relation to one another, in which alone mathematics is interested. Indeed, in so far as mathematical thought is concerned their existence does not matter.



Cassirer, The Problem of Knowledge, Volume 4, 25–26; cf. 29, 35. It isn’t difficult to understand how model-centric thinking spread from mathematics into physics and other physical sciences based on this tendency.

46See Hickman, “Why Pierce Didn’t Like Dewey’s Logic,” 178–189.

47See Whitehead, Process and Reality, 22.

48See Josiah Royce, The Conception of God, ed. G. H. Howison (New York: Macmillan, 1897), 4–22. See also, Auxier, Time, Will and Purpose, chs. 5–6.

49Donald Viney has summed up these arguments as part of a single “cumulative argument” for the existence of God, an interpretation Hartshorne enthusiastically endorsed. See Viney, Charles Hartshorne and the Existence of God (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1985).

50See Dwayne Tunstall’s critique of Royce on this point in his “Concerning the God that Is Only a Concept: A Marcellian Critique of Royce,” Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 42:3 (Summer 2006), 394–416. Auxier’s take on this problem is in chapters 4–8 of Time, Will and Purpose.

51Hartshorne distances himself from Whitehead’s concept of eternal objects in many places, but see “Introduction” in Whitehead’s Philosophy: Selected Essays, 1935–1970.

52Hartshorne says this in a number of places. See for instance, Hartshorne and Brightman on God, Process and Persons, 90.

53Hartshorne and Brightman on God, Process and Persons, 55–56.

54See Donald W. Sherburne, A Key to Whitehead’s, 42–43.

55See Auxier’s essay, “Immediacy and Purpose in Brightman’s Philosophy,” in God, Process and Persons, 132–154.

56William James suggests a number of situations in his famous essay “The Will to Believe” in which a relatively unsparing radical empiricism may allow for belief beyond what particular experience will warrant.

57Hartshorne and Brightman on God, Process and Persons, 24–25, 58–59, 64–66, etc.

58See for example, Charles Hartshorne, Aquinas to Whitehead: Seven Centuries of Metaphysics of Religion (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1976), 6 ff.

59Peirce, Whitehead, and Cassirer all handle this idea effectively: the supposed “laws” of nature must have evolved (Peirce, Whitehead), or our concept of nature is the ground of our capacity to think about impersonal law-like order (Whitehead), or all objects of scientific knowing are products of a long cultural development, not a priori features of the universe itself (Cassirer, Whitehead). On the relation between Whitehead’s views and Cassirer’s on the cultural embeddedness of science, see Auxier, “Ernst Cassirer and Susanne Langer,” A Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought, eds. Michel Weber and Will Desmond, vol. 2 (Frankfurt am Main: Ontos Verlag, 2008), 552–570.

60See Connelly, Whitehead vs. Hartshorne, 137.

61All pantheists are regarded as impersonalists in the historical discourse of personalism. Pantheism is simply one step short of materialism, in the view of personalists. See Jan Olof Bengtsson, The Worldview of Personalism (Oxford: Oxford University, 2006) for the fuller account and arguments.





Chapter 13


1Whitehead, Modes of Thought, 100.

2We are reminded here of Iris Murdoch’s brilliant Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals.

3This view is defended most notably by Donald Sherburne and George Allan.

4Of course, Hartshorne has many able philosophical defenders of his own, such as Daniel Dombrowski and Donald Wayne Viney. Auxier has expressed his independent interpretation of Hartshorne elsewhere, and it is with that work we would expect Hartshorne’s defenders to take issue. Here we are concerned only with Hartshorne’s influence on the interpretation of Whitehead. Hartshorne had a powerful way of convincing people there was something amiss about the idea of eternal objects in Whitehead, and that conviction spread far and wide through his student John Cobb. Ironically, Richard Rorty was persuaded to write his master’s thesis on that problem under Hartshorne’s direction.

5We have already noted that Jorge Nobo is an exception to this, as are Jude Jones and George Lucas.

6Suchocki’s view of the process God is complex. On one side, she asserted in her “Intellectual Autobiography” at the 2008 meeting of the Highlands Institute for American Religious and Philosophical Thought (Assisi, Italy, August 4–7) that there is no negative prehension in God and she defended this thesis (clearly a part of the Hartshorne “correction” of Whitehead’s God that Hartshorne initiated no later than 1948 in The Divine Relativity). But in 2010, Suchocki published an article critical of this “correction” by Hartshorne, and calling for a re-examination of Whitehead’s actual view of God. That view was reiterated at the annual meeting of the same group in 2016. But the list of thinkers she supplies as following Whitehead instead of Hartshorne on the question of God consists mainly of people we would regard as following Hartshorne, or people who completely misunderstand Whitehead, such as Ford. Perhaps Suchocki became aware that the process God defended by the Claremont School was more Hartshorne’s than Whitehead’s and became intrigued with alternatives. We applaud the call in 2010 for a re-examination of Whitehead’s conception of God without Hartshorne’s “corrections.” We believe we have taken up Suchocki’s challenge throughout this book, and especially in the final chapters. See her “The Dynamic God,” in Process Studies, 39:1 (Spring-Summer 2010), 39–58. David Connor has effectively responded to Suchocki’s effort to solve a very real problem. See his essay “The Plight of a Theoretical Deity: A Response to Suchocki’s ‘The Dynamic God’,” Process Studies, 41:1 (Spring-Summer 2012), 111–132, especially see 113.

7See Auxier, “Why 100 Years Is Forever: Hartshorne and Immortality,” cited above.

8See Auxier’s “God, Process and Persons: Charles Hartshorne and Personalism,” cited above, for the full account of this claim.

9See Borden Parker Bowne’s penultimate chapter, “The Failure of Impersonalism,” in Personalism (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1908), 217–267. See also Auxier, “Bowne on Time, Evolution and History,” 181–203.

10See Auxier’s “God as Catholic and Personal,” International Philosophical Quarterly, 40:2 (June 2000), 235–252.

11Suchocki asserts that the “primordial nature” of God is “dynamic,” but that cannot be maintained unless one confuses possibility with potentiality in Whitehead. See Suchocki, “The Dynamic God,” 40–41. Catherine Keller, by contrast, does not seek to be a systematic theologian, preferring narrative and re-mythologizing to structural and formal analyses, but her pre-occupation with issues of creativity and power have the effect, in her writing, of treating possibility as functionally the same thing as potency. Her book Face of the Deep (London: Routledge, 2003), Part IV Creatio ex profundis, is as close as she comes to offering an ontology. It is packed with great ideas and information, as her books are, but we hold out for an understanding of process that does not conflate potentiality and possibility.

12See Rorty and Vattimo, The Future of Religion (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005). Roman Madzia has nicely summarized it in his essay “Only a God Can Save Us: Richard Rorty’s Philosophy of Social Hope Beyond Secularism,” in Richard Rorty and Beyond, eds. Randall E. Auxier and Krzsztof Piotr Skowroński (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, forthcoming). Madzia says:

The death of the God of metaphysics, as it turns out, does not undermine religion as such but re-enables us to grow mature and take it [religion] seriously again. What the death of the God of the Western metaphysical tradition has shown us is that authentic religious belief does not consist in knowledge (i.e., a series of propositions) or incontestable proofs of God’s existence but, on the contrary, authentic belief can only grow out of taking the evidence for atheism with all due seriousness, acknowledging the fact of the disenchantment of the world, ending up with a numbing facticity of absence of God, and subsequently deciding to go beyond it by means of hope alone.



Although, we do not renounce metaphysics, with Rorty, Vattimo, and Madzia, this “weak theology” seems a fair place to begin the discussion of what theists should do in light of our argument.

13Auxier has addressed the sort of philosophical theology that attempts to naturalize God in “Gordon Kaufman’s Astronauts,” American Journal of Theology and Philosophy, 29:1 (January 2008), 18–33.

14Auxier’s article “Why 100 Years Is Forever,” cited above, contains an extended version of this argument with all of the citations to Hartshorne that are needed.

15For more about this way of using the term “evolution, see Auxier, “Bowne on Time, Evolution and History,” cited above; and “The Decline of Evolutionary Naturalism in Later Pragmatism,” in Pragmatism: From Progressivism to Postmodernism, eds. David DePew and Robert Hollinger (New York: Praeger Books, 1995), 180–207; and “The Death of Darwinism and the Limits of Evolution,” in Philo, 9:2 (Fall–Winter 2006), 193–220; and “Evolutionary Time and the Creation of Space,” in Space, Time, and the Limits of Human Understanding, eds. Shyam Wuppuluri and Giancarlo Ghirardi (Berlin: Springer Verlag, 2016), ch. 31.

16See chapter 9, regarding infinitesimals and non-standard analysis. This area of mathematical investigation is exotic and far from settled. For example, see Paul Cohen’s “forcing” technique, which discovers (creates?) new infinities where none was thought to exist. There is evidence of this kind of structural thinking in Whitehead’s earliest work, even though the concepts themselves were not fully formalized until after his death. This could be called the “structural aspect of the problem of accretion.” See for example, A Treatise of Universal Algebra, 124–125 (Prop. V) for an instance—one of many—in which Whitehead toys with these sorts of ideas.

17The issue our conclusion presents for traditional theism is explored in Auxier, “God as Catholic and Personal: A Protestant Perspective on Norris Clarke’s Neo-Thomistic Personalism,” cited above.

18We use “event” and “universe” in the way described by our Introduction. Any empirical experience that can be analyzed as an actual entity in its actual world must answer to experience, ultimately, and hence it is appropriate to speak of experience beyond the hypothesized coordinate whole in this context. The problem of creativity is more than just cosmological.

19See our discussion of dissipation and death at the end of chapter 4.

20This view is outside of orthodoxy. The Ecumenical Councils, especially Chalcedon and Third Constantinople, went to great trouble to distinguish Jesus’s human nature from his divine nature, to the point of suggesting (at Third Constantinople) that, following John’s Gospel, ch. 17, the divine nature might have vacated the world prior to the arrest by the Sanhedrin so that no “passion” (suffering) would be attributed to the Godhead, and that only the human nature dies on the cross, the divine nature having accomplished the glorification of God through the “signs” given to the people, both greater and lesser. There is a reason, we think, that the Fifth and Sixth Ecumenical Councils had the concrete effect of splitting Christendom into irreconcilable factions, making the whole Christian world susceptible to the more coherent cosmology of Islam. It has never been easy to work out the relationship between mortality and God. We do so here only at the cost of defying orthodoxy, but why would we worry about such a thing at this point? If the orthodox Christians of any sort are at all correct, the authors can hope for no better than a Circle of the Inferno with a low number.

21We have noticed that most scholars apologize for the use of gender-exclusive language on its first occurrence. We offer ours, such as it is, on its last. We don’t take the gendered God any more seriously than the ungendered God, and we try to accommodate the now popular erasure of all anachronistic usage with our scare quotes, taking down with one pair of strokes the capitalization and the gendering habits of old.

22Whitehead, Interpretation of Science, 197–198. This passage follows upon Whitehead’s introduction of algebraic thinking as the very basis of rationality. The final essay of this volume, “Immortality,” is devoted entirely to the exegesis and explanation of the idea expressed in this paragraph. There he says: “There is finitude—unless this were true, infinity would have no meaning.” (248).
