PART ONE



The Automatic Life
of Reason in Early
Modern Thought

2
Integration and Interruption
The Cartesian Thinking Machine




I thought too, how the same man, with the same mind, if brought up from
infancy among the French or Germans, develops otherwise than he would if
he had always lived among the Chinese or cannibals.
                                        Descartes, Discours sur le méthode1



It is no surprise that a prominent cognitive scientist like Antonio Damasio
would locate René Descartes’s fundamental “error” in the philosopher’s in-
sistence on the “abyssal separation between mind and body.”2 For the pro-
gram of cognitive science is arguably the total reduction of the mind to its
neurobiological foundation, and this foundation, as Bernard Stiegler for
one has pointed out, is essentially machinic in origin, given the intertwined
histories of computing technology and artificial intelligence research,
which gave rise to cognitive science itself as a discipline.3
    Of course, we could just as easily celebrate Descartes as the first cogni-
tive scientist.4 As most scholars now recognize, Descartes was intensely in-
terested in the physiological foundations of cognition and emotion, elabo-
rating a complex theory of the nervous system and brain5 while developing
a sophisticated medical philosophy.6 Descartes was the first intellectual to
explore systematically the ramifications of the new mechanical philosophy
for thinking about embodied human experience. As he wrote in a letter of
1632, “I am now dissecting the heads of various animals, in order to explain
what imagination, memory, etc. consist in.”7 And yet Descartes is still chas-
tised by so many (in so many disciplines) for holding onto some immaterial,
spiritual “substance” as the ground of the “Cartesian subject.”
    I would like to zero in on the intersection of these two domains—pure
intellect and the body as responsive automaton—to ask the deeper ques-

16

                                               I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   17



tion of how to think historically and conceptually about the more funda-
mental relationship linking humanity with its technology, which is what
I will be tracking across early modern thought and beyond. The history of
“artificial intelligence” cannot be the genealogy of a technology, since the
first early modern concepts of machine cognition were inextricably en-
twined with concepts of intelligence that veered uneasily between the ar-
tificial and the natural.
    Descartes, I argue, was interested in mapping systematically the com-
plexities of somatic machinery, not so much to “reduce” aspects of thinking
to the actions of that body, but instead to reveal the ways our minds were
constantly being shaped and organized by these automatic material pro-
cesses even as they resisted total determination—as the interventions of
what he called “pure intellect” attest.
    We must begin, then, with a Descartes seldom encountered in philos-
ophy or critical theory, the proto-cybernetic theorist of automata. Descartes
in fact recognized the crucial importance of a form of information within
the physiological mechanism that operated as a competing logic within the
organization of the body. The threshold notion of information is what will
connect the rigorous materialism of Descartes with his equally persistent
spiritualism—the body and mind, in his system, although these terms fail
to do justice to the way Descartes understood cognition and its organismic
function.8
    If we look closely at what I call here Cartesian robotics, we can glimpse
a novel concept of the human emerging in the seventeenth century. For
Descartes, the human body was a robotic, even cybernetic information ma-
chine that steered itself, yet it was also one that was capable of interrupting
itself. This will be the key contribution. Indeed, Descartes’s depiction of an
intellect capable of interfering with the sensory machinery of the body can
only be understood if we realize just how intimately bound the soul was to
the organs and structures of a living body. With this supplemental capacity,
the complex technical and informatic machinery of the human body be-
came radically open in a new way and thereby became capable of the most
radical transformations and unprecedented reorganizations. The Cartesian
robot was, in essence, a plastic being.

Living Machines


In adopting the mechanical philosophy as a foundational starting point
of his scientific investigations, Descartes banished any notion resembling
the Aristotelian idea of “soul” to explain natural phenomena, and that in-

18    C H A PT E R 2



cluded living beings, the natural forms that most resisted mechanical ex-
planations.9 His most notorious claim was perhaps his denial of any soul
in the animal. Descartes was committed to a physiological theory that de-
pended on purely mechanical explanation; there was, in the end, no way
that he could explain what he knew to be the free and open nature of the
mind. This is usually read as the beginning point of Descartes’s problematic
“dualism.” More important to note here is that the dualistic approach was
predicated on a prior, revolutionary redescription of both animal and human
bodies as mechanically organized entities, yes, but automatic mechanisms
that were also self-governing. This project of Cartesian robotics reveals (in
a negative fashion) the key role that the soul will play in his effort to un-
derstand the exceptional nature of human identity as something distinct
from, while still embodied in, the explicitly technological understanding
of animal-human automata.
   We can begin with Descartes’s infamous claim that the animal was sim-
ply a machine—no experience, no feeling, no emotion. Descartes, like his
early modern contemporaries, were very familiar with automata, and in-
deed, robotic machines had been a part of academic and even religious
culture for some time.10 In his Discours sur la méthode of 1637, Descartes
imagined that if someone built a robotic monkey we would not be able to
recognize a real creature when confronted with this mechanical version
at the same time. And this was for a simple reason: the real creature was
itself a robot according to Descartes, an “automaton,” or self-moving ma-
chine. Defending this conjecture in a letter the following year, he presented
a more elaborate take on this robotic imitation game.

     Suppose that a man had been brought up all his life in some place where
     he had never seen any animals except men; and suppose that he was very
     devoted to the study of mechanics, and had made, or helped to make, vari-
     ous automatons shaped like a man, a horse, a dog, a bird, and so on, which
     walked and ate, and breathed, and so far as possible imitated all the other
     actions of the animals they resembled, including the signs we use to express
     our passions, like crying when struck and running away when subjected to
     a loud noise.11


Descartes claims that if this mechanical genius was transported to our own
world, he would instantly recognize our animals for what they really are:
intricate automata that were just incomparably more accomplished than
any of those he had previously made himself. He would be struck, that is,

                                                    I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   19



by the structural resemblance between the real dogs and horses and his
own mechanical constructions. As Descartes explained in his physiologi-
cal works, as well as numerous letters in the 1630s, since all animal behav-
iors could be perfectly explained in purely mechanical terms, there was
absolutely no need to introduce the hypothesis of an animal soul: “Since
art copies nature, and people can make certain automatons [varia fabricare
automata] which move without thought, it seems reasonable that nature
should even produce their own automatons, which are more splendid than
artificial ones—namely all the animals.” It was much more astonishing,
Descartes claimed—and this is what we need to focus on—that the human
body, which was in essence one of these “natural” works of art, turns out to
have a soul.12
   But what about these human automata? Would our imaginary roboti-
cist be fooled into thinking our fellow citizens were merely machines when
he arrived in our midst? “Suppose that sometimes he found it impossible
to tell the difference between the real men and those which had only the
shape of men.” Perhaps initially fooled by his own walking, laughing, cry-
ing human robots he would have eventually

   learnt by experience that there are only two ways of telling them apart[,] . . .
   first, that such automatons never answer in word or sign, except by chance,
   to questions put to them; and secondly, that though their movements are
   often more regular and certain than those of the wisest men, yet in many
   things which they would have to do to imitate us, they fail more disastrously
   than the greatest fools.13


In this critique of “expert systems” avant la lettre, Descartes implies that
the automaton would inevitably confront a situation for which it was not
programmed, so to speak, to handle. But, as he had already noted in the
Discours, genuine humans arrange their words differently in response to
inquiries, and crucially they can think their way out of challenging circum-
stances despite the lack of precedents. “It is unimaginable,” he writes, “for
a machine to have enough different organs to make it act in all the contin-
gencies of life in the way in which our reason makes us act.” Humans reveal
themselves by their essential flexibility, their adaptability and their creative
capacity: “Reason is a universal instrument which can be used in all kinds
of situations.”14

20    C H A PT E R 2



The Nervous System as Information Machine


. . . the substance of the brain being soft and pliant . . .
                                Descartes, Traité de l’homme15



It is important to keep in mind that Descartes was never really interested in
the traditional philosophical division between mind and body that we now
associate with his name but rather a more ephemeral transition point be-
tween what might be called forms of “corporeal cognition” produced by the
nervous system and brain of the body and the kind of pure intellection that
could be performed only by the soul.16
    To understand the importance of this liminal space, we must read Des-
cartes’s foray into conjectural human robotics, the Traité de l’homme, written
around 1630 but never published in his lifetime. Descartes’s conceit here is
that he will, like his imaginary counterpart, construct—virtually—a human
automaton, a machine made up only of physical matter (the conjectural
method deployed for Descartes’s theory of the formation of the universe).
After building the automaton, he will then show that this robotic creature
would be able to imitate its real human counterpart in almost every way,
demonstrating that the bodies we possess must be essentially machines—
albeit of divine origin. (Descartes’s implicit argument will be that any ac-
tion not explained by this virtual robotic simulation must be ascribed to the
soul and not to our bodies.)
    Descartes was not only dissecting animals regularly himself, but he was
also clearly well versed in the medical and anatomical tradition.17 He was
of course not the first to offer a theorization of the nervous system (in fact,
he borrows heavily here from Galen’s standard, if by then outdated, work,
not to mention the more recent anatomical investigations of Andreas Vesa-
lius and especially Caspar Bauhin),18 nor was he the first to speculate about
how certain mental operations could be localized in specific parts of the
brain.19 However, Descartes took the terminology and concepts of earlier
medical and psychological theories and reoccupied them, replacing their
sometimes ephemeral notions of order and organization with precise, and
purely mechanistic, explications.
    One of the main aims of the Traité as an exercise in virtual robot con-
struction was to discover the mechanisms of “self-movement” in the human
body, the control systems, in other words, that make possible the continuing
integration of the bodily organs and maintain the process of life. The key
locus of explanation is the nervous system. (Figure 1.1.) Descartes will de-
tail how “animal spirits,” defined as the most rarified form of particulate

                                                             I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   21




Figure 1.1. From René Descartes, De Homine (1662). Source: Wellcome
Collection. CC BY 4.0 / https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.



matter, what Descartes calls a distillation, or “fine wind” (the term itself can
be traced to Galen),20 flowing through exceedingly small and narrow pas-
sages in the nervous system and brain, could explain a diversity of rather
complex animal and human actions. In adopting the mechanistic stance
here, Descartes does away completely with the Aristotelian concepts of the
sensitive or vegetative soul—as that which gives form and unity or life itself
to matter—thereby opening up both a new way to think about the organiza-
tion of living bodies and, perhaps more importantly, paving the way for a

22     C H A PT E R 2



radically new approach to the function of what used to be called the ratio-
nal soul.21 For Descartes, the rational intellect had to be linked to—but also
radically distinct from—the wholly material organization and process tak-
ing place within the automaton.22 The rational soul could not “direct” (like
some sovereign figure) the activity of the automatic corporeal systems.
   In a famous passage, Descartes likens the mechanism of the body to the
intricate engineering animating the moving statues in the artificial grot-
toes at the famous royal gardens at Saint-Germain, which operated auto-
matically by means of complicated waterworks.

     And truly one can well compare the nerves of the machine that I am describ-
     ing to the tubes of the mechanisms of these fountains, its muscles and ten-
     dons to divers other engines and springs which serve to move these mecha-
     nisms, its animal spirits to the water which drives them, of which the heart
     is the source and brain’s cavities the water main. Moreover, breathing and
     other such actions which are ordinary and natural to it, and which depend
     on the flow of the spirits, are like the movements of a clock or mill which the
     ordinary flow of water can render continuous.23


Significantly, these automata could even react to the presence of visitors
via external sensory devices. For example, a visitor unwittingly steps on a
particular special stone in order to better glimpse Diana at her bath, she re-
treats, and suddenly Neptune appears, wielding his trident.
    For Descartes, these automata were essentially cybernetic systems, func-
tioning not according to the rigid, serial logic of the clock but rather follow-
ing from a flow of information within the system understood now as a total-
ity. The automaticity of the reactive mechanism required an information
processing system. That is, the “outside” world was converted by the sys-
tem into an internal coding of sorts, which could then set in motion various
kinds of bodily activity. The act of sensing can be best understood here as a
perturbation of the system, a provocation that sparks a reorganization and
then action in response to this flow of internal information.
    Descartes clearly goes much further than his mechanical and hydrau-
lic analogies would suggest. The body can, he imagined, perform a kind of
thinking that greatly exceeded the relatively straightforward (if complex)
mechanistic activity of these early modern waterworks. Because the sense
organs are made of exceptionally pliant material, they are physically “im-
printed” with the movements generated by the objects of external world—
like wax imprinted with a seal. The animal spirits (unlike the flow of water
in the earlier analogy, which was mostly a physical force) can in fact encode

                                                I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   23



real information as they respond to, then transmit, the configurations or
textures of the physical environment. While this is somewhat murky in
Descartes’s texts, external objects have what I would call a certain structural
topology relating their parts, and different organs “sense” different orga-
nized topologies by virtue of the possibility that this network of relation-
ships can be imprinted on the open, elastic surface of the sense organs.24
The pattern of organization and not the physical collision per se is what is
transmitted from the “screen” of the organ to the animal spirits flowing in
the nerves that are attached to those organs.
    These configurations—information patterns—therefore embody any
number of “sensible” qualities: figure, position, size, distance, but also col-
ors, odors, titillation, and other passions.25 “There is a code of the senses,
antecedent to that of the sensations of the soul united to the body,” as Jean-
Pierre Séris concisely puts it.26 Somewhat cryptically, Descartes even de-
picted this coding of the nervous system in the Traité as a series of lines
forming endlessly complex geometric figures. The important point is that
the code does not need to “represent,” if by that we mean resemble, the ex-
ternal object in order to transmit these qualities, which are after all de-
pendent only on topological configurations of matter themselves.27 Each
sensory organ transmits (or better, transduces) a particular modality or
topology, which is then integrated with other partial configurations in the
common sense. Only later will these material codes be “experienced” by the
soul as actual sensations. (And in animals, of course, there will never be
such an “experience,” only the machinic transduction into nerve patterns
in the ongoing organization and reorganization of the brain.)
    As Descartes describes, the coded information flowing from the various
organs of sense is eventually inscribed on the “common sense,” that ven-
erable cognitive function that was now located with anatomical precision
(and thereby newly materialized) in the infamous pineal gland, deep within
the structure of the brain.28 There, Descartes suggests, the information can
be “read” (or better, “felt”) by the intellectual soul as a single unified expe-
rience of the world. Because sensory information is transmitted as a wave
through the animal spirits instantaneously through the nerves, Descartes
shows how the state of the sensory organs would be immediately doubled
within the pineal gland, which is the center of all the nerve channels lead-
ing into the brain.29 (Figure 1.2.) Even at this first level of neural organiza-
tion the information system has its own internal economy. The brain ma-
nipulates and reorders this information to effect certain physical activities.
Reflex action—the body moving away from the fire, the hands positioned
to protect against a sudden fall—is just the result of a movement of infor-

24    C H A PT E R 2




Figure 1.2. From René Descartes, Traité de l’homme (1664). Source: Wellcome
Collection. CC BY 4.0 / https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.




mation through the nerves to the brain and the pineal gland and back down
to the muscles, where the action finally occurs—“without any mental voli-
tion, just as it would be produced in a machine.”30

The Memory System


Cognition can first be understood by Descartes as largely a physical ma-
nipulation of this virtual reality, organized and reorganized by the imagi-
nation—strictly redefined as a purely corporeal faculty. Memory introduces
a new complexity. Indeed, memory truly distinguishes this information
machine—a cybernetic body with a nervous system—from merely reac-
tive automata such as the royal waterworks. With memory (first described
by Descartes in the Traité de l’homme as actual patterns formed by physical
“holes” in the brain, then in later works as structural “folds” in the brain)31
the body becomes capable of ever more complex actions, because it is in
effect responding not just to present stimuli but also to patterns of past ex-
periences, at the very same time.32 In an almost Pavlovian mode, Descartes
(around the time he was writing the Traité) writes to Mersenne, “If you
whipped a dog five or six times to the sound of a violin, it would begin to
howl and run away as it heard that music again.”33
   This all leads to a rather startling admission by Descartes: if the autom-
aton is outfitted with a memory system, he says in the Traité de l’homme,

                                                I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   25



“without there being any soul in this machine, it can be naturally disposed
to imitate all the movements that real men (or many other, similar ma-
chines) will make when the soul is present.”34 For Descartes the delayed
effects of the memory structure, the persistence and circulation of infor-
mation even after the original physical movements have dissipated, make
possible a “natural” simulation of the interventional capacity of the soul.35
Memory disrupts the flow of information in the system, allowing the ro-
botic machine to act (at least in the view of an observer) in a seemingly flex-
ible and adaptive manner.
   What exactly is it, then, that distinguishes the work of the soul from the
complex cognitive functioning of the temporalized nervous system? Or to
put it another way, what possible advantage does the soul offer the body?
One thing seems clear: the soul (from the robot’s perspective, that is) must
enable a new form of response to the environment, reactions that exceed
the capacity of a corporeal cognitive system—what Descartes calls memory
and imagination.

Nonautomatic Cognition


The rational soul must operate both inside and outside the automatic sys-
tem: it will have “its principal seat in the brain, and reside there like the
fountain-keeper who must be stationed at the tanks to which the fountains’
pipes return if he wants to produce, or prevent, or change their movements
in some way.”36 This raises the question of how that corporeal space of in-
formation can be radically disrupted (i.e., interrupted) from within its very
own economy and logic.
    This question haunts one of Descartes’s earliest works on thinking, the
unfinished Rules for the Direction of the Intellect (ca. 1628), where he rejects
traditional rhetorical and logical methods of discovery, methods that were
essentially discursive and often formally syllogistic, and moves toward a
new cognitive model of understanding that privileged the immediacy of
what he called, somewhat mysteriously, intuition.37 For Descartes, intuition
was self-grounded; that is, it produced knowledge that was not derived
from any other source. “By ‘intuition,’” he writes, “I do not mean the fluctu-
ating testimony of the senses or the deceptive judgment of the imagination
as it botches things together.”38 Intuition was that immediate grasp of con-
nection between ideas. The common sense might synthesize or associate
those separate experiences, but it will never remark the rational, indubit-
able relationship between these experiences.
    The model of thinking in this early text locates intelligence in the grasp-

26   C H A PT E R 2



ing and reconfiguration of relations and proportions as they suddenly ap-
pear within the field of experience generated by the physiological systems
of sensation, imagination, and memory. Descartes can say that the soul rep-
resents a spark of “the divine” within the corporeal system, because there
is a structural analogy between divine creativity and the unprecedented
intuition that disrupts the regular economy of the embodied information
system. The divine soul marks an exception to that causality.

Intellectual Judgment and the Moment of Insight


From the perspective of Cartesian robotics, the Meditations is a demonstra-
tion of just how difficult it is to isolate pure thinking within a complex cog-
nitive realm dominated by automatic and corporeal forms of mental orga-
nization and reorganization. “My habitual opinions keep coming back, and,
despite my wishes, they capture my belief, which is as it were bound over
to them as a result of long occupation and the law of custom.”39 We should
note here that Descartes is referring to the power of the animal spirits. Phi-
losophy is literally a counterbalancing force that keeps at bay the corporeal
cognitive flow.
    In famous passages from the Second Meditation, Descartes locates pure
intellection in the act of judgment, and we now gain insight into the spe-
cific domain of l’esprit—the ability to see something that is not at all pres-
ent in our senses. We might see, touch, even hear the innumerable changes
in, for example, a piece of malleable wax; we can even imagine (in the cor-
poreal sense of that word) changes that have not taken place yet—endless
new shapes, for example. However, only the intellect can “see” wax itself.
But here “wax” marks that invisible form of identity that persists through-
out these perceptual changes.40 The pliant wax—like the pliant brain or
the mind itself—can take on many different forms, but only the intellect
can perceive the underlying identity that is itself never accessible to sen-
sory perception, for this form of organization (substantial unity in and of
itself) can literally make no impression on the nervous system. The intellec-
tual judgment is no doubt parasitic on the corporeal cognition generated by
sensation and its processing in the common sense,41 but it is not, Descartes
demonstrates here, identical with it. The mind, like the wax, is a founda-
tional unity that escapes direct perception but can be located between, so
to speak, its variety of modes. “Therefore this insight [comprehensio] is not
achieved by the faculty of the imagination.” The perception of the identity
is an “inspection of the mind alone [solius mentis inspectio].”42

                                                  I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   27



    But what does the intellect “see”? The judgment is more than an arti-
ficial synthesis of corporeal experiences. Descartes gives us another, brief
(but revealing) example of this intellectual ability to judge beyond percep-
tion, one that nicely ties together the Meditations and the robotic writings.
He writes:

   But then if I look out my window and see men crossing the square, as I just
   happen to have done, I normally say I see the men themselves, just as I say I
   see the wax. Yet do I see any more than hats and coats which could conceal
   automata? I judge that they are men. And so something which I thought I
   was seeing with my eyes is in fact grasped solely by the faculty of judgment
   which is in my mind.43


And yet, why should we judge them to be men? This judgment may well be
in error (think Blade Runner), for in order to recognize (or better, cognize) a
genuine human, we would need to perceive the signs of “pure intellect” it-
self, this strange capacity to see what is not really there.
    The difference between the robot and the human is not attributable to
any substantial content of the soul’s being, something new that is “added”
to the robotic organization. Rather, the soul intervenes—it is the cut into the
system that opens up a new form of action. The intervention is an interrup-
tion in the radical sense of the word. The soul does not construct higher
unity so much as it interferes with the automatic integrations of sensory
information by making and remaking the order of relations that emerge in
the common sense of the brain.

Unitary Systems


Descartes’s last published work, the Passions de l’âme (1649), returned to the
peculiar relationship between the active soul and the automatic robotic
body. The key trope was unity. Descartes is concerned with both the self-
enclosed automatic unity of the body and a much stranger unity that twists
intellect and body together in the unstable figure of the human. The pas-
sions will be studied closely, since they constitute an essential connection
between the sensing body and the purely intellectual functions of the soul.
Descartes confronts a liminal space of connection in which some kind of
unity brings together, while keeping absolutely separate, body and mind.
(To condemn Cartesian “dualism,” one must, of course, ignore this key
question of the required ontological plane that can allow their unification.)

28   C H A PT E R 2



    First, Descartes’s theory of the organism constitutes an independent ex-
istential logic. The body’s internal economy, its organization and motion, is
not at all dependent on the soul for its unity: “Death never occurs through
the absence of the soul, but only because one of the principal parts of the
body decays.”44 Life and death mark the distinction between functioning
and damaged physiological systems—the success and failure of unity.45
After a brief overview of his theory of the gross anatomy and physiology
of the body, Descartes turns to the nervous system, explaining it in some
detail, repeating ideas developed earlier in the Traité de l’homme and other
texts—but with a new inflection. He emphasizes here, first, the absolute in-
tegrity of the animal or human body mechanism. Every movement that is
not willed “occurs in the same way as the movement of a watch is produced
merely by the strength of its spring and the configuration of its wheels.”46
In other words, the soul is here absolutely excluded from the logic of the
body’s own operations. But the soul does inhabit this space in a special
way: “The various perceptions or modes of knowledge present in us may be
called its passions . . . for it is often not our soul which makes them such as
they are, and the soul always receives them from the things that are repre-
sented by them.”47
    The most critical point, as we know, is that the soul can initiate “actions
that terminate in our body”; that is, the soul can will particular actions.
This special relationship is obviously important, but we cannot help but re-
mark on its profound, almost perverse, strangeness. Elsewhere, Descartes
claimed that if an “angelic intelligence” were to inhabit the body, to posi-
tion itself, as it were, inside the pineal gland, “it would not sense the world
as we do.” Instead, the angel would simply observe “the motions which
are caused by external objects” as they pass through the animal spirits; it
would perceive, that is, only the raw “coding” of the information flowing
through the nervous system. This angel spliced into a human automaton,
therefore, “would differ from a real man.”48 Our human souls are so deeply
intertwined with our bodies that we actually feel the sensory information
as subjective experience. As he says repeatedly in the Passions, these re-
lations (i.e., between soul and nervous system) are themselves “ordained
by nature.”
    The Passions is from one angle a protracted attempt to understand the
function of this intimately bound soul, to understand it, that is, from the
perspective of the corporeal economy. The passions emerge here as a sup-
plement to corporeal memory, which was already staged as a supplement
to sensory information and therefore capable of disrupting the linear se-
quence of sensation, action and reaction. The passions, though, unlike

                                               I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   29



memory, operate more as a warning system for the body.49 Pain, joy, sad-
ness, courage, and so on, all are ways the body presents challenges or op-
portunities to itself, based on its needs.
    The soul is provoked by these signals, according to Descartes, in mo-
ments of crisis and can constitute a new space of decision for the living body.
When passion “impels us to actions which require an immediate decision
[résolution], the will must devote itself mainly to considering and follow-
ing reasons which are opposed to those presented by the passions, even if
they appear less strong.” The soul can interrupt the automaticity of the fear
response, as well as a strong desire for honor, both of which arise in one
single situation. The soul can turn against these responses, intellectually, by
attending to their opposites. Descartes’s example is an “unexpected attack
of the enemy” when there is “no time for deliberation.”50 However, there is
still time for decision, or we can say, the judgment that is decision takes no
time. The conceptual difficulty is locating the plane of connection between
soul and brain here.
    First, we can say the body is a “unity which is in a sense indivisible be-
cause of the arrangement of its organs, these being so related to one another
that the removal of any one of them renders the whole body defective.”51
Second, the soul has its own form of indivisibility, its own foundational
unity—the cogito.
    Descartes suggests that the point of contact between soul and body is ne-
gotiated precisely at the intersection of these two unities. The soul is joined
to the whole body, or, more precisely, to the body’s being where it appears
as wholeness. The concrete physiological space where that unity is best ex-
pressed is the brain’s own center of organization, namely, the pineal gland.
That gland, as we saw, was automatically inscribed by the informational
systems of the body simultaneous to their occurrence. Not surprisingly,
then, the soul “exercises its functions” in relation to the body “more par-
ticularly” in the pineal than anywhere else. I rely here on Nima Bassiri’s in-
novative reading of this fundamental point. “The pineal gland,” he claims,
“is organizationally reduplicating the body’s sensory affections.”52 The con-
nection between mind and body as parallel unities is indeed less mysteri-
ous now than the connection between the body’s organizational wholeness
(whatever status that has metaphysically) and its various complex parts. In
any case, we can now understand that for Descartes the soul is in a sense
able to influence the pineal gland via its intimate connection to the body as
a whole, a body that itself can influence specific parts, though the medium
is still not explained here by Descartes.
    As some scholars are now asserting, the Passions introduces a tentative

30   C H A PT E R 2



but powerfully novel conception of the human as a “single system” consist-
ing of physiological organization and the functions of intellectual interven-
tion.53 I would supplement these persuasive interpretations. Descartes is
setting the stage for the idea that the soul (whatever its own aspirations)
is the entity that takes responsibility for acting on behalf of the body’s own
integral unity in the absence of any such existential reaction in the robotic
system. In moments of real crisis, the virtual integration of the body’s diver-
sity in the brain does not constitute the most effective weapon.
    As Descartes wrote in the Meditations, the soul is not at all like the pilot
of the ship, who controls the vessel as if it were an organ—that is, a mere ex-
ternal instrument of its own desire, an organon. As in cybernetics, the disci-
pline that took its name from the Greek word for “steering,” kyber, Descartes
here insists on seeing the organism as a functional whole, an integration of
intellectual and bodily systems, of informational and material operations.
That is, the body, even a human body, is a complex unity that steers itself as
a reactive and adaptive automaton.
    In the Passions, Descartes redescribes the soul’s function in relation to
the existential, vital demands of the body. The passion of “anxiety,” for ex-
ample, is raised in the soul when something “very strange and terrifying”
is perceived. While one can imagine an animal fleeing automatically from
this danger, the point that Descartes emphasizes is that the soul can make
a decision, one that is not at all predetermined by the nature of the bodily
response. The soul is co-opted by the body to serve its own existential drive:
“The principal effect of all the human passions is that they move and dis-
pose the soul to want the things for which they prepare the body.”54 The
passions are excited in us by objects in the world “because of the various
ways in which they may harm or benefit us.”55 The soul is affected by the
passions, in that it now desires what the body already “desires” and thus may
persist in a course of action despite the changing physiological conditions
of the body or the environment, or, perhaps, the presence of conflicting im-
pulsions.

Wonder: Epistemology of the Automaton


The key moment in the text is when Descartes points out a certain special
kind of passion that is not like any of the others—an exception to the very
logic of desire and fear that shape the movements in the brain and pro-
duces the basic passions he has enumerated. The singular passion of “won-
der” (admiration) is unusual precisely because it has no relation at all to the
immediate well-being of the body. This passion affects only the brain. Yet a

                                                I N T E G R AT I O N A N D I N T E R R U PT I O N   31



pliant, plastic Cartesian brain can hardly have its own object of desire, or
fear. This is, I argue, why wonder is something quite unusual—the “sudden
surprise of the soul which brings it to consider with attention the objects
that seem to it unusual and extraordinary.”56 Wonder is really a radical dis-
ruption of the body’s operations, not an expression of vitality. With wonder,
the body is alerting the soul to the presence of something fundamentally
unknown. Now, it is exactly this state of wonder (admiration) that is impos-
sible in the robotic animal, for it can react to something only if it can be un-
derstood in relation to its immediate or automatically anticipated needs.57
The shock of the new within an animal-machine cannot produce any spe-
cific form of behavior.
    So how does the machinic body go beyond itself, its own automaticity,
to “alert” the soul to something unknown? Wonder is, Descartes tells us, an
“impression of the brain, which represents the object as something unusual
and worthy of special consideration.”58 The challenge is to explain how a
material system can express its own absence of information. As Descartes
will suggest, the novelty of the impression is marked by the fact that cer-
tain parts of the pliant brain that have not normally been affected in the
past have been suddenly forced into new configurations. At this moment,
the animal spirits flow to this site of novelty and to the sense organs, so that
they remain fixed on the new object; therefore the soul will be forced, in a
sense, to acknowledge it.
    Whatever the physiological explanation, the functional point is abso-
lutely clear. Wonder is the way that a body interrupts itself in the face of
a novel and unprecedented situation, in order to alert the soul to initiate
a response that is no longer aiming to duplicate or amplify an anticipated
machinic response but rather act in a way wholly foreign to the body—but
still in the service of organismic life.
    All other passions identify what is “good” or “evil,” of benefit or not to
the bodily machine. Yet wonder is a state of surprise, the purest form of
interruption—good and evil are no longer in play. So wonder, unlike the
other passions, is agnostic with respect to life because its object is defined
as unknown, as absence of knowledge of fear or desire. Therefore wonder
will always provoke a genuine decision while simultaneously preparing the
ground for new knowledge. Or at least, if the soul rises to the challenge and
is not absorbed completely by novelty, to the point of immobility, the patho-
logical state Descartes calls “astonishment.”59

To sum up: The soul intervenes on behalf of the life of the organism, by
forcing the automaton to act against its own automaticity. However slight

32   C H A PT E R 2



the impact of the soul might be in the face of the passions, this is the zone
where the soul realigns the organization altogether, beyond the logic of its
own automaticity. The human is, therefore, no simple addition to the liv-
ing mechanized body, a reasoning being trapped in a material existence, an
awkward marriage in both philosophical and practical terms. The human
as a Cartesian robot is a hybrid, defined by its material organization, yet
open to both cultural and technical formation—and often inspired to use
that very capacity of openness to remake itself freely in moments of true
decision. (This is why this hybrid entity must always be, for Descartes, an
ethical being, but that is another question.)
    A genuinely autonomous robotic system must therefore itself be some-
what “autonomous” of its own subsystems if it is going to display the flexi-
bility and adaptability of the human being.60 The human automaton is not
just capable of reorganizing itself; it is also endowed with a capacity for rad-
ical self-interruption.
    Cartesian robotics demands that we interrogate early modern thought
and its theorization of cognition as an immersion in the complex intersec-
tion of rapidly evolving conceptualizations of minds, vital organic bodies,
material technologies, and cosmic speculation. In the wake of Descartes,
the cognitive capacities that resisted simplistic models of l’homme-machine
will also spur parallel investigations of the body and technology. The crucial
line was between artificial and natural, and this line was drawn in surprising
and complex ways. The concept of automaticity was inseparable from ideas
concerning openness, plasticity, creativity, and indetermination—whether
in physical science, emerging forms of biological thought, theories of tech-
nology, or the philosophy of mind. And underlying these complex strands
of thought was Descartes’s open question, the ontological plane that would
function as a common space for the appearance of both automatic machines
and spiritual intellects.
