7
The Pathology of Spontaneity
The Critique of Judgment and Beyond




Autonomous Judgments


As explicated in the First Critique, judgment conditions itself through an
adoption of the concept as principle; as Kant writes in the Third Critique,
judgment “is not autonomous,” “it has no principles of its own.” At least,
determinate judgment has no principles. However, in its reflective mode,
Kant remarks, it has to do its work but without the presence of any law or
principle.1 It is clear, then, that reflective judgment must subsume objects
under a law that is in fact radically artificial, in the sense that it has no ob-
jectivity. We can say perhaps that it must produce a substitute for the law
that is not in fact present.
    This would seem to go against the very nature of cognition as Kant has
laid it out. Judgment proceeds from the universal to the particular because
the particular cannot reveal anything that would be binding on the under-
standing. Of course, the construction of the empirical concept resolves the
problematic issue because with this concept the judgment has a principle
that will determine particulars in their relation to that more general or uni-
versal concept. The challenge Kant presents here in the Third Critique is
this: What does judgment do when it is confronted by a “particular” that
has not yet been conceptualized and hence “automatically” cognized as
such? This is why our understanding works from what Kant calls the “ana-
lytically universal” to the particular, since it is only in the concept that the
particular can become subsumed.
    Now, Kant holds that we can conceive of another, alien form of under-
standing that proceeds from the “synthetically universal”—which is to
say, an understanding that would intuit, without any mediation, the exis-

                                                                               95

96   C H A PT E R 7



tence of a “whole” in the plurality of individuated and differentiated parts.
The fact that we must “begin” with the parts means that any construction
of a concept involves an essential contingency in the identification of a
substantial unity. It is not enough, Kant argues, to simply identify unity
through the appearance of purpose (as Spinoza did), because we cannot un-
derstand how the actual substance of that unity (we could say, its particular
concreteness both as form and as matter) is related to its purpose. Reason
simply cannot answer that question.
   The only option, for Kant, is to rethink the problem. This initial sub-
stance of a body, say, must be understood to have an “intelligence” that en-
ables the specific “natural forms” to develop in the “unity of a purpose”—
and by “enable,” Kant means that we understand the relation as causality.2
The aesthetic judgment as reflective judgment is therefore never the appli-
cation of a concept to the work of art. And it is also not, as we might conjec-
ture, the process of forming a concept from the particular. The reflective
aesthetic judgment is precisely singular. It forms a whole from a specific set
of contingent relationships. Yet how could a singular judgment ever have
any value as a judgment, or to put it more bluntly, what status would this
judgment have from the perspective of the understanding and its orienta-
tion to objectivity?
   For Kant, the work of art (natural or human) arrests the understanding
(since it cannot provide concepts) and, at the same time, refuses to stabilize
despite the efforts of the imagination to cognize it. The famous “free play”
of the imagination that is involved is maybe more serious than it appears.
I want to suggest that the very artifice of the work demands that it be ex-
perienced in two conflicting ways—hence the perpetual lack of stabiliza-
tion. The painting or sculpture, for example, or a natural wonder, is at one
and the same time organized according to a certain concrete materiality
of marks or characteristics (shape, color, depth, etc.) and organized in the
sense that the same marks can symbolize or indicate what they are not. The
judgment in this situation seizes the moment, freed from the obligation of
borrowing any principle automatically, or even of creating a general prin-
ciple to then apply.
   The aesthetic judgment interprets the order of the work as a unity of
organization even while recognizing the radical subjectivity and contin-
gency of that particular order. This judgment is, in effect, an imitation of
an intuition of a synthetic universal. The value, for Kant, of this strange
and exceptional situation, is that it reveals so clearly what we might call
the “pure” form of judgment that is usually hidden by the power of the
concept—namely, the power of judgment to impose normativity, as Gins-

                                               T H E PAT H O LO GY O F S P O N TA N E I TY   97



burg argues. The aesthetic judgment does not “intuit” objective norms in
the singular experience of a unity and its parts, but that is not a failure: the
judgment demonstrates the radical capacity to establish norms as norma-
tive, whatever their origin (a priori, empirical, or even singular).3

On the Unitary Judgment of Organismic Order


So when Kant turns to discuss the teleological judgment, again, the key as-
sumption here is that the mind does not in fact have any conceptual appa-
ratus for cognizing the way that living beings are organized and how they
behave. That is, in order to understand empirically the “ends” of a living
being, we would have to examine and observe that being before trying to
grasp what is common or “universal” in those actions. To understand this
intuitively is impossible, for two reasons. First, as in the case of the aes-
thetic judgment, the mind faced with an organized body cannot proceed
from the recognition of a synthetic universal to comprehend how all the
differentiated organs and parts of the body contribute to that “whole.” Sec-
ond, even with that insight into the structure of this unitary being, we could
not perceive intuitively the end of that unity.
    So what exactly is going on with the teleological judgment? If the aes-
thetic judgment is reflective and hence free of any concept, it is judging
purely according to rules of organization that have no a priori status, no
objectivity. To follow closely Ginsburg’s thorough analysis of this problem-
atic in Kant, what is objective in the aesthetic judgment is the structure of
normativity itself, its appearance as a judgment that could potentially com-
mand universal acceptance—even though it may in fact not.
    In contrast, the teleological judgment is a reflective judgment (freed,
again, from the condition of the concept), but it is not judging the living be-
ing according to rules. Rather, the teleological judgment is a strange form
that proceeds according to concepts but in the reflective mode—that is, not
determining experience through the concept.4 In both aesthetic and teleo-
logical judgments, there is a postulation that the “synthetic universal” (an
unmediated access to the intuition of the “unity” of an object) exists—even
if it doesn’t—but not to elide the epistemological problem; the postulation
frees the mind to exemplify its own normative creativity.
    Kant’s argument concerning the teleological judgment is that we have
no “category” for what we call “purpose” in nature, and no a priori knowl-
edge that nature produces beings in relation to purposes; nor do we have
the cognitive ability to intuit directly the integrated unity of a systematic
whole. And we cannot, of course, rely on mere empirical principles, since

98   C H A PT E R 7



there is no ground for the identification of what would even be a “purpose”
in nature (we would have to assume, again, some a priori concept of “intel-
ligence” operating in the natural world).
    So the solution proposed is that when we judge natural beings to be
purposeful, to have ends in other words, we are, Kant says, introducing the
concept that would be necessary for determining teleology in the natural
world—but without using it for the judgment. Rather, with that substitute
concept standing in for the absence, the mind can go on to judge individ-
ual natural beings as organized according to purposes—as Kant puts it,
“to guide our investigation of organized objects and to meditate regarding
their supreme basis.”5
    The artificial concept authorizes us to think analogically about the way
organized beings function—that is, our orientation in the world of appear-
ances allows us to see nature in only one framework, a spatial and temporal
view that implies only one form of causality, namely, the sequential connec-
tion of events that undergirds modern physical science. However, organic
beings evoke a kind of “wonder” (what Descartes called l’admiration) be-
cause they defy this kind of mechanical causal understanding. We do have
access to another form of causality, Kant reminds us—but that kind of cau-
sality emerges only within the intelligent mind. Only minds (and not what
appears to mind) can act according to ends. That is what freedom (sponta-
neity) is for Kant: the act of mind proceeds not from what comes before but
as a consequence of what it aims at according to the law or principle that
informs it. This kind of automaticity is autonomous because it is generated
entirely from within the sphere of the psyche, which is to say, governed by
its own rules. So it is not surprising (even if it is an error) that humans have
for centuries transplanted the intrinsic purposive of cognition, its peculiar
autonomy of self-generation, into the entities of nature that themselves
defy mechanical explanations. However, as Kant will stress, this analogi-
cal move has no epistemological warrant whatsoever. It can have, at best,
practical use.

The Pathology of Artificial Thinking: Technicity in Kant


At this point, we could be content with understanding how the teleolog-
ical judgment—the idea that the organic being is self-organizing and
self-generating—mirrors the aesthetic judgment. Kant’s analysis of the
teleological judgment shows that while the organic being is organized as
purposeful, that purposiveness itself can have no purpose. The insight is that
the human mind is organized in the same way: it is a system that strives

                                               T H E PAT H O LO GY O F S P O N TA N E I TY   99



to one final end, yet that end is in itself without purpose (at least from our
own perspective), not because it cannot be objectively known, but because
the purpose is in fact only understood via the unity of the system that is
the mind. The unity of the mind is, like the organism, an integrated pur-
poseful system whose purposefulness (a striving to maintain its unity) is
essentially without intrinsic purpose. The juxtaposition and comparison of
the aesthetic and the teleological serves to exemplify what is foundational
to the human mind: it is a norm-producing machine that operates free of
any norms. Even when it is conditioned by norms—by that I mean even the
universal “norms” that are the categories—the mind must itself establish
the normative power of those concepts via the judgment, which, as we saw,
must always condition itself. And judgment, as revealed in its pure reflec-
tive form, can, Kant shows, operate normatively even in the absence of any
concrete norm—through its capacity to institute norms.
   It is of course difficult to conceive how judgment functions in this way,
and that is perhaps Kant’s point here. But there is a lingering structural is-
sue in the Third Critique that opens up an important new line of thought in
Kant’s thinking, both in light of the realm of the organism and within the
sphere of cognition. By paying more attention to artifice and its relationship
to what we can call organismic pathology, we can excavate a preliminary—
but absolutely essential—theory of technology in Kant.

Central to the analysis of both aesthetics and teleology is the idea of the
“whole” as a concrete unity of integrated differentiation. Kant has us imag-
ine someone walking along a beach in “a seemingly uninhabited country”
who comes across a geometric figure, a hexagon, say, “traced in the sand.”
Kant explains that reflecting on this figure, “working out a concept for it,”
this person would, through reason, become aware (however obscurely) “of
the unity of the principle required for producing this concept.”6 That unity
is not explicable under the “natural laws” of the physical world. The figure
is an effect of purpose, the purpose of externalizing a concept into a mate-
rial representation. That cannot be “natural,” says Kant, because it is neces-
sarily understood to be a “product of art,” a reorganization of the natural—
the appearance, that is, of the artificial. So when confronted by a natural
being, whose order and organization appears to us as “infinitely improb-
able” if produced only by the chance interactions of the material world, we
cannot help but see the organic entity as structured and thus purposeful—
exactly like the material externalization of a geometric concept traced in
the sand.
    Nature’s causality here is then a form of technics (Technik).7 And there are

100   C H A PT E R 7



only two options to consider: either the form was produced intentionally,
like the work of art, or it was the unintentional result of the blind mecha-
nism of nature. For Kant, this dichotomy is of course undecidable, since the
mind cannot conceive the necessity (or even conjectural necessity) of either
option. However, what we can conceive (since this is the very structure of
cognition itself) is a form of rationality guiding the organism from within.
This is the only way we can conceive of nature producing organization—
but as Kant argues, this is a new and illegitimate form of physical causality
that radically disrupts our very understanding of the natural world. Hence
the almost paradoxical vision of the organism that emerges here: a being
that must be totally governed by a concept (an organizational form) so that
its unity will be genuine but whose concept of organization is therefore it-
self necessarily contingent.8
    We can now return to the important question raised in the First Critique
concerning the status of the “governance” of the mind. As Kant argues in
the Third Critique, if something is to be understood as a “natural purpose” it
has to have two qualities. “First, the possibility of its parts (as concerns both
their existence and their form) must depend on their relation to the whole.”
The concept, in other words, “must determine a priori everything that the
thing is to contain.”9 The “whole,” that is, as concept must include the exact
way that parts are formed and integrated into a unitary being. Second, that
concept cannot be external to the being. What this entails, for Kant, “is that
the parts of the thing combine into the unity of a whole because they are
reciprocally cause and effect of their form.” The nature of the whole cannot
determine the parts causally, since the whole would then be external to the
products of the concept—implying, it would seem, the supplement of an
internal judging and steering organ of some kind, violating the principle
of total unification of concept and materiality.10 Therefore, this “systematic
unity” is cognized in the unity of the form but also concretely as the way the
manifold parts are combined, its “wholeness.” In later writings, Kant would
say this clearly: “The definition of an organic body is that it is a body, every
part of which is there for the sake of the other (reciprocally as end and, at the
same time, means).”11
    It is striking, then, to remark how Kant destabilizes this rigorous defi-
nition of the idea of the natural organism with his own interesting take on
pathology in the living being. Given the normative requirement of part-
whole reciprocity, what are we to make of Kant’s observation that while
“nature organizes itself,” and the “pattern” is always the same, “that pattern
also includes deviations useful for self-preservation as required by circum-
stances”?12 And if Kant uses the ubiquitous example of the watch to point

                                              T H E PAT H O LO GY O F S P O N TA N E I TY   101



out the key difference between machine and organism (that the parts do
not imply the existence of the other parts), he also goes on to say that the
watch cannot replace its own parts by itself.13
    But what would the organism be as a whole if it lost one of its essential
parts? How does the unitary concept act in this situation? The term “self-
organization” elides the location of causal activity. Even more problematic,
Kant says that the organism, unlike the machine, “can compensate for this
lack by having the other parts help out.”14 Yes, Kant introduces here the idea
of a “formative” and not merely motive force of action in the organism,
which as we know he borrowed from Blumenbach.15 But what is import-
ant here is the fact that the compensation referred to here must be under-
stood as a reorganization of the original part-whole synthesis that defined
the unity of the original being. The parts are no longer what they are, once
they are adapted to function otherwise. The formative force must deviate
from the conceptual (functional) determination of the organism, unless it
is assumed that both matter and organized tissue are completely receptive
to what would be the automatic reproduction of the concept through this
formative force—without anything like an organismic analog of the imag-
ination.16
    However, the possibility of this sort of automaticity is undermined by
Kant’s remark that even the accidental deviations of some individual or-
ganisms would still have to be judged in terms of a purpose—but now
displaced into an internal process of radical transformation and reorgan-
ization to preserve a unity without concrete locality. As Kant notes, with
some mutant beings, “we find that the altered character of these individu-
als becomes hereditary and is taken up into the generative force,” an alter-
ation that must be cognized, then, as a necessary development lurking in
the original formation of the species. In other words, the accident of muta-
tion that is taken up by the formative force transforming the concrete unity
of the organism as a result is still consistent with the “undeveloped” predis-
position of that same being.17
    But there is no reason why the deviation could not be entirely “acciden-
tal” or purposeless—contingent, in other words. What is important here is
not whether this makes any sense scientifically (whether in the eighteenth
century or in light of contemporary biology). What I want to suggest in-
stead is that Kant’s analogy between mind and organism becomes more in-
teresting and more complicated once we admit the possibility, and perhaps
even the necessity, of these pathological conditions of life. For they point to
a way in which the concrete organization of an integrated being (whether
organic or psychic) can be internally transformed in a radical way, without

102   C H A PT E R 7



losing the essential continuity of its identity. This is, for our purposes, most
suggestive and interesting when we move from the organic world (where
we have absolutely no real conceptual access to the way in which beings
develop and function) to the very origin of the analogy, namely, the rational
order of the mind, where we have intimate experience.
    What is at stake in the question of the pathological is not the return or
reproduction of the integrated organization of the plurality, where part and
whole emerge as co-constitutive. It is precisely that organization consid-
ered as a specific concrete order which is literally violated by the injury to
the organ or the collapse of local zones of order. If, as Kant says, the part can
be replaced or even compensated for by a new organization, there must be
an internal principle capable of effecting that change. And yet there cannot
be such a principle, since then it would also be integral to the original given
organization. What is needed is not a normative faculty of repair but rather
a capacity to establish a new norm to replace or modify the original norma-
tive order of concrete unity—without violating the principle of unity itself.
    Given the absence of any “super” norm within the entity (cognitive or or-
ganismic), that is, one that would be “steering” the concrete order in excep-
tional conditions in light of a specific notion of unity, the establishment of
the new norm must be understood to be absolutely devoid of all necessity,
utterly contingent—except for the fact that the norm must serve the con-
tinued existence of the being itself. What would this mean? In the context
of the organic living being, we would have to say that the very unity of the
being (and not its wholeness as a concrete form) must somehow intervene
in the concrete order so as to reestablish itself anew. However we cognize
this (if we can actually think this at all), Kant’s theory would seem to fore-
close the possibility of some pure unity ever appearing as itself. It cannot
function as a concept, since it has no formal organization. The unity of the
“life” of the body considered existentially must therefore have its represen-
tative, a stand-in, one capable of intervening somehow and yet operating
completely outside all of the actual “norms of life.”
    If we turn now to the psychic unity, we can see that pure reason, which
produces the rational idea of the “end” that integrates the mind’s functions
as a concrete whole, is incapable of enacting the refoundation of unity in a
new organization. This is all to say that given Kant’s own argument in the
Third Critique we have to admit what should be impossible—that some-
thing outside of cognition (namely, the pure unity of the transcendental ap-
perception that can only be deduced) makes its appearance within cogni-
tion, as a force of radical novelty, a radically indeterminate determination
of the logic of cognition itself.

                                               T H E PAT H O LO GY O F S P O N TA N E I TY   103



    The vehicle of that pure unity is of course the judgment, whose capacity
to establish norms is predicated on the impossibility of normativizing the
very act of foundation.
    The radical origin that is the judgment (hidden in the determinate form
but there nonetheless, lurking behind the facade of self-conditioning) has
no place in the system if it is defined as the concrete unity, organized by the
faculties and its concepts. The judgment is therefore outside of the system
as it appears within cognition, the representative (and decidedly not repre-
sentation) of a pure unity. If the mind is “steered” by reason as the governor
of the law that is the formal organization of psychic activity, in times of cri-
sis or emergency, when this spiritual automaton is failing, reason is not de-
posed but instead offered a new order, a bifurcation within the organization
itself that can preserve the continued existence of unity in a new, concrete
order of mind.
    The pathology of the spontaneous judgment is therefore the only path
to a new normative existence. What Kant will imply, here and in other writ-
ings, is that the artificial form of order—namely, the technical object—is
both an origin and a result of this productive aberration.

Cosmic Orders and Human Artifice


As Kant wrote in a fragment collected in the Opus Postumum, there is an
“immaterial” principle of “indivisible unity” necessary to understand the
integration of cognition. However, this unity is not given: “For the man-
ifold, whose combination into unity depends on an idea of a purposively
(artificially) acting subject, cannot emerge from moving forces of matter
(which lack the unity of the principle).”18
   But there is another form of artificial order we must confront, as Kant
does in the Anthropology: “Natural understanding can be enriched through
instruction with many concept and furnished with rules,” although the
power of judgment itself can only be “exercised,” not instructed.19 However,
there is something important going on here, as Kant notes. The vehicle of
instruction is the technology of memory. Citing Plato’s Phaedrus, Kant writes:

   One of the ancients said: “The art of writing has ruined memory (to some
   extent made it dispensable).” There is some truth in this proposition, for
   the common man is more likely to have the various things entrusted to him
   lined up, so that he can remember them and carry them out in succession,
   just because memory here is mechanical and no subtle reasoning interferes
   with it. On the other hand, the scholar, who has many strange ideas running

104     C H A PT E R 7



      through his head, lets many of his tasks or domestic affairs escape through
      distraction, because he has not grasped them with sufficient attention. But
      to be safe with a notebook in the pocket is after all a great convenience, in
      order to recover precisely and without effort everything that has been stored
      in the head. And the art of writing always remains a magnificent one, be-
      cause, even when it is not used for the communication of one’s knowledge
      to others, it still takes the place of the most extensive and reliable memory,
      and can compensate for its lack.20


But there is more to artificial memory, in fact. Kant will observe that
through reading one can have what is nothing less than an artificial illu-
mination: “clear representations” are a kind of gift, a flash of illumination
on a large map. “This can inspire us with wonder over our own being, for a
higher being need only call ‘Let there be light!’ and then, without the slight-
est co-operation on our part (for instance, when we take an author with all
that he has in his memory), as it were set half a world before his eyes.”21
More prosaic but equally important: the blind man can overcome the lack
of a sense, not just with some prosthetic aid (the cane), but also with the in-
troduction of the conceptual order of the sense that is being substituted. The
blind mind internalizes the organizational power of a missing sense, which
is to say, it grasps something that is alien to its own sensory system through
the symbolic mode of artificial memory. The new “part” of the manifold is
capable of then being integrated because the unity as unity is precisely not
concretely given: it can accommodate new organization just as the patho-
logical body can in making use of its own “parts” (and perhaps mechanical
ones as well) as prosthetic substitutes for original organs.22

The Technical Predisposition


I will end with Kant’s reflections on the human mind as exception with the
suggestion that what constitutes our cognition and separates it from the
bestial is just the capacity for this normative interiorization. The human is
defined by its more radical openness, a more radical “lack” that will forever
preclude a systematic automaticity because the unity of the mind is not a
relation between whole and part but between a unity and a gap that will
never be bridged.
    That gap is the origin of what Kant calls the human “technical predis-
position.” This is the capacity for manipulating things, a process that is at
once “mechanical” and psychic, one of the sufficient markers of human-
ity (along with the pragmatic and moral disposition) that separates it from

                                             T H E PAT H O LO GY O F S P O N TA N E I TY   105



“all the other inhabitants of the earth.” Key here is the idea of manipulation
(Handhabung); the focus is literally on the hand. As Kant explains, with the
advent of the human hand, a certain necessary spontaneity, plasticity, inter-
ruption, whatever we want to name it, is revealed concretely.23
    The hand is the hinge between nature and artifice, between the automa-
ticity of reason and the possibility of norm-generating judgment, because
the hand can both enact the will of the mind and reorganize the world itself.
As Kant will clearly state, “The characterization of the human being as a ra-
tional animal is already present in the form and organization of his hand,
his fingers, and fingertips; partly through their structure, partly through
their sensitive feeling.” Why is the hand a sign (a material instantiation) of
rationality? For Kant: “By this means nature has made the human being not
suited for one way of manipulating things but undetermined for every way,
consequently suited for the use of reason; and thereby has indicated the
technical predisposition of skill as a rational animal.”24 Undetermined. The
“form and organization [Gestalt und Organisation]” of the hand makes the
hand capable of organizing the unorganized, of introducing novel order into
the world; the hand is the origin of both the technical and rational dispo-
sitions. If the rational animal is by nature undetermined it must therefore
determine itself. But this novel, original, improbable determination must
always be integrated and continually reintegrated into the unity that is the
mind—a unity that can never be fully present to itself because the “parts”
that constitute it are always changing. And especially, we might add, the
patterns of thought involved in the spontaneous creation and manipula-
tion of these prosthetic implements. That is, of tools.
