9
Psychophysics
On the Physio-Technology of Automatic Reason




Lovelace’s speculations on a calculus of the nervous system exemplify an
important current of thought in the nineteenth-century—what will come
to be known broadly in the period as “psychophysics.” Figures straying
across the border between philosophy and the biological and medical sci-
ences tried to identify both the inner dynamics of cognition and their con-
nection with the activity of the nervous system—this in a period before
the accelerated advance of brain science and the emergence of a new ex-
perimental psychology later in the century. Indeed, the lack of any solid
consensus concerning the relations between mind and body in the period
stimulated much new thinking that went beyond traditional philosophical
inquiry. As Alfred Smee, author of the book Process of Thought (1851), noted,
“I was remarkably struck by the unsatisfactory account of the functions of
the brain, and I was surprised that so little appeared to have been done in
connecting mental operations with that organ to which they are due.”1
   The development in this period of machines like Babbage’s Engines, Wil-
liam Jevons’s logic piano, and Alan Marquand’s automatic electric reason-
ing machine did not, I suggest, signal a comprehensive mechanization of
the human mind; their automaticity, however, is a feature worth dwelling
on. Or at least, the “silent” operations of the artificial logic machines point
to an important zone of inquiry in the nineteenth-century theorization of
intelligence. The flash of insight that occurs “suddenly, without effort, like
an inspiration,”2 and the “inconceivable” presuppositions that fuel the cre-
ative leap of hypothesis, the cognitive challenge of the exceptional and the
anomalous—this kind of thinking could now be framed as essentially un-
conscious cognition. The leap of intelligence was a radical gap, to be sure,
in the experience of insight. However, that gap could be reconstructed by

116

                                                            P SYC H O P H YS I C S   117



tracing the unconscious roots of conscious reasoning—and, ultimately, the
role of the brain in the production of the creative thinking that was the hall-
mark of the human mind.
    The question of the cognitive unconscious, then, helps us understand
what was at stake in the debates about the brain in the nineteenth cen-
tury, and beyond. How was thought—especially intelligent and creative
thought associated with discovery, intuition, and epistemological insight—
mediated or produced by these physiological information systems? If it was
at least possible to conceive of a purely automatic mechanism generating
mental life, as Huxley advocated, the question that still lingered from the
early modern debates—the question of whether there was something in hu-
man thought that demonstrably exceeded the mechanisms of sensibility—
took on new significance in this new era of brain research.

Smee’s own effort to chart the mind results in what he takes to be the “fixed
principles” of thought. It is because these principles are fixed that Smee
has the inspiration to represent the complexity of the mind’s interactions
with a “mechanical contrivance” that would give results “which some may
have considered only obtainable by the operation of the mind itself.”3 That
is, artificial thought. Smee’s conjectural machine would encode every word
and sequence possible in the mind—thinkable in abstraction but an impos-
sible engineering task, since such a thinking machine, he admits, “would
cover an area exceeding probably all of London” and its movement of parts
“would inevitably cause its own destruction” (43). However, he does detail
the construction of a restricted version of this “relational machine.” The
important point, however, is that such a machine could give “an analogous
representation of the natural process of thought.” Which is not to say that
the mind is itself a machine. Indeed, Smee admits that the mechanical rep-
resentation only shows how superior is that knowledge “which is obtain-
able by the mind through the operation of the brain” (45).
    If that is not satisfyingly clear, what is obvious is that Smee positions
his thinking machine as more than just a modeling tool for understand-
ing the mind. It can, just like the notational system of analysis invoked by
Babbage, function as a supplement to the ephemeral nature of thought and
memory. It can also act as a tool for the breaking of habitual prejudices or
the eruption of passion, not because it reveals a truth, but because it dis-
plays in objective form the correspondence and nonconcurrence of partic-
ular logical statements. Ultimately, Smee will map the machine back onto
the brain, suggesting that the device could reproduce a reasoning process
“according to those principles which regulate the action of the brain in such

118   C H A PT E R 9



circumstances,” in effect claiming that the externalization and mechaniza-
tion of the brain activity has the advantage of artificially isolating it from
other activity in the body or mind, activity that could, as Hume well knew,
“interfere with a sober and correct judgment” (49). Still, if the machine
could reason “by a process imitating, as far as possible, the natural process
of thought” (50), no human artifact could instantiate what Smee (echoing
Kant in a way) calls the power of spontaneity. This reveals the infinite supe-
riority of the “cerebral organization” compared to our most ingenious con-
trivances. Left unsaid is exactly how the biological “machine” is capable of
such autonomy.
    George Boole’s much more influential work, the Laws of Thought (1854),
explored the same terrain—“the fundamental laws of those operations of
the mind by which reasoning is performed”—and was also concerned with
translating those principles into a system of representation, here a “calcu-
lus” that would function as a new methodological tool for the mind in ex-
panding its logical capacity. As Smee already asserted in his work, the logic
of the mind was, for Boole, facilitated by our use of discursive symboliza-
tion: “Language is an instrument of human reason, and not merely a me-
dium for the expression of thought.”4
    The limit of these projects is clear: the form of reasoning that could be re-
duced to fixed principles, even mechanized—namely, deductive logic—was
already a function of a kind of internal psychic technology, which is to say,
our use of a symbolic system of notation. Even more problematic was the
widespread recognition that the human mind exhibited forms of thought,
such as insight, analogy, and intuition, that defied rigid definitions of syl-
logistic reasoning inherited from the classic logical tradition. For philoso-
phers and proto-psychologists, as well as practicing neuroscientists, these
forms of thought were often understood to be the most productive, even
essential to the discovery of new ideas and other forms of invention. So the
scientific challenge for mid-nineteenth-century thinkers studying human
reason and intelligence was how to understand both the formal procedures
of logic and the more ephemeral capacities of the mind, all in the context of
a “natural history” of the sensible body and nervous system.
    John Stuart Mill perhaps best exemplified this trend, with his influen-
tial and controversial rethinking of logic as, at its foundation, a natural
and intuitive dimension of the mind and not the result of a formal sym-
bolic procedure. Reasoning was a fact of our embodiment. Mill’s examples
highlighted the significance of the layering of experience and the largely
unconscious process of integration (especially inductive formations) that

                                                                 P SYC H O P H YS I C S   119



would prepare the way for insights that emerged in the moment of deci-
sion. Central to his theory was analogy as both a cognitive function of the
mind underlying rationality and a basic form of operation for the nervous
system and brain. His example here is the coup d’oeil,5 the insightful glance
of the experienced mind.

   An old warrior, on a rapid glance at the outlines of the ground is able at once
   to give the necessary orders for a skillful arrangement of his troops; though
   if he has received little theoretical instruction, and has seldom been called
   upon to answer to other people for his conduct, he may never have had in
   his mind a single general theorem respecting the relation between ground
   and array. But his experience of encampments, in circumstances more or
   less similar, has left a number of vivid, unexpressed, ungeneralized analo-
   gies in his mind, the most appropriate of which, instantly suggesting itself,
   determines him to a judicious arrangement.6


Other figures would characterize the often-maligned category “hypothesis”
as a crucial dimension of human reason, indeed a core capacity that was
indispensable for the discovery of truth. As William Thomson, in another
work addressing the perennial topic of the “laws of thought,” published in
1849, pointed out, whatever the vagaries and risks of hypothetical conjec-
ture, without the insight that often comes in a “flash” when investigating
nature the scientist would be lost. This is how he described it: “This power
of divination, this sagacity, which is the mother of all science, we may call
anticipation.”7 It was obviously not clear how anyone could ever formulate
fixed principles for this kind of inference—what Thomson called “the logic
of anticipation, the philosophy of the unknown.”8
    This is all to say that a nineteenth-century preoccupation with mechan-
ical instantiations of logical processes and automatic devices in general
hardly indicated a general project to frame human thought or even human
reason as an essentially mechanical process—or even to say that human
thinking was some kind of output of cerebral activity. William Jevons, who
actually built a sophisticated reasoning machine in the 1870s, the so-called
logic piano, did characterize the process of logical reason as in essence a
process of “substitution,”9 which was akin to the industrial system of assem-
bling products with standardized replaceable parts.10 This kind of action
was the model for the logic machine, which would operate automatically to
arrange and “process” trains of reasoning based on the precise substitution
of terms. The formal instruments of symbolization and method could now

120   C H A PT E R 9



be liberated from the mind entirely and performed accurately and repet-
itively. As Jevons noted, logic was often called an “organon,” and in many
sciences the assistance of a vast array of technical machines was common-
place (107). The logic piano was just such a machine, to be used for logi-
cal assistance. Jevons was not at all willing to set up the logical piano as a
kind of substitute for human thought itself. As he remarked, “It cannot be as-
serted indeed that the machine entirely supersedes the agency of conscious
thought; mental labour is required in interpreting the meaning of gram-
matical expressions, and in correctly impressing that meaning on the ma-
chine; it is further required in gathering the conclusion from the remaining
combinations” (111 n.).
    Even more important, the machine was incapable of what Jevons called
intuition. For example, given the proposition A = B, the machine could not
infer on its own that B = A; one had to supply both propositions because it
could not intuit the identity. This was no mere technical observation; Je-
vons called it a “remarkable fact.” This is because he was, in his larger proj-
ect on the “principles of science,” interested in showing the importance of
such intuitive thought (Mill’s “induction”) for the advancement of knowl-
edge: “Hypothetical anticipation of nature is an essential part of inductive
inquiry, and . . . it is the Newtonian method of deductive reasoning com-
bined with elaborate experimental verification, which has led to all the
great triumphs of scientific research” (ix). As Jevons would explain, these
anticipations of nature are the leaps that make possible the kind of re-
search and observation that make possible new spheres of understanding.
The foundation of this kind of thinking was not amenable in any way to
the mechanisms of his logic processor. As he wrote, “The truest theories
involve suppositions which are inconceivable, and no limit can really be
placed to the freedom of hypothesis” (557). What was crucial to this kind of
creative thinking was the cognitive attention to novelty, especially its often
unsettling appearance (644).
    Here Jevons moves us further and further away from a machinic vision
of reason. Not only is the machine incapable of even the most basic forms
of intuitive anticipation, the inductive reasoning natural to the mind; it was
therefore also incapable of the even more creative turns that come with the
failures of anticipation. We are aroused to “mystery” precisely when the
“routine” of our knowledge is affirmed in unvaried “everyday observation.”
The confrontations with the “exceptional” need to be understood as “the
points from which we start to explore new regions of knowledge” (644–45).

                                                                         P SYC H O P H YS I C S   121



Peirce and Machinic Thought


Since calculation is so much of an external and therefore mechanical
business, it has been possible to manufacture machines that perform
arithmetical operations with complete accuracy. It is enough to know this
fact alone about the nature of calculation to decide on the merit of the idea
of making it the main instrument of the education of spirit, of stretching spirit
on the rack in order to perfect it as a machine.
                                            Hegel, The Science of Logic (1816)11


In one of his early essays in logic, published in 1871, the great philosopher
and semiotician Charles Sanders Peirce gave a formal analysis of the dif-
ferent modes of rational inference, supplementing the traditional catego-
ries of deduction and induction with that of “hypothesis”—that strange
and somewhat mysterious capacity for insight into a problem that is not
predicated on any specific evidence.12 True to his pragmatic orientation,
Peirce redescribed logic here as different forms of inference suitable to
the varying needs of the embodied mind. If deduction is the careful, atten-
tive process of deriving conclusions from trusted principles of knowledge
and induction is the at times unconscious reasoning that formed of habits
from repetitions of observations in similar contexts—habits that gave the
mind the security and efficiency of prediction—Peirce positions hypothesis
(which he will in later works rename “abduction”) as emergency thought. Hy-
pothesis becomes necessary, that is, in times of crisis, when our knowledge,
our trust in certain principles, say, or our inductive expectations about the
world, fail us.
    The essence of the hypothetical conjecture is, for Peirce, surprise, the
“unexpected.” Hypothesis begins with the startling result. And because of
its jarring appearance, the result at first has absolutely no context for un-
derstanding, or to put it more precisely, this result defies what our under-
standing would entail in this specific situation. Hypothesis is therefore en-
tirely conjectural.13 As Peirce explained, the mind must find some principle
associated with the anomaly and then imagine, with no evidence and not
even an indication of direction, a way that the anomaly could have been
generated. The value of the hypothesis is not in its speculative character but
rather lies in the fact that without its fantastic invention, the mind would
not know where to begin to look for clues. Discovery (especially in the sci-
ences) was first of all a purely cognitive act. The hypothesis can then be ver-
ified through directed observation and experimentation.14 As the French
philosopher Ernest Naville would note, in his own study of hypothesis from
1880, scientific progress cannot be accounted for solely by induction and

122     C H A PT E R 9



deduction reasoning. To understand “the special process of discovery” we
must introduce hypothesis, for which Rougemont, echoing Peirce, had
coined the neologism “conduction” in 1874, Naville remarks.15
    But what was the source of a hypothetical conjecture? Peirce, like so
many others in this century and even before, emphasizes its sudden and
unpredictable nature, which is to say, its essential mystery. “The abductive
suggestion comes to us like a flash. It is an act of insight, although of ex-
tremely fallible insight.”16 This was the kind of thought that had, by defini-
tion, no method or system that would guide us to the promising solution
to the exceptional problem. Peirce was more than willing to admit that de-
duction, the classic example of rational inference, was essentially mechan-
ical in that it relied on strict relations that could not vary. As he wrote in a
review of recent technologies from 1887, “The logical machines of Jevons
and Marquand are mills into which the premises are fed and which turn
out the conclusions by the revolution of a crank.”17 Peirce worked closely at
Princeton with Alan Marquand, who was developing an electrical variation
of Jevons’s logic piano. Remarkably, decades before Claude Shannon’s piv-
otal work on logical relays, Peirce offered Marquand the brilliant sugges-
tion (never taken up) that electrical circuits could be arranged in such a way
as to perform logical operations directly.18
    In any case, it might seem surprising to find Peirce admitting that the dif-
ference between the logical machine and the human reasoner was merely
the “place” where logical inference was taking place. As he once wrote:

      All that I insist upon is, that, in like manner, a man may be regarded as a
      machine which turns out, let us say, a written sentence expressing a con-
      clusion, the man-machine having been fed with a written statement of fact,
      as premiss. Since this performance is no more than a machine might go
      through, it has no essential relation to the circumstance that the machine
      happens to work by geared wheels, while a man happens to work by an ill-
      understood arrangement of brain-cells; and if there be room for less, still
      less to the circumstance that a man thinks.19


However, it is clear right from the seminal essay on logic of 1871 that Peirce
felt that deductive reasoning was by far the least interesting form of human
cognition, just a technique for “paying attention.”20 So if Hobbes’s notion of
logic as computation, Babbage’s theory of artificial engines, and the more
recent invention of logical machines left nothing to be desired in terms of
computational precision, Peirce insists that all these machines “have no
souls that we know of.” This was not some vague mystical rejection of ma-

                                                            P SYC H O P H YS I C S   123



terialist understandings of the mind. For Peirce, the machine “does not ap-
pear to think, at all, in any psychical sense.”21 In synthetic leaps of thought
like the abductive conjecture of an imagined case, machines (governed by
strict procedures that conditioned their movement from one configuration
to the next) would be at a complete loss.
    In the end, Peirce would express doubts about the mechanical perfor-
mance of even the strictest “necessary reasoning,” noting that a machine
like Babbage’s or Jevons’s was incapable of generating the “unexpected
truth” that comes in the process of reasoning, where initial premisses, for
example, can be reintroduced in creative ways. Even in chains of deduction,
then, there are moments when the reasoning path opens up “several lines”
of possibility and therefore demands a decision. Genuine human cognition
will always depend on the exercise of invention, which is present even in de-
duction but was utterly essential to the radical leap of conjecture. Crucial to
genuinely human thinking was the use of certain tools, from the relatively
mundane (such as pen and inkstand) to the complex (chemical instrumen-
tation) in scientific pursuits.22
    As Pierre Janet put it, in an 1889 thesis on automatism, and here we can
note an echo of Descartes, the “judgments” that are so essential to human
reason are phenomena that are radically different from the experience of
sensations and images; the “idea of resemblance” between two perceptions,
for example, is not itself something that could be a “sensation.”23 While de-
tailing the many automatisms central to human existence, Janet would ar-
gue that what distinguished the human was the presence of some “other
activity superadded [surajoutée] to this automatic activity.” What I want to
underline here is that the status of the brain was in question in these con-
ceptualizations of human thought and did not stand in for mechanistic
reductionism. As Janet said, “the automatic act is rigorously determined”
(476) and the exercise of judgment reveals a “true independence” (477); it
was a “power of synthesis capable of forming entirely new ideas which no
previous science had been able to predict” (478).
    The brain that emerged in the middle of the nineteenth century as an
object of serious experimental and physiological study was positioned as
something capable, at one and the same time, of both automaticity and
the very disruption of that automaticity. Janet, echoing Peirce, wrote that
judgment was a “new and unexpected [inattendu] phenomenon, like con-
sciousness itself, appearing in the midst of phenomena of mechanical
movement” (477). What was the origin of this break that was the unprec-
edented intervention? This was not really a purely philosophical question
for nineteenth-century intellectuals. As Janet reveals so clearly, the prob-

124     C H A PT E R 9



lem of creative thought was defined in terms of what we can call the natu-
ral history of the organism, in that the function of “novel” and unprece-
dented cognition was resolutely linked to the survival of the organism; the
synthetic capacity is likened to the political decision that must be made in
“new conditions” because the conservative forces of automaticity can no
longer produce “equilibrium” since they derive only from past experience
(486–87).
   The spirit of the intellect was not, then, a sign of some radical division
within the organism. This spirit emerged in the moment of the exception,
when the norms of automatism might fail.

      When the mind is normal, it consigns to automatism only certain inferior
      acts which, conditions having remained the same, can be repeated without
      inconvenience, but it is always active in carrying out new combinations at
      every moment of life, which are constantly needed to maintain equilibrium
      with changes in the environment. (487)


The pathology of “automatism” that is addressed in Janet’s clinical work is
not identified with automaticity itself but in fact the lack of this adaptive
and creative capacity. He writes, “But whether the environment varies be-
cause of misfortunes, accidents, or simply changes, an effort of adaptation
and new synthesis will be required, otherwise [the individual] will collapse
into the most complete disorder” (487).
