10
Singularities of the
Thermodynamic Mind



The emergence of thermodynamics and the study of organization as a func-
tion of energy and its dissipation provoked important new conceptualiza-
tions of organismic vitality. Claude Bernard on the internal regulation of
the body (the “internal milieu”) would be one notable early example. How-
ever, we can also see how the thermodynamic approach to technology (the
transformation and direction of energy) offered another angle on the ques-
tion of the self-interrupting spiritual automaton. That is, thermodynamic
models and the mathematical tools of this science opened the way to an un-
derstanding of how the lingering issue of this Cartesian spirit of judgment
could operate concretely within automated and self-regulating systems
(whether these were biological or artificial machines). The nervous system
was now often directly analogized to the communication technologies that
regulated vast networked systems like railways or colonial infrastructures.
Crucial to this vision was the idea that the direction and organization of
vastly powerful material forces would be dictated by the most ephemeral of
physical forces—that is, electricity.
   The dangers of a materialist reduction of the nervous system (not to
mention the complex mega-systems of the industrial and colonial age)
are obvious. So it is important to tease out of these intertwined domains
the conceptualization of the points of intersection within these machine-
information hybrids. What were the limits of automation? Where, in
the human being in particular, would be revealed a potential space for
intervention—not a space for the transcendence of the automaticity of the
machinery but rather for the appearance of indeterminacy or uncertainty,
conditions that demanded decision precisely because there was always
something that escaped the automatisms organizing this system.

                                                                        125

126   C H A PT E R 10



    One sphere for offering new scientific resources for this challenge was
thermodynamics. In his famous and influential essay, “On the Interaction
of Natural Forces,” which appeared in 1854, Hermann von Helmholtz takes
the time to give a concise but thorough history of automata, characteriz-
ing the early modern interest in constructing self-moving machines (his
examples include Jacques Vaucanson’s infamous defecating duck and his
flute-playing machine that mimicked the actual blowing techniques of hu-
man musicians) as an exercise in overly ambitious scientific enthusiasm—
to rebuild nature, to construct a model of the functions of men and ani-
mals. However, by the nineteenth century, interest in the automatic was fo-
cused squarely on the functions of the machine in the industrial age. “We
no longer seek to build machines which shall fulfill the thousand services
required of one man, but desire, on the contrary, that a machine shall per-
form one service, but shall occupy in doing it the place of a thousand men.”
So how to conceive the automaton in light of the new science of energy?
With the principle of the conservation of energy comes the problem of en-
tropy, the loss of energy in any physical system due to friction and collision,
and the inevitable conduction of heat from warmer to colder until homo-
geneity is reached. As Helmhotz put it, if the universe is left undisturbed in
its physical motions, “all force will pass into the form of heat, and all heat
come into a state of equilibrium.”1 At this point, there will be no change,
no transformation whatsoever—what we now call the “heat death” of the
universe.
    The question of the organic being must be posed anew in this context. The
automata that were models of living “machines” (from Descartes on) were
“clockwork” systems, Helmholtz observes, but there was never any consid-
eration of how these machines were wound up, energized, so to speak. But
what if we compare the living body to the steam engine? The machine, the
body, both must be seen as active, even destructive beings—constantly con-
suming and transforming energy in order to maintain themselves in chang-
ing environments. And, at least with organic beings, the worn out or dam-
aged parts of the system must also be repaired and replaced from within.2
    The automaton as something fighting against disorder—rather than
simply expressing order—opened up new concepts of will and action (and
“mind”) within machines and bodies.3 For Balfour Stewart, writing in 1874
on the conservation of energy, there were (as he wrote in his appendix) “vi-
tal and mental applications of the doctrine.”4 He points to the kind of phys-
ical structures that are balanced on a knife edge, in moments of radical in-
determinacy, where an “unstable equilibrium” will lead to an unpredictable
outcome. Or at least, the ultimate cause that pushes the structure one way

                                     S I N G U L A R I T I E S O F T H E T H E R M O DY N A M I C M I N D   127



or the other is so “exceedingly small” that it is beyond all measurement.
Stewart’s point is that there are different kinds of machines (whether in the
organic or technological sphere)—namely, those that are organized to be
highly predictable and stable so their behavior is calculable and those whose
“delicacy of construction” entails an essential incalculablilty (99–100). De-
pending then on the goal of the machine, it either tries to reduce instability,
or it takes advantage of it. If the “timepiece” is the quintessential example
of the first, the other kind of machine, where “the object aimed at is not a
regular, but a sudden and violent transmutation of energy” utilizes as its
means the “unstable arrangements of natural forces” (158). Any machine
with “trigger” points (quite literally the example of a rifle, say) would count
as an instance of this category—although significantly, Stewart will empha-
size that in reality the machine consists of both the rifle and the human that
wields it (159).
    Stewart’s provocative claim here is that the organism must be under-
stood to be this kind of incalculable machine; its internal instability is the
only way to explain, physically, its profound flexibility, what Stewart calls
its “freedom of motion.” He will suggest that “life is always associated with
machinery of a certain kind, in virtue of which an extremely delicate direc-
tive touch is ultimately magnified into a very considerable transmutation of
energy” (163). There is, Stewart argues, something obviously absurd about
a human being calculating its own movements, or those of any other hu-
man. The argument is drawn from chemistry and physics, not theology or
philosophy: living beings are constructed of unstable substances and must
operate in unpredictable and often hostile circumstances. What guides the
organism—“life” is what Stewart calls it—might be likened to a “great com-
mander” at the end of a chain of organizations in a “vast army” at war (161).
Telegraphic wires lead to the “well-guarded” room of command, and the
commander can send orders back through the same cables. And as Stew-
art says, what flows here is information. Life is not a sovereign presence ac-
tively coercing the structure of the body. What “causes” the army to move in
a coordinated way is that there is a flow of commands along the chain. The
“cause” of the whole movement, then, is one “delicate directive touch” in
that room—and Stewart suggests that the brain chamber is where we might
locate the directive force of life, “so well withdrawn as to be absolutely invis-
ible to all his subordinates” (162).
    Citing Stewart’s work, the thermodynamic theorist and physicist James
Clerk Maxwell would refine this model by noting that certain physical sys-
tems might be, in general, predictable and calculable based on their config-
urations, yet these systems may pass through “certain isolated and singu-

128   C H A PT E R 10



lar phases, at which an infinitesimal force may determine the course of the
system to any of a finite number of equally possible paths.”5 He makes an
analogy with the figure of the “pointsman” who, at a railway junction, has
to decide which trains go to which tracks. Maxwell will also speculate that
we could imagine the soul as the engine driver of the train, who by means
of valves directs the vast and powerful machinery of the steam locomotive.
But he would go on to think of the mental direction of the body primarily
in terms of the pointsman, or “steersman,” who intervenes precisely at the
critical moment when the predictable path of the particular entity reaches
a point of decision—what will be called a bifurcation in mathematics.6
“When the bifurcation of path occurs, the system, ipso facto, invokes some
determining principle which is extra physical (but not extra natural) to de-
termine which of the two paths it is to follow.”7 Maxwell is interested in ap-
plying to cognition and mental action these kinds of examples in physics
where natural laws consist in influencing direction—the process of mold-
ing and determining, for instance, as we see in the case of organisms. Not,
strictly speaking, “forces” in themselves, they are unconscious in the body
but become conscious in the realm of thought.8 The laws of thought are re-
lated then to the laws of organization and not “physical” laws of force. The
will is figured here as a possibility of direction but not in the usual sense of
participating in the action and reaction of material entities. The will is a ca-
pacity for deflection, and must be conceptualized within the framework of
Maxwell’s development of the mathematics of the singularity.9
    The organic being could not actively resist the second law of thermody-
namics if it meant using force to counter the effects of physical disorder.
The soul that directs the body is therefore not an active source of energy but
rather what Maxwell will describe as “that of a steersman of a vessel—to
not produce, but to regulate and direct the animal powers.”10 The tradi-
tional division between “free will” and determinism is replaced by Maxwell
with the idea of machines that are either largely stable and therefore pre-
dictable in their motion or in some way essentially unstable and therefore
susceptible to being drastically affected by relatively small impacts on the
system. The free will is more like a Lucretian atom, swerving and deviating
in an “uncertain manner from their course” (820). The implication is that
at definite moments in the life of a being there are points of bifurcation,
and in these moments an “imperceptible deviation” will be the determin-
ing factor for which path will be followed. The difference between lower
organisms and higher animals or humans, and the distinctions within ar-
tificial machines as well, will be measured by the degree of complexity. For
the more complex an organized system is, the more “singularities” will ap-

                                     S I N G U L A R I T I E S O F T H E T H E R M O DY N A M I C M I N D   129



pear in the system. And it is in these singular moments that deflection is
possible. “All great results produced by human endeavor depend on taking
advantage of these singular states when they occur” (822). Maxwell can re-
define the preeminence of the human now not so much in terms of a more
sophisticated or complex organization itself, but rather as a consequence
of the mathematically demonstrable instability and incalculability of these
systems. “It appears then that in our own nature there are more singular
points—where prediction, except from absolutely perfect data, and guided
by the omniscience of contingency, becomes impossible—than there are in
any lower organization” (822).
    Maxwell was offering a novel way of integrating the tension within the
human, between the demonstrated automatisms of both physiological and
mental life, and the irruption of spontaneity and invention in the midst of
regularity. The singularities are of course defined by the functions govern-
ing regularity, and they are by their very nature isolated occurrences. In any
case, Maxwell’s call for a science of singularities and instabilities is aimed at
removing the dominant “prejudice” in favor of determinism that perme-
ates contemporary research. The exception here is no longer the artificial
miracle generated by Babbage’s Difference Engine; it is the sign of a new
metaphysics, one that allows a certain contingency or even looseness in the
concept of the natural law. The “steersman” idea pointed to a concept of a
human mind that had its own systematic function but that could also enter
into the open space that was the organismic singularity to radically influ-
ence the normally automatic behavior of the physiological system.
    In a similar vein the French mathematician A. A. Cournot would argue
that the laws of the physical world and the laws of organization that held in
the world of living beings were two different things. Physics could not ac-
count for the phenomena of life, yet the seed of life develops from the “soil”
of physical laws. But in the physical world, an exception—the surnaturel—
could only ever be a miracle.11 The definition of organic life and the evolu-
tion of organic life depended on what was a kind of violation of the physi-
cal laws, in that it was the occurrence of small “deviations” that produced
complexity. This propensity to novelty was what continued to distinguish
organic life from the merely physical for Cournot. In moments of crisis, or-
ganisms were capable of “extraordinary dispensations.”12 The exceptional
was an exception but not really a violation of the physical laws of the uni-
verse; rather, the exception was a violation of the usual biological norms of
existence. In the singular case, nature abandons its usual course and is not
governed here by any other law. As was once said of the great monarchs of
the Old Regime, “si veut le roi, si veut la loi.” In other words, the appearance

130     C H A PT E R 10



of the radical exception in organismic beings just means that there is no
law that can explain this appearance; the singular is not really a violation
of the law but a moment where the law simply does not function.13 Writing
against the Lapalacian idea of total prediction made possible by the calcula-
bility of physical law, Cournot points to the organic sphere.

      He would have been forced to recognize in each species [type] all the charac-
      teristics of a law which the legislator repeals and replaces according to his
      views. At this count, for insects only, there would have been several hun-
      dred thousand laws to register in the Code of Nature, and laws which have
      changed several times supernaturally, that is to say extra-legally, by a sort of
      revolutionary measure or coup d’état.14


As we have seen, the constitution of freedom within the systems of organ-
ismic and technical machinery lay in the capacity for interruption, and the
instability or disorganization of a system (especially a living system) was
pinpointed as the localization of indetermination. But what exactly was this
capacity, or to put it another way, where was the point of instantiation for
the leap into the unprecedented that provided the opportunity for reorgan-
ization and creative invention, especially with respect to the organic, living
body? In the late nineteenth century, the brain would be a key site for fram-
ing this critical question.
