Frame

1
Autonomy and Automaticity
On the Contemporary Question of Intelligence




The historical evolution and development of artificial intelligence (AI) has
long been tied to the consolidation of cognitive science and the neurosci-
ences. There has been, from the start of the digital age, a complex and mu-
tually constitutive mirroring of the brain, the mind, and the computer.1 If to
be a thinking person in the contemporary moment is to be a “brain,”2 it is
also true that the brain is, in the dominant paradigms of current neurosci-
entific practice, essentially a computer, a processor of information. Or, just
as easily, the computer itself can become a brain, as the development of
neuromorphic chip designs and the emergence of “cognitive computing”
aligns with the deep learning era of AI, where neural networks interpret
and predict the world on the basis of vast quantities of data.3 These disci-
plines and technologies align as well with a dominant strand of evolution-
ary theory that explains the emergence of human intelligence as the pro-
duction of various neural functions and apparatuses.4
    In a way, this is a strange moment, when two powerful philosophies of
the human coexist despite their radical divergence. For in the world of so-
cial science theory, science and technology studies, and the critical human-
ities, the dominant framework of analysis has emphasized the historicity
and cultural plurality of the “human,” and has, over the past few decades,
moved more and more to a consensus that humans are just one part of dis-
tributed, historically structured networks and systems that subject individ-
uals to various forms of control and development. We are, that is, functions
in systems (political, economic, social, moral, environmental, etc.) that
seem so familiar and almost natural but can be relentlessly critiqued and
historicized.


2

                                                AU TO N O M Y A N D AU TO M AT I C I TY   3



    On the other hand, we have a conceptual and disciplinary line that has
increasingly understood human beings as essentially driven by uncon-
scious and automatic neural processes that can be modeled in terms of in-
formation processing of various kinds, and the brain is the most complex
network mediating these various processes. The result, to borrow the title
from a cognitive science paper, is a new condition, namely, “the unbearable
automaticity of being.”5 For the cognitive scientist, the human will is de-
monstrably an illusion, appearing milliseconds after the brain has already
decided in controlled experimental conditions.6 Consciousness, while still
a philosophical problem, is understood as just another evolutionary func-
tion, linked now to attention mechanisms that can prompt responses from
the unconscious space of operations. Whether we are thinking “fast” or
“slow,” to use Daniel Kahneman’s terms, the system of human cognition as a
whole is encompassed by the brain as the automatic—and autonomous—
technology of thinking.7 What else could thought be in the contempo-
rary scientific moment? As one psychologist observed a while ago, “Any
scientific theory of the mind has to treat it as an automaton.”8 If the mind
“works” at all, it has to work on known principles, which means, essentially,
the principles of a materially embodied process of neural processing. Ste-
ven Pinker, whom humanists love to hate (often for good reason), has put it
bluntly: “Beliefs are a kind of information, thinking a kind of computation,
and emotions, motives, and desires are a kind of feedback mechanism.”9
However crude the formulation, the overarching principle at work here is
important. Cognitive science and neuroscience, along with myriad AI and
robotic models related to these disciplines, cannot introduce what might be
called a spiritual or transcendental element into their conceptualizations.
Even consciousness, however troubling it may be, can be effectively dis-
placed, marked as something that will eventually be understood as a result
of physiological organization but that in the meantime can be studied like
any other aspect of the mind. As the philosopher Andy Clark claims, a key
contemporary philosophical issue is automaticity: “The zombie challenge
is based on an amazing wealth of findings in recent cognitive science that
demonstrate the surprising ways in which our everyday behavior is con-
trolled by automatic processes that unfold in the complete absence of con-
sciousness.”10

Much as we may not want to admit it, Yuval Harari, of Sapiens fame, is prob-
ably right about the current moment, in at least one crucial way. As he says,
“we” (cognitive scientists, that is) have now “hacked” humans, have found

4    C H A PT E R 1



out why they behave the way they do, and have replicated (and in the pro-
cess vastly improved) these cognitive behaviors in various artificial tech-
nologies.

    In the last few decades research in areas such as neuroscience and be-
    havioural economics allowed scientists to hack humans, and in particular to
    gain a much better understanding of how humans make decisions. It turned
    out that our choices of everything from food to mates result not from some
    mysterious free will, but rather from billions of neurons calculating proba-
    bilities within a split second. Vaunted “human intuition” is in reality “pat-
    tern recognition.”11


While we (rightly) rail against the substitution of human decision making,
in judicial, financial, or other contexts, by algorithms, according to the new
sciences of decision,12 there is nothing more going on in the human brain,
and to be fair, it isn’t like humans were not exemplifying bias before the
age of AI. As we know, the development of algorithmic sentencing, for ex-
ample, was motivated by the desire to avoid the subjectivity and variability
of human judgments.
    In any case, we have to recognize that Harari is channeling the main-
stream of science and technology on the question of the human: since we
are, so to speak, “no more than biochemical algorithms, there is no reason
why computers cannot decipher these algorithms—and do so far better
than any Homo sapiens.”13 Hence the appearance of recent books with such
horrifying titles as Algorithms to Live By: The Computer Science of Human De-
cisions, which helpfully introduces readers to concepts from computing
that can improve their day-to-day lives,14 and Noise: A Flaw in Human Judg-
ment, which advises us humans to imitate the process of clear, algorithmic
objectivity.15 But my main point is that Harari reveals the contemporary cri-
sis very clearly: it is a crisis of decision. “Computer algorithms,” unlike hu-
man neural ones, “have not been shaped by natural selection, and they have
neither emotions nor gut instincts. Hence in moments of crisis they could
follow ethical guidelines much better than humans—provided we find
a way to code ethics in precise numbers and statistics.”16 Computers will
make better and more consistent decisions because they are not decisions
in crisis but applications of the rule to the situation, objectively considered.
    The backlash against this vision of AI, however well intentioned, has of-
ten been driven by just the kind of platitudes about the “human” that hu-
manists and social science scholars have been dismantling for decades (if
not centuries). New centers for moral or ethical or human-compatible AI

                                                  AU TO N O M Y A N D AU TO M AT I C I TY   5



and robotics assert a natural “human” meaning or capacity that the tech-
nology must serve—usually couched in the new language of “inclusion,”
“equity,” and “fairness,” as if those concepts have not emerged in histori-
cally specific ways or have not been contested in deadly conflicts (in civil
wars, for example). As the home page for Stanford’s Center for Human-
Centered Computing proclaims, “Artificial Intelligence has the potential to
help us realize our shared dream of a better future for all of humanity.”17 As
we might respond: so did communism and Western neoliberal democratic
capitalism.
    But what do the critical scholars have to offer? At the moment, it seems
that there is a loose collaboration that is hardly viable for the long term.
One can critique technical systems and their political and ideological cur-
rents pretty effectively, and in the past years much brilliant work on media
and technology has defamiliarized the image of “tech” and its easy “solu-
tionism” with research on the labor, material infrastructures, environmen-
tal effects, and political undercurrents of our digital age.
    And yet: What can we say in any substantial or positive sense about what
can oppose the “new human” of our automatic age? What will ground a
new organization or animate a new decision on the future? “Inclusion,” for
example, is not a political term—or maybe more accurately, it is only a po-
litical, that is, polemical, term. The challenge, obviously, is that the consen-
sus among critical thinkers of the academy is that there is no “one true” hu-
man, or one way of organizing a society, a polity, or a global configuration.
However, lurking in much contemporary critique is a kind of latent trust in
an “automatic” harmony that will emerge once critique has ended—a ver-
sion of Saint-Just’s legitimation of terror in the French Revolution.
    We are facing then a crisis of decision that must paradoxically be de-
cided, but the ground of decision has been dismantled; every decision is just
an expression of the system that produces it, whether that is a brain system,
a computer network, or a Foucauldian disciplinary matrix. Is it even pos-
sible to imagine an actor-network system “deciding” anything? When we
have undercut the privilege of the human, where is the point of beginning
for a new command of technology, one that isn’t just a vacuous affirmation
of “multiplicity” or diversity against the Singularity? Or a defense of hu-
man “values” against technical determination?
    I want to suggest that the current crisis demands a rethinking of the hu-
man in this context, the evolution of two philosophies that seek to dissolve
the priority of decision itself. This cannot be a regressive move, to recuper-
ate human freedom or institutions that cultivate that freedom. We must, I
think, pay attention to the singular nature of automaticity as it now appears

6   C H A PT E R 1



in the present era, across the two philosophies. The goal of this project has
been to rethink automaticity, to recuperate what we can call autonomy from
within the historical and philosophical and scientific establishment of the
automatic age.18 What I offer here is not a history of automaticity, or a his-
tory of AI, or a history of anything. There is no history of AI, although there
are many histories that could be constructed to explain or track the current
configuration of technologies that come under that umbrella. But this is
also not a “history of the present,” or a genealogy, that tries to defamiliar-
ize the present moment to produce a critical examination of its supposed
necessity through an analysis of its contingent development. There has
been much good work in this area, but at the same time, the conceptual
or methodological principle is hardly surprising. We (critical humanists)
always know in advance that the historical unraveling will reveal, say, the
importance of money, or political and institutional support, or exclusions
in establishing what is always contingent.

Critique and Crisis in the Automatic Age


The historian Reinhart Koselleck published his postwar classic, Critique
and Crisis: Enlightenment and the Pathogenesis of Modern Society, in 1959, as
the Cold War emerged as a new epoch in world history.19 Koselleck tied this
new era to the foundation of a new technical apparatus. “History has over-
flowed the banks of tradition and inundated all boundaries,” he claimed.
“The technology of communications on the infinite surface of the globe
has made all powers omnipresent, subjecting all to each and each to all.”20
With the appearance in our own day of the digital revolution, which is only
accelerating in its expanse and reach into the operations and lives of the
globe, this statement seems all too relevant—although we are not so sure,
as one might have been in 1959, what these omnipresent “powers” really
are today, although we do know that technologies from automated drones
to algorithmic sentencing are surely vehicles of political and social control.
Koselleck’s goal in Critique and Crisis was to examine how the world had
come to the point where two political blocs not just opposed one another,
but actively excluded the legitimacy of the other, preparing the way for a
potentially annihilistic war. The roots of the crisis were to be found in the
kind of historical concepts inherited from the Enlightenment: “They are
the philosophies of history that correspond to the crisis and in whose name
we seek to anticipate the decision, to influence it, to steer it, or, catastroph-
ically, to prevent it.”21
   As Koselleck would explain, here and then in more detail in his concep-

                                                  AU TO N O M Y A N D AU TO M AT I C I TY   7



tual history of the term, “crisis” was already a question of decision. The cri-
sis was the moment when history could not predict the outcome, and there
was no automatic resolution. Crisis meant decision, for to recognize a crisis
is to know that a decision must be made.22 This is why preventing the de-
cision in a critical time may well be catastrophic. Other forces will define
the future or maybe even destroy it, at least for human beings. Koselleck’s
Critique and Crisis was indebted to the work of the German legal scholar Carl
Schmitt, whose theorization of sovereignty as decision in a time of crisis
was a warning to liberal democracies in the Weimar era, as well as a kind
of perverse “reason of state” principle for the Third Reich, during which
Schmitt continued to work and publish. After the war, however, Koselleck’s
invocation of the Schmittian decision in the context of new global techni-
cal infrastructures animating military machines of apocalyptic scale was
hardly unproblematic.
    Only a few years earlier, Schmitt himself had reflected on the new era,
supplementing his 1950 book, Nomos of the Earth, with an analysis of tech-
nology. In a set of dialogues on power and the state, published in 1954,
Schmitt gave an astonishing rebuttal, in a way, to the idea that the crisis of
the moment (the threat of unlimited warfare) demanded a decision. The de-
cision, he proposed, had been taken over, assimilated to the technical sys-
tem that now uses the human being as instrument rather than the other
way around. As Schmitt wrote, “The human arm that holds the atom bomb,
the human brain that innervates the muscles of the human arm is, in the
decisive moment less an appendage of the individual isolated human than
a prosthesis, a part of the technical and social apparatus that produces the
atom bomb and deploys it.”23 As Schmitt argued in this period, the question
was no longer the decision on the crisis but a crisis of decision. The new chal-
lenge of technology was its unprecedented independence: “The one who
manages to restrain the unencumbered technology, to bind it and to lead
it into a concrete order has given more of an answer than the one who, by
means of modern technology, seeks to land on the moon or on Mars.”24
    Today, technology, in particular, digital technology and the power of ar-
tificial intelligence, is raising the same kind of questions. No longer is it
assumed (if it ever really was) that the process of technology would be “ben-
eficial” to humanity, and the backlash has begun, with figures as prominent
as Elon Musk, Bill Gates, and Stephen Hawking warning the world of the im-
pending dangers of AI, for example. But how to meet the challenge? Musk,
fulfilling Schmitt’s prophecy, has suggested that starting afresh on Mars
might be a good idea. The libertarian Peter Thiel for some time champi-
oned the idea of independent city-states flourishing offshore in a techno-

8   C H A PT E R 1



anarchic paradise. (Thiel, by the way, actually knew Schmitt’s work, through
his interest in Leo Strauss, and famously invested in Facebook because he
recognized at work in social media anthropological principles explicated
by his teacher René Girard at Stanford.)25 But what would it mean to take
back technology, to make the decision for humanity and against the accel-
eration of automation and automatic governmentality, to borrow Michel
Foucault’s term?26

What I want to do here is prepare the way for facing this crisis of decision.
The aim is not to resurrect old concepts of liberty to counter the scientific
understanding of automaticity. Rather, we must confront the intimate (and
tangled) historical and philosophical connection between autonomy and
automaticity from within the very heart of a tradition that is understood to
be the very source of the pathology that is instrumental reason. This is not,
therefore, a history of a technology and research program (“artificial intel-
ligence”), nor is it an intellectual history of the concept of mind and body
in Western thought, though it intersects with these themes. In an import-
ant sense, this is not a history at all. What I am tracing is an entanglement
in modern thought, one that begins in a specific historical moment (the
emergence of a certain scientific worldview and method in the seventeenth
century) and the opening up of the possibility of a total mechanistic under-
standing of nature, including organic nature and our own living bodies. At
the same time, this modern scientific perspective allowed for, perhaps even
required, the persistence of a divine order, and this proved to be the space for
thinking anew what we can call the exception that is the human—part of
nature, yet forever outside of the natural. At the heart of this entanglement
was the machinic body and the nervous system as control mechanism, for
no longer was it enough to connect physiology with sensory experience.
Cognition itself would be reorganized around the living brain, and here the
exception of the human could be attacked or at least normalized in terms of
scientific methods of explication. This much we know from the history of
psychology, a discipline that emerged in a new form in this period.27 The
other thread in this entanglement is technology. As we know from much
work in the history of science on mechanistic models and metaphors in
this period of the “clockwork universe,” there was an unstable interplay
between artificial machines and the order and organization of nature, of
the cosmos itself. More recent work on the history of automata reveals the
new importance of artificial robotic beings for thinking the body and for
setting the stage for a total replication of human action—including cogni-
tion and rationality itself. Again, the seventeenth-century concept of the

                                                AU TO N O M Y A N D AU TO M AT I C I TY   9



human is never stabilized due to the intricate entangling of ideas about the
brain and nervous system, the theory and practice of human technologies,
and the philosophical reflections on the capacities of the human mind.
Descartes is our beginning point, since his work so clearly elucidates the
topology of this modern entanglement, the shifting boundaries that link
artifice, nature, automaticity, and human autonomy.
    What follows is not a history per se but instead an attempt to track the
multiple, evolving lines of thought that begin in this early modern mo-
ment, lines of thought that move from body to mind to nature to tech-
nology, thereby weaving new entanglements as certain ideas and concepts
solidify and come to the fore. I also try to show how new ideas and experi-
ences (e.g, industrialization, evolutionary theory) reconfigured the ways in
which the automaticity of the body could be linked with technical systems,
while at the same time the mind, as the inventive power of technology, could
still create the space for autonomy and the possibility of an exception from
nature itself.
    To be clear, the trajectories I am tracing here are resolutely Euro-
American and indeed, with rare exceptions, the domain of white male
minds. Normally, critics of the contemporary computational, algorithmic
regimes of surveillance and asymmetric legal justice can trace their or-
igins to a central line of thought deep in the Western tradition, one that
centers “reason” in the sovereign subject and aligns that reason with an
essential technical organization of the world. If this tradition begins with
figures such as Descartes, there is no doubt that the emergence of compu-
tational and cybernetic forms of rationality in the twentieth century accel-
erated this historical movement. My goal here is to delve into what Achille
Mbembe, echoing Nick Land, calls the “Dark Enlightenment” of contempo-
rary computational regimes,28 to rediscover within this new heart of dark-
ness that is Western rationality lines of thought that conceptualized a dif-
ferent form of reason, and different forms of epistemology, not through a
rejection of technology but rather with an intense reflection on the essen-
tial technical dimension of human thought itself. While the figures partic-
ipating in these lines of thought are no doubt among the most privileged
in intellectual history, my argument is that this tradition harbors resources
for an internal critique of what has been spawned by “modernity”—in all its
worst guises.
    We are witnessing today a moment when, to quote Mbembe, there is
“the very distinct possibility that human beings will be transformed into
animate things made up of coded digital data.” And in an extraordinary
comment, Mbembe warns of a loss of self-determination on a massive scale,

10   C H A PT E R 1



going so far as to write, “This new fungibility, this solubility, institutional-
ized as a new norm of existence and expanded to the entire planet, is what I
call the Becoming Black of the world.”29 For Mbembe, reason is no longer the
(unequally shared) faculty that defined the human as such: “The computa-
tional reproduction of reason has made it such that reason is no longer, or
is a bit more than, just the domain of human species. We now share it with
various other agents. Reality itself is increasingly construed via statistics,
metadata, modelling, mathematics.”30 My artificial history of reason is an
attempt to recuperate models of human thought that preserve an excep-
tional space for human autonomy despite the very real infiltration of tech-
nical supplements into our own nervous systems. Cybernetics was not the
end of thinking (pace Heidegger) but in fact the continuation of a complex
history that fueled both the automatization of the social and political world
and new concepts of human autonomy appropriate to this new condition.
This history is of course one that marginalized certain groups and individ-
uals and produced the kind of technologized world implicated in all the
worst excesses of Euro-American hegemony. But as I try to demonstrate,
there is at work here conceptions of the human that rely on notions such
as plasticity, error, interruption, and so on, concepts that have been effec-
tive in the many critiques of Western thought, especially in the domain of
media and technology.

The first part of the book tracks the ways in which some of the major think-
ers of “mind” in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries met with the
challenge raised first by Descartes, namely, how the intellect relates to a
complex organismic body armed with sophisticated sensory organs and an
integrating brain and nervous system. With Hobbes and Spinoza, we will
see how reason and cognition was, in part, the result of an artificial regi-
men of training, linked to a nervous body that was capable of formation and
re-formation. For Spinoza, this insight offered a path to thinking anew the
ways in which human thought were connected to materiality, at the site of
the body but also at the very site of God. A crucial element here will be the
figure of artifice. I then take up Leibniz, whose infamous doctrine of pre-
established harmony will be reframed as automatic harmony. Again, I tease
out different lines of thought to see how Leibniz deploys order and orga-
nization across different fields—the body, the mind, and the natural cos-
mos writ large—with an eye to how the creative capacity of the mind can
help us understand how the human can maintain its exceptional character.
   This sets up the analysis of Hume and Kant, in which that status is re-

                                                  AU TO N O M Y A N D AU TO M AT I C I TY   11



lentlessly dismantled in favor of an analysis of the human mind that em-
phasizes internal processes and laws of regulation. If Hume set out to
dismantle early modern pretensions through a refiguring of the “animal
spirits” and the emergence of reason in the midst of passionate activity,
Kant thoroughly systematized the plurality of cognitive operations while
speculating on the peculiarity of organismic causality. My goal in these
chapters is to isolate the challenge of autonomy and creative intelligence
as it appears in accounts of the mind that rigorously articulate the automa-
ticity of cognition itself. Kant is a threshold to the modern neuroscientific
worldview, one that resolutely embodies cognition and perception in the
structures of automatic neural machinery.
    The second part of the book ranges more widely, through new psychol-
ogies, thermodynamics, evolutionary thinking, and so on, to see how in
the period of industrialization in Europe thinkers and scientists reframed
the body as both within and outside the artificial regulations and organiza-
tions produced and demanded by new circuits of manufacturing and eco-
nomic ordering. The lines of thought move through the new brain sciences
to emerging experimental psychology and refigured philosophy, where we
can see technology itself emerge as the marker of the human exception—in
evolutionary time but also in terms of individual human development. The
goal of this part of the book is to show that in the midst of automatic ma-
chinery, intellectual figures from a wide variety of domains understood the
mind to be a space of possibility for interrupting automaticity, using newly
available concepts and language that were to be found in disciplines such as
thermodynamics, evolutionary theory, or neuroscience.
    The third part explores, in what can only be a preliminary way, the rich
territory of interwar thought, to see how radically new concepts of the in-
tegrative nervous system, alongside new philosophical approaches to mind
and body spurred by the physiology and psychology of both humans and
animals, drew on—while simultaneously influencing—a new and intense
interest in the rise of automatic technologies, technologies controlled not
by human operators but by complex new informational systems. This sets
up part 4, where the very idea of “artificial intelligence” emerges with the
development of the digital computer during World War II. Having followed
the often-errant paths of several lines of thought, we will see in the early dis-
ciplines of cybernetics and AI a continuity with earlier concepts and prob-
lems, now filtered through the most radically automatic technology ever
invented, namely, the digital computer. In this moment when brain, mind,
and computer were first becoming fused in certain disciplinary frame-

12   C H A PT E R 1



works, a host of other possibilities were in play, and the argument here em-
phasizes how the radical automaticity of the computer did not inevitably
lead to the kind of reductive cognitivism dominant in contemporary sci-
ences of the mind and body but in fact provoked significant and sophisti-
cated rethinking of the nature of technology itself, and its relationship to
the human mind. The final part of the book tracks this last line of thought—
a series of concepts and frameworks that cross disciplines but are linked
by the key philosophical issue of what I call technogenesis, to use the term
employed by Bernard Stiegler. An analysis of an example of contemporary
neurocognitive science, the theory of predictive processing, I argue, offers
a critique from within cognitive science itself, as contemporary researchers
and theorists struggle with the entanglement of ideas that must be under-
stood across this longer historical time axis.

This project of providing an “artificial history” of human intelligence is of
course a massive one. I offer here only a failed version of this more grandi-
ose vision. The lines of thought I trace and the concepts I sift out are frag-
mentary, selective, and very limited, hampered by the constraint of time,
the contingencies of research, my specific abilities and languages, my own
idiosyncratic interests and psychic challenges. There are, of course, many
other lines of thought that point in a dizzying plurality of different direc-
tions, and while I do think it is fair to say that the core concepts and issues
inherent in my “artificial history” do emerge historically from within a par-
ticular (and let it be said, peculiar) European constellation, the network of
intersection, opposition, and juxtaposition would only get richer as the
threads from different contexts and zones of thinking are confronted in an
extended time and space.
   Still, with respect to our current crisis of decision, I hope at least to make
the case that there is a critique of the automatic era that is possible from
within the domain of technology and from within the domain of the auto-
matic in particular. Autonomy can be rethought as the foundation of one’s
own norms: the artificial history of intelligence reveals a kaleidoscopic va-
riety of examples of how the decision on norms is always dependent on a
certain openness to automaticity, to the automatic regulation of human life
on many different planes. What grounds critique in this space is the special
character of human beings—poised between the automaticity of the organic
and physical world and the automaticity of its own technical being. The hu-
man is not outside natural or artificial life. But thinking, I argue—by trac-
ing intersecting and divergent lines of thought in neurology, philosophy,
biology, technology, and psychology, from Descartes to deep learning—is

                                                  AU TO N O M Y A N D AU TO M AT I C I TY   13



not possible except in that gap between the two. There is no natural intel-
ligence. All intelligence is artificial. And so, we might say, there is no ar-
tificial intelligence, at least as we usually think of it, because machines are
not living and are (unlike us) only artificial. Hence this is not a history. It is
a conceptual trajectory that aims to release from contemporary ideas his-
torical traces of the question of intelligence as it emerges as the very mark
of the artificial.
