11
The Dynamic Brain




The history of brain science in the nineteenth century has often been
framed as a struggle between the (ultimately successful) advocates of “ce-
rebral localization” and those who saw the brain as a decentralized organ.1
Without diminishing the importance of these debates for the history of
neurology, it is crucial to recognize that the boundaries between these po-
sitions were never always clear or rigid. And, as I want to emphasize here,
what links the two perspectives is the underlying if not always explicit
problem of staging within the brain key thresholds, the lines between, say,
animal and human, or between instinctual, habitual, and creative (or, we
might say, artificial) cognitive behavior. If the brain was understood to be a
kind of neural machine, the human brain raised very particular challenges,
since it was identified as the site of the human exception—the site, that is,
of a special kind of intelligence that exceeded mere physiological or envi-
ronmental demands.
    Indeed, the ambiguity can be seen clearly as these debates open in Eu-
rope, with the startling and seminal experiments carried out by Marie-
Jean-Pierre Flourens, beginning in 1815. When Flourens surgically removed
various sections from animal brains, these animals would subsequently
exhibit various pathological conditions, most notably the complete lack of
perception, initiative, and judgment when portions of the cerebral spheres
were lesioned, for example, and then the disappearance of balance and mo-
bility when the cerebellum was taken out. Flourens showed the complex
intersection and interactions of tasks taking place in the brain by disturb-
ing the functions. One could eliminate the perception of visual phenom-
ena, for example, yet the automatic systems of visual sensation (such as the
operations of the iris) would still operate independently.2 While the theory

                                                                           131

132   C H A PT E R 1 1



of brain localization was not new, before Flourens it was all essentially pure
speculation, which complicated the controversial efforts of Franz Joseph
Gall and his collaborator, Johann Gaspar Spurzheim, earlier in the century,
to found the new discipline of “phrenology,” which infamously mapped the
surface of the skull as an indication of the spatial location of certain intel-
lectual functions.
    However, Flourens’s demonstration of the functional division of the
brain must be juxtaposed to his fundamental and much-debated claims:
first, that the nervous system was fundamentally a unity (ch. 12) in which
the “energy” of each of the parts influences the others, creating a “unique
system” that would then coordinate the parts in a hierarchical order of con-
trol and subordination (243); and, second, that within the distinct zones
of the brain neural tissue had a general capacity to instantiate these func-
tions. This theory would come to be known as the “equipotentiality” of the
brain tissue, though Flourens did not use this term; today we would say
plasticity. The theory was based on the idea that if the intelligence of an
animal had a “determined location,” that is, its own organ (namely, the cere-
bral lobes), then the “property” of intelligence (perceiving, judging, willing)
was clearly unitary in its operation, and therefore could not be localized
within the cerebral lobes (244). The key demonstration of this hypothesis
was the fact that even with localized surgical destruction within the cere-
bral lobes, the exercise of intellectual function was usually not disturbed
(as long as the destruction did not go past certain bounds) (265). As Flou-
rens explained, the lobes must operate as an ensemble, so “it is completely
natural that one part can compensate [suppléer] for another, that as a result
intelligence could either continue—or come to an end—through any one
of them” (264).
    Generally speaking, France was considered the center of leading re-
search on the brain in the wake of Flourens’s work, and for the following
decades there was a cautious consensus against the most radical localiza-
tion theories, in line with Flourens theory of equipotentiality and the ce-
rebral distribution of functions in separate but interacting spheres. Yet in
1861, Paul Broca’s startling discovery of a “language” area in the human
brain—he identified postmortem highly specific damage in the brain of a
patient who had suffered from a well-studied severe language disability—
opened up more concerted efforts to “map” the location of more discrete
functions in the cerebral organ.3 The introduction of electrical stimulation
methods in both animal and human experimentation allowed for a much
more precise and disciplined methodology, leading to a new era in neuro-
surgery once doctors could seek out lesions in specific zones according to

                                                         T H E DY N A M I C B R A I N   133



symptoms and avoid damaging sensitive areas. By 1908, the different zones
of the brain, carefully differentiated by distinct tissue types, had been iden-
tified, and the German neurologist Kordanian Brodmann, in collaboration
with several other researchers, published a definitive map (still in use today)
that provided a comprehensive topography for the subsequent localiza-
tion of various functional capacities in experimental studies.4 (Figure 11.1.)
    Yet the isolation of these specific functions and their spatial coordinates
only displaced the crucial problem of explaining the crucial fact of integra-
tion and coordination of the myriad operations of the brain. And Flourens’s
initial demonstration of neural “compensation” in the face of damage or
injury could hardly be accounted for by a strict localization hypothesis.
The development of the neuron doctrine in the late nineteenth century, in-
stigated by revolutionary staining technologies that revealed for the first
time the microstructure of nerve cells, raised radically new questions con-
cerning the nature of neural connectivity and communication. In this con-
text, the interplay of automaticity and flexibility would be reimagined. The
psychic operations, which were understood to be mostly unconscious, need
not be considered “fixed” just because of their automaticity and routine
nature.
    Revisiting the eighteenth-century theory of habit, brain researchers hy-
pothesized an active brain, dynamically adjusting itself to the environment.
As Henry Beaunis argued, in 1876, following on his study of somnambu-
lism, “Cerebral organization, a necessary condition for psychic phenomena,
can be continuously modified under the influence of impressions coming
from either outside or from our body itself.”5 With repetition came habit,
and the process could be explained as a transition from conscious atten-
tion and reaction to unconscious automaticity within the brain as a unitary
organ—a dynamic of maintaining an “equilibrium.” The capacity of the
brain to change itself was fundamental, and as Beaunis notes, it is not only
through repetition that reorganization takes place. With a single, intense
experience (we might say an extraordinarily exceptional one) “the modi-
fication produced only one time can become permanent, and this modi-
fied nerve center thus reacts differently than it would have done before the
modification.”6
    Beaunis indicates here the openness of the brain to interference. De-
scribing the power of the hypnotist, he explains that an “unexpected shock”
delivered to the nervous system can interrupt its course. The success of the
hypnotic intervention in clinical cases relies on this cerebral shock because
it initiates the modification and hence reorganization of the brain. The im-
plications are obvious: To what extent, Beaunis asks, is the brain subject to

Figure 11.1. From Korbinian Brodmann, Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der
Großhirnrinde (1909).

                                                         T H E DY N A M I C B R A I N   135



such shocks in other situations, perhaps producing the pathological (or nor-
mal) state itself as a series of radical self-enclosed modifications? So while
Beaunis affirms his commitment to localization of functions in the brain,
his depiction of habit as the acquisition and superposition of new cerebral
organizations that supplement any “innate” order reveals at the same time
a vision of a fundamental neural plasticity.
    In lectures given in 1877, the neurophysiologist Charles-Édouard Brown-
Séquard put this issue of cerebral openness at the center of his doctrine.
Admitting that different functions have different organs in the brain, he
would argue that the organ was not a fixed spatial object but instead a net-
work of connected cells “diffused in many parts of the brain,” cells that form
a “whole” through the union of fibers made possible by constant commu-
nication between the cells.7 Virtually all the cells of the brain, he suggested,
could take on any of the various functions. The best proof of this theory
was the many cases where brains overcame radical damage, for example,
children who had half their brain diseased and yet still developed normal
language and intellectual abilities. To commit to localization therefore
meant conceiving of a new topology of organization that exceeded three-
dimensional mapping.8 The famed pathologist Camillo Golgi, who devel-
oped a revolutionary staining technique, would criticize in 1883 the prevail-
ing research that focused so much on localization, which was not, he said,
“in perfect harmony with the anatomical data.” He insisted on the impor-
tance of the neural networks formed by the extensive interconnection made
possible by the multiple links between individual cells and others through-
out the brain. A “rigorous” localization of function made no sense in this
framework, as Golgi argued for a new concept of organization based on the
“diffuse network” that conjoined cerebral “provinces.”9 With the network
idea, it was plausible to see the higher intellectual functions, which were
responsible for the more abstract and flexible modes of behavior, as more
or less freed from spatial determinations altogether.
    Although the Scottish neurologist David Ferrier is renowned for his con-
tributions to brain mapping and functional localization, and drew criticism
from Golgi as a result, the question of the higher intellectual capacities of
the human mind was not for him simply a matter of locating the area of
the brain associated with those capacities. Ferrier distinguished the human
from the animal (and marked the gradations of all higher animals) accord-
ing to their potential for volition. Based on extensive experimentation ab-
lating animal brains (he would, in fact, later be the first one charged under
new anticruelty laws), he saw that rabbits, for example, compared to dogs

136   C H A PT E R 1 1



were more governed by “autonomisms” and therefore were not disturbed
as much by destruction to the cortical centers. Conscious movement was
not automatic and required what Ferrier called education. So in the human
case, where “volition is predominant,” extensive “and laborious” education
is necessary in order even to function capably in the environment. Most
birds are virtually “conscious automata,” with little in the way of develop-
mental potential, while “the human infant can scarcely lift a finger on its
own behalf.”10 Linked to the nonautomatic human brain was the capacity to
retrain even after catastrophic injury. So while Ferrier believed that the in-
telligent brain was a function of the complex operation of both hemispheric
halves, nonetheless, even with destruction of an entire hemisphere, indi-
viduals have been able to acquire the full complement of functions, even
those that seemed to be consistently localized.11
    The tension revealed in the brain debates on localization and distribu-
tion of function points to the constitutive tension at the heart of human
cognition, the existence in one being of both natural automatism and an
equally natural capacity for exceeding in some way cerebral determina-
tions. Ferrier, like so many others in this period, was quick to identify the
cortical lobes as crucial for human intelligence, given their predominance
compared to other animals—and equally quick to point to the supposed
“great differences in the development of the lobes” among the races, mark-
ing the racial hierarchy of “mental powers.” At the same time, his theory
of the brain denied any specific “seat” of intelligence as it emphasized the
significance of association with the activity of other “centers” and their “re-
spective cohesions.”12 Finally, Ferrier would remark just how critical the use
of symbols was for human intelligence, which could be linked directly to
our ability to use abstract ideas and form conceptual relations—leaving
open the question of how symbols arise in the brain in the first place.
    Much of the comparative and anatomical work on the brain in the late
nineteenth century was of course intertwined with the evolutionary un-
derstanding of the development of species and their respective place in the
process of specialization. It was not just that the brain was understood to be
progressively developed from the appearance of sensory organs in simple
creatures to the highly complex nervous systems of the higher mammals.
The brain itself could be interpreted as a kind of palimpsest of evolution
itself.
    The idea that the brain was a recapitulation of its own evolution was
most explicitly conceptualized by John Hughlings Jackson, whose work, es-
pecially in epilepsy, led him to the conclusion that seizures revealed what
he described as a condition of “de-evolution,” where various regions of the

                                                         T H E DY N A M I C B R A I N   137



brain were deactivated, allowing for a regression to certain automatisms
generated by lower brain centers.13 Hughlings Jackson articulates a thread
implicit in nineteenth-century brain science, a thread that crosses many of
the disciplinary and theoretical disputes, namely, that the brain was not a
final product of evolution but in fact an organ still in the midst of a pro-
cess of evolution. The tension between automatism and creative “freedom”
in the brain was resolved in a way similar to the theory of habit: original
responses are, through repetition, consolidated in the brain’s structure as
an automatic reflex. But this theory of habit is now played out along a long
temporal axis. Hughlings Jackson argues that the most basic autonomic
controls of the brain have been long fixed by evolution and transmitted
through a genetic inheritance, while other topological spaces of more re-
cent lineage have a more or less essential determination (as Ferrier and
others also argued).
    What is most tantalizing about Hughlings Jackson’s theory is the idea
that the highest functions of the human mind are located in the most recent
cerebral acquisitions, areas that were the site of a stage of neural evolution
that was still ongoing. The cortex now understood as a space of evolution-
ary dynamism, testing, adapting, improvising—all this entails a fundamen-
tal openness of structure. This means that the least organized centers are at
the same time the most complex, according to Hughlings Jackson, in that
they are capable of the greatest variety of behaviors. This capacity is what
can explain the exceptional status of the human mind without invoking
metaphysical distinctions and without rejecting the main tenets of evolu-
tionary theory. The flexibility and creativity of our intelligence stems from
the flexibility and creativity of the higher brain’s own lack of determination.
“If the highest centres were already organised, there could be no new or-
ganisations, no new acquirements.”14
    There was no longer, then, an abrupt division between “automatic” and
volitional for Hughlings Jackson. If the human was an automaton, he re-
marked, it was never a perfectly automatic one, give that the brain revealed
evolutionary layers arranged from “most to least automatic.” “A perfect au-
tomaton is a thing that goes on by itself. . . . To say that nervous arrange-
ments go on by themselves, means that they are well organised; and to say
that nervous arrangements go on with difficulty, if at all, by themselves, is
to say that they are little organised.”15 The very lack of organization opens
up more room for what he calls “correct adjustments in new circum-
stances.” The automatic automaton, with its total determination of cerebral
responses would be perfectly adapted to the circumstances of its original
environment, but in the context of evolutionary transformation it would be

138   C H A PT E R 1 1



incapable of any adaptation to “new conditions.”16 Becoming automatic, in
other words, is to become “more perfectly organized.”
    Thinking the brain in the late nineteenth century was therefore never
simply a matter of replaying the metaphysical debates over dualist ontol-
ogies, nor was it a question of taking a materialist or vitalist stance on the
nature of the corporeal “machine.” Theorizing the brain as an organ meant
taking seriously the fact that its operations defied all easy reduction and
necessarily demanded new orientations precisely because the brain was at
once a space of determination and lack of determination.
    Charles Sherrington was the influential neurologist who coined the
crucial term “synapse,” used to describe the junction between nerve cells.
For Sherrington, this “gap” was the site of an active process of contact and
not, as others had theorized, a material bond across some kind of space.
Sherrington eventually synthesized a massive amount of neurological re-
search (including his own important experimental work) in his book of
1906, based on his ten Silliman lectures delivered in 1904 at Yale Univer-
sity.17 There he argued for a strong theoretical interpretation of the ner-
vous system as a whole, defined by what he called its essential integrative
action. The nervous system, Sherrington demonstrated, was an exceed-
ingly complex, highly differentiated, but also completely unified organ.
Even the simplest automatic responses, often considered in complete iso-
lation, were, he showed, in fact the result of a “total” reaction of the sys-
tem as a whole to a specific irritation or excitation on the periphery (114).
Unlike other “mechanical” systems in the body, however, such as the circu-
latory system, the nervous system could operate simultaneously across its
network, over relatively long distances, through what Sherrington called
“waves of physico-chemical disturbance” along multiple lines of stationary
cells that were vehicles of these informational diffusions. And as a system,
it was continually being “disturbed” internally by the activation of, for ex-
ample, sensory nerves. These irruptions of activity, Sherrington would ar-
gue, citing numerous experimental studies, required a reorganization of
the system, one that was tightly interconnected and constantly subjected
to what Sherrington called internal “breaks” that upset its “relative equilib-
rium” (182). The mutability—plasticity—of the system was essential to its
operation, because it had to radically reconfigure its “pattern” in an ongo-
ing process of internal reaction and action. The nervous system was a site of
competing reflexes, producing internal interference requiring new synthe-
ses. Through a network something like a telephone exchange, the nervous
system adjusts connection points in a spatial and temporal flow, changing

                                                         T H E DY N A M I C B R A I N   139



its topological patterning with each interference or disturbance, like a ka-
leidoscope after being suddenly tapped (233).
    Sherrington redefines consciousness in this context as a function of the
nervous system’s adaptability. Learning is the process of “adapting” certain
brain centers for “other uses.” The “organs of control” in the brain, the site
of “adjustability,” are “among the most plastic in the body” (391). In evolu-
tionary terms, these higher brain centers show how the nervous system
is not something adapted to its environment; rather, adaptation itself is the
very function of the nervous system. “We thus, from the biological stand-
point, see the cerebrum, and especially the cerebral cortex, as the latest and
highest expression of a nervous mechanism which may be described as the
organ of, and for, the adaptation of nervous reactions” (392–93). Conscious
thought appears when the habitual reactions and adjustments no longer
work effectively. As Herrick put it in an essay on the evolution of intelli-
gence, consciousness is a phase when “non-stereotyped actions” are re-
quired because the reflexes are no longer adequate.18
    This model of neural flexibility, Sherrington believed, can explain why
human beings, in particular, are so successful: they possess the maximum
“adjustment capacity” (392). But if human thinking and reasoning are de-
fined as the ability to “forecast the future” by synthesizing past memories,
what distinguishes this intelligence from similar (if less complex) processes
of learning and anticipation in the animal mind?
    As neurological science and evolutionary theory insisted, intelligence
had to be explicated by physiological processes, and these processes in turn
were always aimed at the survival of the living being—including human be-
ings. As Ralph Lillie, the Canadian American neurologist who would later
construct an artificial nerve cell, explained, the body had a whole array of
“compensatory and regulatory devices” that allow for an improved “organic
equilibrium.” These devices, he observed, were not fundamentally differ-
ent from those “used to control the rate of energy-consumption in artifi-
cial mechanisms (thermostats, governors, rheostats, etc.).” The internal
alteration of structure allows for the restoration of “normal conditions.”19
Intelligence, as Sherrington already said, is what allows for an adjustment
to anticipated future events. What, Lillie asked, would be the physiological
mechanism to explain that capacity? In a strange, almost proto-cybernetic
rereading of Kant, Lillie will say that intelligence is just the way that a sys-
tem’s “permanent organic predispositions or adjustments” (we might say,
in psychological terms, categories and empirical concepts) allow it to grasp
particular and singular experiences as objects of knowledge. The univer-

140   C H A PT E R 1 1



sal concept or frame is just one of the many permanent mechanisms of
adjustment, the particular “event or condition in nature which calls this
mechanism into action and so brings the organism into effective—i.e., self-
conserving—relations with its conditions of life.”20
   The intelligent action is therefore no more “purposeful” than the behav-
ior of the safety valve on a boiler, the “governor” that will be later be hailed
as the forerunner of the cybernetic notion of negative feedback.
