13
Creative Life and
the Emergence of
Technical Intelligence


Life, in this period of evolutionary thinking, evaded any strict mechanistic
explanatory model: it would have to be conceptualized as fundamentally
creative, in the sense that the organism was perpetually adjusting and reg-
ulating its own “internal milieu,” to use Claude Bernard’s phrase, just as it
was actively responding in flexible ways to its unpredictable environment.
“Life,” it was said, “is perpetual auto-regulation, an adaptation to changing
exterior conditions.” The organism “always renews itself, and it is always
the same.” Life is revealed as the existential force of defense against “the
enemies that attack it.”1 As so many neurophysiologists and psychologists
could demonstrate, the plasticity of the nervous system and especially the
open fluidity of the associational centers in the cerebral lobes were likely
the locus of this creative action.
    One thinker immersed in these ideas was the influential French philoso-
pher of science, the spiritualist Émile Boutroux. In his words, “brute” mat-
ter was organized in the living being, marking a “true creation” of order, but
this organization was accompanied by an “elasticity” of behavior during
“breaks in equilibrium,” a creative potential inherent in even the most sim-
ple organisms. This was due to a fundamental indetermination.2 Boutroux’s
counter to any overly physiological reduction of thought was to highlight
its essential activity. It was not a “function” or a material entity. Conscious
thought was the active transformation of external data into internal infor-
mation, a “living mold” capable of a radical metamorphosis, crossing the
abrupt threshold between the self-enclosed nervous system and what was
given beyond the body. The “idea” or concept was the form through which
thought transmuted the substance of external material reality into some-
thing assimilable to the nervous system as a mode of organization (115).

152

                     C R E AT I V E L I F E A N D T H E E M E R G E N C E O F T E C H N I CA L I N T E L L I G E N C E   153



    So consciousness does not develop out of physiology, by definition, be-
cause it is the activity that transcends physiology—it is a “new element, a
creation” (117). What is crucial to the argument here (and it is important not
to dismiss this kind of work as a mere exercise in “vitalism” or spiritualism)
is the independence of the logic of the mind, which enables the articula-
tion in concepts of relations and orders that are simply not capable of being
formed by a physiological system, however open and flexible and creative
it might be in its own terms. For Boutroux, the appearance of the “ideal” in
the organism opens up the possibility of purpose—exactly what was miss-
ing in Lillie’s reductive account. What is possible in the conscious intelli-
gent being is a new synthesis of the goal of life (self-conservation) and the
goals inspired by the idealization of natural order itself, which is to say, the
coming to consciousness of natural order. The organism, as complex sys-
tem, is a hierarchy of heterogeneous organs and processes. But that hier-
archy is only made present and active within the conceptualization of the
conscious mind.
    The turning point here is Boutroux’s redefinition of the exception that
is the human—not merely the translator between body and nature, or the
mere consciousness of natural order, but in fact the vehicle of wholly new
orders of existence. What distinguishes the humans (already evidenced in
the evolutionary literature) is their capacity to transform, to make “obsta-
cles” to life into new instruments of life. Technology is the artifact of a re-
organization of the forces and order of nature, the creation of a new form
of beauty (188). Through the production of organization outside the body,
human beings share a world that is in nature but not of nature. The human
is thus capable of a social existence that has an independence analogous
to the independence of the human mind itself. Individual consciousnesses
translate the order of the external world into the “language” of the organis-
mic being via the nervous system, but they now also translate the artificial
and exterior orders of the “ideal” that constitute the essence of a creative
and technical human life.
    Intelligence, then, is what is particular to animals that are not just more
capable, in the evolutionary sense of their nervous systems being well
adapted to their environments. As James Mark Baldwin argued in his im-
portant reconsideration of Darwinian models of natural selection, it would
be impossible to imagine consciousness—as a new adaptation—ever aris-
ing in the course of normal evolutionary development. If consciousness of-
fers a creature “choice” in the direction of its actions, how would it choose
the right path and thereby become a useful adaptation? It would be more
likely that the organism with its own possible modes of action would evolve

154   C H A PT E R 13



according to its own testing of the environment. What Baldwin recognized
is that it is possible that the “individual life history” of an organism—its
specific form of life (not its internal structure)—could be what is selected
for, not a transformation in the organism itself. He contrasts this “organic
selection” with Darwinian “natural selection,” which would not be able to
explain any survival of organisms in conditions that are changing, since in-
herited “reactions” would not be adequate to the task of life.3
    How would the elements of a life history operate in evolution? It cannot
simply be the “emergence” and inheritance of some special “adaptive capac-
ity” nor the “special creation” of every organism for its “peculiar environ-
ment.” As Baldwin notes, the only option is to imagine that new stimulations
that are provoked by the change in the environment actively modify the
inherited reactions of the organism, producing new actions that are condu-
cive to life in these new conditions. Of course, this can happen through the
long processes of evolution. Baldwin is however pointing to cases where
adaption occurs in the specific lifetime of an individual organism.4 What
he suggests is that the internal pleasure and pain system guides the organ-
ism in the acquisition of useful habits—including the habit of inhibition in
the encounter with what has been experienced even one time as painful.
Habit is the securing of “vital stimulations,” and this is true across the or-
ganic life-world. Or, as Baldwin puts it counterintuitively, the organism is
endowed with the habit before it even forms it, in that the organism uses
individual concrete experiences to confirm or deny its own inner norms of
evaluation. The point is that variations are conserved that lend themselves
to intelligent (i.e., flexible and adaptive) modifications of the organism’s
own specific organization in the formation of an individual habit regime.5
    So Baldwin will agree, with respect to intelligence, that the evolution
of the nervous system can be understood as part of a process where (and
here he quotes Lloyd Morgan) “the most plastic individuals will be pre-
served to do the advantageous things” (447). With such radical plasticity,
it would be possible that an individual would create a new action (entirely
unprecedented) “under stress of circumstances” (449) and that that action
was necessary to survival. Those others that did not follow the individual
in performing this action would not survive. This is the core of the “new
principle” of evolution then: “The ontogenetic adaptations are really new,
not preformed; and they are really reproduced in succeeding generations,
although not physically inherited” (451). In the course of evolution, many
creatures retain instinctive behaviors because they are well adapted to their
environments. With others, plasticity comes to the fore, through the capac-
ity to learn not by testing reactions but through consciousness. This way

                           C R E AT I V E L I F E A N D T H E E M E R G E N C E O F T E C H N I CA L I N T E L L I G E N C E   155




Figure 13.1. From James Mark Baldwin, The Individual and Society; or,
Psychology and Sociology (1911).




the learning that takes place in an individual is not bound to the individ-
ual.6 (Figure 13.1.) It is a form of Lamarckian evolution because the con-
scious learning can be transmitted to others. Here Baldwin cites the well-
known examples of animal learning and sociality and the importance of
play and imitation in the animal world. As he puts it, “By the exercise of
such gregarious or quasi-social impulses as these, the young are trained in
the habits of life of their kind” (41). Social heredity is predicated on suffi-
cient “‘plasticity’ to absorb lessons of the family and group tradition. Each
must be plastic in the presence of the group life and its agencies” (42).
   The emphasis in this period on plasticity and the active capacity of reor-
ganization in the face of repeated breaks, disturbances, and interferences
created a framework for understanding novelty and the appearance of the
exceptional in organic nature and the human in particular. However, that
very paradigm of adaptability could occlude the important and still un-
formed question (raised by Peirce and others): How does the mind escape
the logic of the body—however plastic it might be—altogether and know
itself and others in a way that animals simply cannot? A related question,
which would become perhaps more important, was already being asked
in the first forays into a theory of cultural evolution: How was the human
mind capable of internalizing the experiences of foreign brains, of shar-
ing thought itself? Baldwin’s “organic selection” in the case of the human
displaces the origin of this special capacity for imitation and the sharing of
conscious thought across the boundary of the individual nervous system.
   This is what Peirce described as the quality of “thirdness,” the relational
meaning of a symbol that is incarnated in a specific sign but is entirely inde-

156   C H A PT E R 13



pendent of that concrete instantiation because meaning is a function of the
network of shared intepretation (unlike iconic signs—“firstness”—that relate
to perceptual features, or indexical ones—“secondness”—that “point” to an
absent cause).7 Given the truth that intelligent thought (conscious and oth-
erwise) was obviously embedded in the body’s complex neural machinery,
and given that the brain was the most plastic organs in the higher animals,
the exception of the human could not be isolated in terms of the individ-
ual mind and body. Understood in evolutionary terms, the human revealed
a chasm, namely, our separation from our natural adaptive capacities and
learned habits, which we shared with virtually all animals that possessed
nervous systems, and the creation of a genuine “second nature” in that nat-
ural body, a second nature formed by forces external to the nervous system,
forces that in fact deployed the nervous system for its own purposes.

“Man is preeminently plastic, educable in a supreme degree.”8 This may
seem a vague affirmation, and we have encountered versions of it across
different lines of thought, stretching back to Descartes. However, in the
context of the early twentieth century this statement is deceptively simple.
Edward Bradford Titchener was not in fact suggesting that the openness of
human minds was just the most extreme concluding point of an organis-
mic plasticity at the center of evolutionary development. As he understood,
human education seemed to constitute something altogether new: the
education of the child, he said, is really the artificial extension of plasticity
beyond its normal limits—temporally and spatially, so to speak. Yes, most
organisms tended to become more and more automatic over time, as they
acquired reflex habits from life experience, supplementing inherited in-
stinctual behaviors, and these new automatisms enabled them to survive
in their particular environments. Human intelligence, however, was not
simply a suite of automatisms, a system of responses that came from the
repetition of experiences shaping and organizing the plastic higher brain.
The implication of this analysis, in line with the kind of thinking charac-
teristic of the period, is that human thinking as intelligence involved more
than just neurological plasticity. It emerged from what might be described
as the creative deflection or reappropriation of plasticity itself as a habit.
    The American philosopher Charles Judd clearly articulated the complex-
ity of plasticity and habit in his own analysis of human evolution. Judd had
trained (like so many other early enthusiasts of the new discipline of psy-
chology) with the important experimentalist Wilhelm Wundt in Germany,
and eventually translated Wundt’s works into English. To attack the core
of the anthropological problem, he explained, one had to recognize the

                    C R E AT I V E L I F E A N D T H E E M E R G E N C E O F T E C H N I CA L I N T E L L I G E N C E   157



fact that one set of animals somehow broke free of their biological deter-
mination. Established physiological organizations (even relatively flexible
ones) at some point gave way to these unusual and exceptional creatures,
who are “characterized by intelligence, meeting the emergencies of their
lives by a mental adaptation of themselves rather than by a purely phys-
ical adaptation.”9 That odd locution, “mental adaptation of themselves,”
suggests the novelty of the human as the species that internalizes the evo-
lutionary process itself. As Judd will propose, consciousness will serve as
the threshold concept; this was what brought the external environment
into the individual organism, not simply as sensory information (which re-
quired no thought), but as an organization foreign to the nervous system’s
natural operation. The form of consciousness “remolds” that environmen-
tal organization in relation to the individual’s physiological needs that are
also represented as formally ordered in consciousness—there is an echo here
of Boutroux’s theory. Judd realizes that the inner world of the higher ani-
mals, especially that of humans, is not merely concerned with physiologi-
cal needs: the mind becomes capable of ever more complex organizations
of its own experience.
    But what is perhaps more important is that consciousness in the human
case can bring together in one psychic “space” the inner order and the struc-
tures of the environment. This is why the human mind can, according to
Judd, synthesize its model of both the inner world of experience and the
outer world; the result is that the mind can then “attack” the environment
to force it to serve the inner life of the individual. The “outer world itself
is remodeled to conform to the inner pattern.”10 This foundational creative
capacity is best revealed in the act of reorganization that is in the end es-
sentially a technological intervention. The human being, Judd comments,
“molded materials, following his ideas, into forms and combinations that
never under any chance could have come into the world through the mere
operation of physical forces.” The human produces, in other words, not new
“reactions” to the environment but rather new forms that become templates
for the concrete “reworking of external reality.”11
    What this means in terms of evolutionary anthropology, then, is a break
in the natural order, a split between creatures of adaptation and the human,
who now concentrates on the “indirect methods of attacking nature”—
which is to say, builds technologies and artificial infrastructures to ensure
survival. Instead of, say, “cultivating strength” to oppose some natural ob-
stacle, human beings develop “science and engineering and indirect me-
chanical devices.”12 Crucial to Judd’s theory here is the existence of another
break: humans are no longer limited to their individual consciousness.

158   C H A PT E R 13



The remaking of the world is a shared participation in a world of ideas and
forms that exceeds the limits of the natural cognitive faculties. And so, Judd
tells us, it is through language and symbolic life, the vehicles of this cre-
ative reorganization of the world, that we are able to catch a “glimpse into
the conscious life of a fellow being.” For Judd, “art carries over from man
to man the inner possibilities of rearranging the physical environment”13—
a process we might now call niche construction.

Bergson’s Human Technician


This is the threshold that Henri Bergson will position as the very distinc-
tion between human and animal. The human is not defined by its flexible
reactions, its habits, or even its freedom from instinctual automatisms.
Like many others, most notably Willam James in this period, Bergson will
(especially in Matter and Memory) highlight the essential “indetermination”
of organic life and the open, plastic form of the nervous system. However,
what makes the human the appearance of an intelligent being is the point
when freedom—something that defines the very process of life itself as a
creative activity occupying “zones of indetermination”—exceeds its own
structuring space of activity. As Bergson put it, freedom, when it appears
as intelligence, “proceeds to construct constructive machinery.”14 Human
cognition, for Bergson, is not, then, a capacity for decision in the confronta-
tion with the exceptional moment, the radical indeterminacy that defies all
memory and instinct. Human action as the response to challenge now con-
cerns itself with the reorganization of nature itself. The evolutionary process
is now split, between the construction of new organisms with new struc-
ture and capacities and the creation of an organism that will itself, by “fash-
ioning inorganic matter,” resolve threats to its existence (142).
   This is why, for Bergson, we are not so much Homo sapiens as Homo faber;
our intelligence resides in the “faculty of manufacturing artificial objects,
especially tools to make tools, and of indefinitely varying the manufac-
ture” (139). As Bergson observes, all animals use tools or machines; it is
just that the implement is a natural one, forming part of its own body, op-
erated through inherited instincts—the faculty of using organized instru-
ments. Human intelligence “as it leaves the hands of nature” is revealed in
the process of organizing itself: “constructing unorganized—that is to say
artificial—instruments” (150). For Bergson, this leap is a function of the
exteriorization of thought itself into the materiality of the unorganized
object. Just as the rhythm of speech is the reproduction of the rhythm of
thought, the exteriorization of consciousness is the penetration of the spirit

                    C R E AT I V E L I F E A N D T H E E M E R G E N C E O F T E C H N I CA L I N T E L L I G E N C E   159



into matter, the relation of soul and body, and it is because human thought
finds its way into matter that the meaning of things (language, tools, sym-
bols) is inherently mobile, unlike the natural signs of the animal or insect
world, which are always bound to the “thing signified” (158).
    What links Bergson’s theory of mind, spirit, evolution, and technology
is the concept of form, the organization that is incarnated—but never ex-
hausted—by its concrete instantiation. Intelligence bears on the nature of
“relations” between concrete things; instinct refers to the concrete only. In-
telligence is therefore the striving to make external things into organs of
its own formal understanding. With human technology, life is making itself
visible in external forms that are themselves radically contingent from the
perspective of nature. And in exteriorizing thought itself, human minds
open themselves up to the other: our own thought passes “into the soul of
another.”15 Of course, this is where the question of the social intervenes.
How are these artificial organizations of matter, technologies, related to
one another? How are they coordinated? As Bergson will observe, in Cre-
ative Evolution, new technologies cannot help but disorder social relations.
We are, he says, “only just beginning to feel the depths of the shock” that
is the invention of the steam engine. The revolution of industrial society
has “upset human relations altogether” (138). The industrial age will mark,
Bergson predicts, a whole new epoch in human civilization, akin to the
Bronze Age or the era of stone implements.
    This new world of technology is like an organism; a new orientation will
be required to understand the world of the machines. As Werner Sombart
observed, in his 1910 “Technology and Culture,” the question of the impact
of technology demands acknowledgment of the independent logic of the
technical sphere itself. We find, then, that technology is not just one dimen-
sion of a culture, or even an instrument of cultural processes and activi-
ties. Sombart’s radical thesis is that the primary culture of technology is the
basis of all human culture: “There is no cultural manifestation that is not
based in some way on dependence on primary technology.”16 Even human
institutions—the church, the state—are manifestations of technological in-
ventions that make possible new techniques of control and organization—
communication technologies, weapons, and so on. The cultural influence
wielded by the newspaper in the modern age is itself fully dependent on
technology: “It could not exist without an infinite supply of paper, the ro-
tational printing press, or the telephone and telegraph.”17 For Sombart, we
must learn to isolate the specifically technological effects in human cul-
ture, to establish, we can say, a concept of technology.


Prophecy



THE FUTURE OF
EXTENDED MINDS
