3
Spiritual Automata
From Hobbes to Spinoza




Man alone is a concrete Spirit.
        Jean-Baptiste van Helmont



Organisms and Machines: Hobbesian Rationality


For those seeking early modern roots of artificial intelligence, Hobbes is of-
ten cited for both his mechanistic “reduction” of cognition to the physics
and physiology of matter in motion and his infamous remark that “by rea-
soning, I understand computation [per ratiocinationem autem intelligo com-
putationem].”1 What usually goes unremarked is the original distinction of
the natural and the artificial in Hobbes’s conceptualization of the human.
The natural world of living creatures implies the existence of forms of orga-
nization and systemic integration that work automatically to produce com-
plex and varied action. What distinguishes the human is its capacity for
artificial forms of behavior. Indeed, for Hobbes intelligence is not naturally
computation; rather, intelligence is dependent on the acquisition and de-
ployment of a new technology of organization that allows for rigorous pro-
cessing of information. Hobbes looks to machines such as the abacus, or
“paper machines” like accounting ledgers,2 to emphasize that it is precisely
the artificial system that allows thinking to do more than it ever could in its
natural state.
   Reason is “attained by industry.” Philosophy is therefore the disciplin-
ing of the forms of natural thinking inherent in human beings; it is a form
of what Hobbes will describe as cognitive agriculture. As Hobbes put it in
De Corpore, “All men can reason to some degree, and concerning some
things: but where there is need of a long series of Reasons, there most men

                                                                             33

34   C H A PT E R 3



wander out of the way, and fall into Error for want of Method, as it were
for want of sowing and planting, that is, of improving their Reason.”3 This
reason—with its artificially linear furrows and precise, regular distribution
of “seeds”—is, we find in Leviathan, a method of manipulating names, espe-
cially universal names, the most precious seeds of knowledge. Remember
that for Hobbes the name itself is an artificial unity: a multitude of experi-
ences is made one through the prosthetic of a material sign.4
    Unity is a critical issue for Hobbes and not just because of his political
argument for singular sovereign power. Hobbes’s model of the human is
organismic and not so much mechanistic, as we are so often led to believe.5
As Hobbes explained in his late text Decameron Physiologicum (1678), “It is
very hard to believe, that to produce male and female, and all that belongs
thereto, as also the several and curious organs of sense and memory, could
be the work of anything that had not understanding”6—in other words, the
organic body resists comprehension because its order and reproduction of
order cannot be deduced from the mere existence of given matter put in mo-
tion. Bodies have an organismic order with their own logic of operation, and
they are therefore the result of an invention, a “product” of intelligence.
This is perhaps why Hobbes struggles to explain how our naturally orga-
nized bodies could ever extricate themselves from the automaticity of natu-
ral cognition. How can intelligence produce itself from nothing? What is
the theory of generation?
    Hobbes emphasized that a natural body (“animal”) is a collection of me-
chanical parts—the heart a spring, the nerves so many strings, the joints so
many wheels—these parts are organic, and what is at stake here is not the
materiality of the body but instead, as Hobbes writes in the introduction to
Leviathan, how one gives “motion to the whole body, such as was intended
by the artificer.”7 To imitate nature with automata, he implies, some insight
into how natural bodies are animated is needed—which is also another way
of saying we need to understand how natural bodies produce and maintain
their unity.
    The figure who coined the term “mechanical philosophy” in fact agreed
with Hobbes on this score, underlining the importance of the question of
organismic order in this period. Robert Boyle would admit that it was im-
possible to imagine, at the origin of the universe, that the “Great Mass of
matter” having been “barely put into motion, and then left to itself ” could
ever produce the order of nature, in particular organic nature—“such curi-
ous Fabricks as the Bodies of men and perfect animals, and such yet more
admirably Contriv’d parcels of matter, as the seeds of living Creatures.”
Boyle thought it necessary to add another principle, “an Architectonick

                                                          S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   35



Principle” that would through “skilfull guidance of the motions of the small
parts of matter” transform the confused Chaos into an orderly world.8
    Without exactly denying this implication, Hobbes leverages the very
ambivalence of the distinction between the automatic machine and the
natural body in order to highlight the artificial character of political sov-
ereignty, the real subject of Leviathan. The commonwealth is described as
an “artificial man,” created to protect and defend individuals. But unlike
the automatic machine, the automaton that is the commonwealth has to
imitate the organism by having that “life and motion” animating a “whole
body.” The trick, which is at the center of Hobbes’s argument but easy to
forget, is that this particular automaton will have, as he puts it, an “artificial
soul”—the sovereign figure who will produce and maintain the unity of the
commonwealth.
    The obvious but often ignored truth that lies behind this claim is that an
organic body has such a soul naturally, though this soul—we can really call
this organization—has nothing to do with the Aristotelian version, accord-
ing to Hobbes. In any case, successful imitation of the function of a natural
soul entails a clear understanding of the organic version that comes before
it. To be clear, nowhere does Hobbes argue that animal (or human) bodies
are mere machines—though to be sure he often seems to be saying exactly
that when he wants to highlight the materiality of human experience and
action; in fact, he recognized that the organization of bodies requires a new
form of explanation.
    This distinction between the natural body and the artificial machine
is in fact essential to Hobbes’s body-politic analogy, given the importance
in his work of the sovereign figure as the substitute for the automatic or-
dering principles that inhere in organisms but are absent in machines. In
chapter 42 of Leviathan, for example, Hobbes critiques the argument that
in both the “natural body” and the automaton-commonwealth, individual
members “depend one of another.” For Hobbes, it is important to recognize
that any coherence in the state is dependent on the sovereign, the political
“soul,” such that in the absence of sovereignty (in a civil war, say) the lack of
“common dependence” means the dissolution of coherence—and Hobbes
pointedly notes that this is just like when the parts of a dying natural body
“dissolve into earth for want of a soul to hold them together.”9
    Human beings are not naturally in agreement at all, hence any agree-
ment is “by covenant only, which is artificial,” and it is precisely this artifi-
cial construction that cannot sustain itself, be “constant and lasting,” with-
out intervention and coercion directing the parts making it up (120). On the
other hand, the unitary “system” of systems (155) that is the commonwealth

36   C H A PT E R 3



can learn to become “organic” to the point where it is even capable, Hobbes
says, of artificial procreation—that is, the formation of colonial “clones,” so
to speak, that, like a child who has matured and become independent, can
be emancipated from its parent metropolis (175–76).
    The analogy between living unitary organisms and artificial common-
wealths depends on an understanding of how biological tissues and organs—
the subsystems—are integrated into an overall system that provides the
unity and direction necessary for maintaining life. In De Corpore Hobbes
draws on the mechanistic physics of his time, stating that “all Resistance
is Endeavour opposite to another Endeavour, that is to say, Reaction.”10 To
understand an organism, Hobbes realized, means to understand how orga-
nized arrangements of matter could produce specific kinds of “reactions”
to events in the world. The living body is not made of particles but instead
organs, and it is the “whole organ” that reacts to motions outside of it. The
reaction of the organ is therefore conditioned wholly by its organization,
“by reason of its own internal natural motion,” as Hobbes puts it.11
    The sense organ, in particular, conducts its reaction via the nerves to the
brain, where the endeavor of the organ appears as “Phantasme or Idea.”12
But given the “endeavor” (like Descartes’s “coded figures”) is now sepa-
rated from the organ, the endeavor “appears” to the mind as something
external—outside the body, that is. Hobbes, like Descartes, understands
that the motions of objects hitting the organs of the body produce inward
reactions that are organized and directed due to the internal configuration
of the organs themselves.
    Furthermore, as Hobbes points out, if sense is nothing more than reac-
tion, then the body must have some way of retaining within itself that re-
action as motion. Again, this will depend on the precise configuration of
the organs involved. He can imagine inanimate reaction producing what
he calls a “Phantasme,” but it would cease to exist as soon as the object was
removed. As he writes, in Leviathan, “For unless those bodies had organs,
as living creatures have, fit for the retaining of such motion as is made in
them, their sense would be such as that they should never remember the
same.”13
    Hobbes therefore constructs his physiologically based psychology on
“organics” and not mechanics. He lays out, in Leviathan, a distinction be-
tween what we would call the “autonomic” operations of the body’s internal
regulatory functions and the “voluntary” motions that direct movements
in an environment. The vital motions begin “in generation” and continue
throughout life—circulation of blood, breathing, nutrition, and so on. What
exceeds the automaticity of the motion of organs and reaction is the retain-

                                                                   S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   37



ing of sense in the organs of cognition. The important question: How ex-
actly does the unnatural organization and reorganization of thought—the
very technologies of language and reason—appear within a natural body?

The “Umwelt” of the Bloodworm: Spinoza on Reason


Each Umwelt [subjective environment] forms a closed unit in itself, which is
governed, in all its parts, by the meaning it has for the subject. According
to its meaning for the animal, the stage on which it plays its life-roles
[Lebensbühne] embraces a wider or narrower space. This space is built up
by the animal’s sense organs, upon whose powers of resolution will depend
the size and number of its localities.
                                  Jakob von Uexküll, Theory of Meaning (1940)14


Despite radical philosophical differences, Descartes, Hobbes, and other
early modern figures were, we can say, positioning the mind as something
simultaneously both inside and outside of the organismic body—a claim
that opened up corporeal psychologies but also the possibility of a connec-
tion between cognition and the intelligent order of nature itself. This would
of course lead to the some of the most troubling philosophical puzzles of
this period. Spinoza’s thought, I propose, marks a new approach altogether.
He will reject Hobbes’s attempt to ground the rational mind in the sensing
body while refusing to displace the mind into some higher plane of exis-
tence. In a radical turn, Spinoza will confront for the first time the philo-
sophical question of how to understand how our corporeal experience of
the world and the ordered world that we experience are both parts of a sys-
tem that exceeds and incorporates, so to speak, these two different domains
simultaneously.
    However, if Nature (“God”) is one, how is it possible to claim that the hu-
man mind—as a fragment, however privileged, of that unity—could have
true knowledge of this universal unity, given that it comprehends at one
and the same time our cognitive experiences and what is emphatically not
experience, namely, the external “what” of extended existence that the
mind perceives in fragments?
    To answer this question, we will begin not with God but instead a par-
asite—a microscopic being, namely a bloodworm,15 that Spinoza, a lens
maker by trade, speculates about in a letter to Oldenburg from 1665. Imagine
a little being that lives in our veins, Spinoza proposes, a worm that is capa-
ble of distinguishing by sight the different particles of blood (lymph, chyle,
etc.) that surround it. This “little worm,” Spinoza explains, could “observe
by reason how each particle, when it encounters another, either bounces

38   C H A PT E R 3



back, or communicates a part of its motion” and therefore could navigate
its way through the bloodstream.16 However, what escapes the worm’s expe-
rience is the the systematic quality of the blood understood as a unity with
a “universal nature.” These individual particles “adapt themselves to one
another, in relation to their size and shape, that they completely agree with
one another and they all constitute one fluid together.”17 What Spinoza is
saying it that the worm recognizes the particles as “wholes” that interact
with other similar entities according to regular laws but does not see that
the blood is itself a whole, actively governing the behavior of its constitu-
ent parts. The point of this exercise is to remind us that we humans are in
exactly the same position as the bloodworm. All bodies in nature, Spinoza
explains, are like these particles of blood, determined in a specific and cer-
tain manner by other entities, their motions governed by a higher system
of unity that comprehends them, and these systems—all systems—are ulti-
mately regulated by the total unity that is the entire system of the universe.
    Spinoza is here seizing on a lacuna in early modern thought. If all
bodies—especially organic ones—are subject to the formal order that struc-
tures them, where can we draw the boundaries between unified systems
and those that are what Hobbes called “subordinate systems,” or organs?
When we (or the bloodworm) perceive some body as a “whole,” we under-
stand that all the parts “cohere,” in that they adapt themselves to each other
and interfere with each other as little as possible. The threshold between
part and whole is marked by the idea in our mind of agreement and dis-
agreement only—that is, we grasp a whole by distinguishing it from other
ideas that do not agree at all with it. However, that particular whole may
well adapt itself to another whole and be understood as a “part” of some
larger system. Spinoza’s conclusion is that the human mind, or the blood-
worm’s, could never grasp the coherence of nature as a whole, since we only
ever have access to very particular perspectives and cannot track how every
demarcated unitary order related to every other in the entire cosmic order.
The bloodworm would have to leave its Umwelt in order to understand how
the blood as a system regulates the parts. Similarly, the human mind would
have to get outside of its own specific experience—and ultimately outside
of nature itself—in order to grasp cosmic order. Given that the human body
and the human mind are themselves undeniably parts of nature, that es-
cape is absolutely impossible. The part can never transcend itself to grasp
the totality of a system of which it is part.18 At best, we can experience dis-
ruptions of our reasoning that are based on the properties that we have ac-
cess to—an action whose cause is the larger system that encompasses the
parts we perceive and reason through.

                                                                       S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   39



    Still, we must understand that the mind and the body are not the same
kind of thing. The body is a part of Nature, a part or expression of the mate-
rial and physical attribute of the universe, which is to say, it is a specific
formation in the total organization of all substance. At the same time, the
mind is a part of the intellectual Nature that represents the “whole” of Na-
ture as extended and formed substance. The individual mind represents
in ideas its own particular and limited natural environment, the one that
the finite individual body reveals to that mind through the senses. This is
a deflationary account. Even as Spinoza admits, with Descartes and Cud-
worth (and Hobbes at the edges of his argument), that the mind is capable
of grasping relations and formal order in sensible experience, he follows
the consequences of that argument to its radical endpoint, which is that
the finite mind will never truly understand Nature at all. What we take to
be “natural laws” are only tentative insights into the local relations that we
observe as regulating certain bodies—in other words, completely contin-
gent. The limitation of this form of inquiry (which Spinoza calls “reason-
ing”) is that any observation of regularity (i.e., perceived relations of cause
and effect) relies on the preliminary identification of the body itself, and
yet whether or not a body in fact “coheres” with other bodies will always
escape our observation, or at least, we have to recognize that it is impos-
sible to observe all the ways in which bodies react to one another across all
of time and space. Reason in this context is, for Spinoza, therefore just a
local logical prediction tool and not an easy path to knowledge—because
knowledge, in this early modern context, must be founded on certainty, and
reason can draw only on our limited experience.19 In other words, no mat-
ter how adequate the universal notions we gain by reason, the tracking of
causation is still fundamentally limited, despite our adequate knowledge
of, say, how bodies act and react to each other.

Spinoza’s Organismic Rationality


I do not presume that I have discovered the best Philosophy; but I know that
I understand the true one. Moreover, if you ask how I know this, I will reply: in
the same way you know that the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two
right angles. No one will deny that this is enough, not if his brain is healthy
and he is not dreaming of unclean spirits, who inspire in us false ideas which
are like the true. For the true is the indicator both of itself and of the false.
                                    Spinoza, letter to Albert Burgh (1675 or 1676)20


The path to knowledge must therefore bypass, rather than transcend in
some way, the contingency of experience that limits reason’s grasp. As

40   C H A PT E R 3



Spinoza put it in a letter to Simon de Vries, experience can only reveal to us
things that are not necessary, such as modes, which cannot therefore be de-
rived from the essential definition of a thing. That definition of an essence
cannot be grasped through experience since the existence of an essence is
exactly the same as the essence. (The mode, in other words, is not what it
“is” completely, given that its definition relies on its status as a modification
of something more essential.) However, we clearly do understand what an
essence is—therefore, for Spinoza, the mind must be able to grasp the “es-
sence” of a thing in an intellectual way, going beyond the identification of
disciplined universal concepts, the work of reason.21
   To track Spinoza’s argument we need to pay attention to both the way
he frames the body, as an exemplar of this object of mental experience, and
then the way he positions our purely intellectual capacity in that context.
This is not a question of the “mind-body” relation, because the real end of
philosophy for Spinoza is an understanding of exactly what must compre-
hend them both. The relation between ideas and materiality will reveal his
ontology that positions them as modifications of one essential reality.

We can begin with Spinoza’s postulates concerning the human body as
spelled out in the Ethics. This body is made up of many individual parts,
each “extremely complex,” and all of them distinct—some are hard, some
soft, and some fluid. This body is, of course, affected by external bodies,
but it also “stands in need for its preservation” of these external bodies,
as a source of replenishment of matter, because the human body is con-
stantly regenerating itself from within—a process that we can call, loosely,
metabolism.22 Finally, Spinoza makes two points. First, the “fluid” parts of
the body, when impinged by foreign bodies, can actually alter the surface of
the “soft” parts that fluids flow through, so that these plastic spaces are left
with an “impression” of the external body—a kind of inscription in a new
medium. Second, the human body can intervene, to move external bodies
and “arrange them in a variety of ways” (2, Postulates 1–6, p. 128).23
    Now to unpack the implications of these postulates. One key argument
is that any compound body that can lose particular bodies and replace them
with those of the same nature must still preserve its “nature” as a unitary
body: there is no change in its “actuality” (forma). The body is defined by its
union and not the substantial materiality that is brought together in that
union, since that substance can be continually changed. As Hans Jonas first
noted in a 1965 essay, Spinoza’s concept of the organism locates identity in
the spatial and dynamic pattern of this composite body, such that the whole
is compatible with a change in its parts, which is essential to the life of any

                                                          S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   41



being. For Jonas, there is no machinic analogue to this kind of organized
body, which is continually constituting itself through regeneration of its
parts.24 The body is a local zone of auto-regulation.
    But as Spinoza insists, the operations of the body can be understood in
terms of the strict causal relations that govern all of its material activity. In
the Ethics, Spinoza mocks those that celebrate any discovery of “harmony”
in the natural world—whether religious enthusiasts or more sober philos-
ophers carefully observing the heavenly bodies. His response to this reac-
tion could have come from Hobbes: “Each one has judged things according
to the disposition of his brain.” And Spinoza proceeds to quote an apho-
rism: “There are as many differences of brains as of palates” (1, Appendix,
p. 114). What will seem ordered and harmonious to one brain will seem dis-
ordered and unpleasant to another. More to the point, Spinoza notes how
so many people are “struck by a foolish wonder” when seeing the intricate
structure of the human body; ignorant of how its organs function and in-
terrelate, they leap to the conclusion that some kind of “supernatural art”
has arranged the parts so they act harmoniously, through extramechanical
means (1, Appendix, p. 113). The body is a machine, an automaton, capable
of highly complex behavior, as the example of the somnambulist reveals
(3p2s). But it is also a body that is capable of maintaining itself through a
transformation of external bodies to replace any loss or damage to the inter-
nal bodies making up the tissues and organs of the physiological system.
However, the real question does not concern the metaphysical status of the
perceived “order” of the system. For Spinoza, the challenge is to explain the
existence of the mind. What purpose does it serve in the autopoietic (self-
organizing) economy of living bodies?
    Given the undeniable reality of mental experience, Spinoza argues that
the basic function of thought is to give representation of the body in the
sphere of ideas. Of course, if that representation was merely passive, it
would have absolutely no function. Which is not to say that the mind can
be assumed to have some special “power” over the body. Just the opposite.
Spinoza is concerned to locate the function of mental representation pre-
cisely on the seemingly abyssal threshold connecting but also dividing the
body and the mind. Or to put it another way, the question is not to ask how
the mind and the body are “connected” but rather to probe how the human
being—which is at one and the same time both a material body governed
by causal laws and a series of mental representations—operates as a single
system. The mental experience is the direct analogue of the physiological,
in that both material and mental activity constitute the modes of one being.
    With this in mind, we can see how Spinoza will explain the valuable role

42   C H A PT E R 3



of a mind for this being—by focusing on the crucial role of what we might
call passionate affect.

Affective Interference


The advantage of having mental representations of the body’s own causally
determined responses to its internal and external environments hinges on
the separation of the representation, which allows for the emergence of a
psychic realm where ideas interact independent of their origin. This is not
unlike Hobbes’s argument in Leviathan. However, unlike Hobbes, Spinoza
does not keep separate the passions of the body and the logic of sensory in-
formation. Like Descartes in his Passions of the Soul, Spinoza will argue that
the intersection of psychic and organismic realms will have a specific effect
on the body’s capacity for survival and success. Take Spinoza’s definition
of “joy” and “sadness,” for example. Joy is somewhat cryptically defined as
the idea of something that increases the body’s power of acting or increases
the mind’s power of thinking; sadness refers to the exact opposite (3p11s).
The mind can have an idea of an external body only indirectly, so to speak,
that is, through the impression made on our body’s affection by that foreign
entity—which for Spinoza means through the mind’s representation of the
body’s own causally determined material transformation.
    The next part of the argument is admittedly not easy to grasp: Spinoza
is claiming that when the mind imagines (i.e., causes the representation to
appear again in the mind) that external body as “present,” our physiological
systems will again be affected in the same way, as if that body was actually
present again (3p12). The mental experience is not merely a repetition of
the original experience. The being that is subject to both material and men-
tal “expression” (to use Deleuze’s term) mediates the two domains.25 Mental
representations do not “act” on the body. However, the body reacts, as a ma-
terial expression of the unitary being, to its (i.e., the system’s) transforma-
tion expressed in the mental representation. The logic of interaction is pre-
cisely not one of causality: the causal logics are distinct within the separate
domains of the material dimension and the intellectual sphere.
    The implication Spinoza draws out is this: the mind will strive to imag-
ine those things that increase the capacity of the body to act, since that con-
dition will also allow the mind a greater power to think. And vice versa: the
mind will strive to imagine situations that do not involve those bodies that
decrease the body’s ability to act, since the mind would lose its capacity at
the same time. But what does this mean exactly? One way to approach Spi-

                                                         S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   43



noza’s theory here is to focus on the organismic unity of the body alongside
the unity that connects the material with the psychic. Only the mind can
learn from the body’s history of affection and feed back that knowledge in
order to alter the automatic trajectory of the body, and it does this not by in-
tervening or suspending mechanical causality but instead by clarifying its
ideational representation of the physical states in the body.
    The mind learns through the use of the sensible imagination (where
ideas can be organized and reorganized) and through memory, defined in
the Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect as the “sensation of impres-
sions on the brain” along with a sense of “duration.” Spinoza is arguing that
the function of the mind is to track, through its own system of ideas, the
causal order of the material environment, to penetrate, that is, the “laws”
that govern the interaction of the body and foreign entities, as well as the
laws governing interaction between external bodies.26
    How does the mind accomplish this? For Spinoza, the method of reason
is the tool that the mind uses to comprehend the cause-and-effect relations
that hold sway in the material domain. Reason is not at all a mere function
of the brain, some kind of cognitive machinery. The value of the mind is its
liberation from the logic of the body’s own sensibility, the trace of the logic
of extension that haunts the world of ideas. The task of the understanding
is first to articulate the distinction between the fictitious array of represen-
tations that emerge from the accidents of origin in the sensory and nervous
systems. The understanding must identify what Spinoza calls “true ideas,”
those that clearly show “how and why something is or has been made; and
that its subjective effects in the soul correspond to the actual reality of its
object.” With true ideas in view, the mind will naturally “perceive” (ratio-
nally, that is) the causal relations that determine the behavior of the exter-
nal world and the ways in which the body will respond to certain kinds of
interactions with the world.
    But if the soul will naturally (by virtue of its nature) reason and compre-
hend, for it to be successful it needs to be furnished with the proper kinds
of ideas—true ideas, not those generated by the material logic of the brain,
appearing in the mind as “imagination.” And here Spinoza admits that a
certain kind of tool—what he calls “method”—is important for the proper
functioning of the mind. Method is the construction of a standard, the
“laying down certain rules and aids,” so that the mind can be saved “use-
less mental exertion.” Method is an artificial training of the rational mind,
through the adoption of rules that will generate the occasions for proper
reasoning and comprehension. Human beings are not rational; they be-

44   C H A PT E R 3



come rational.27 For Spinoza, the analogy is literally the origin and develop-
ment of technology—the intellect uses “intellectual tools” to bootstrap its
progress in the search for knowledge.28
    Method will literally make the mind into a machine: once so trained, the
soul acts “according to fixed laws, like a spiritual automaton [automa spir-
ituale].”29 The mind is not naturally an automaton (“like a . . .”); neither is
the mind analogous to a material automaton, if that means an ordering of
parts that interact according to rigorous physical laws of cause and effect.
The spiritual automaton is one that is radically self-constructed, and it op-
erates therefore according to an independent psychic logic, namely that of
reason.30
    The struggle that results from the creation of the spiritual automaton
hinges on the coexistence, now, of two logics within the realm of ideas: first,
the corporeal and contingent experiences of the senses and the imagina-
tion that arrive together in a somewhat ad hoc manner and therefore do not
clearly reveal necessary relations of things in reality; and alongside that,
second, the logic of reason, the development of a system of understanding
that discerns the necessary laws of nature from the limited and often con-
fused conjunctions of ideas that represent our corporeal affections. This
struggle is perpetual. The persistence of “inadequate ideas” challenges
the spiritual automaton to locate and resolve any new incoherence within
thought. The artificial life of reason—an orderly and internally consistent
life based on adequate, that is, clear, ideas—is much like the life of the mate-
rial automaton that is the organism; however, the spiritual automaton is
never fully in sync with its counterpart precisely because there is not, and
there cannot be, any causal relationship between them. Moreover, there is
no one-to-one parallel of ideas to extensive body: for Spinoza, the mind is
constituted by a limited, fragmented number of ideas of bodily modifica-
tion. The value of reason for the body is a heightened awareness of the nec-
essary order of nature and hence a capacity to act on the basis of prediction,
or better, anticipation (which is, according to Spinoza, resolutely more than
the mere deployment of memory; Hobbes also argued this in his discussion
of foresight).
    The engineering of the spiritual automaton is a process of associating
the logic of reason (deduction and the tracking of cause and effect) with the
memory system of the brain, so that when nervous associations are made
through the causality of the sensibility, the impressions provoked are now
organized in a new way in the brain. Again, the mind does not act on the
body or the brain, but in thinking rationally, the mind affects the being that

                                                        S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   45



is at one and the same time mental and physical. This is how the material
systems express, in their own way, the affections of the mind. (And we can
note here that this conceptualization of the relation between reason and the
body’s physiological systems can help explain Spinoza’s effort to implement
a kind of psychosocial engineering in the Tractatus. One will behave ratio-
nally, Spinoza explained, even if one does not possess a properly function-
ing “spiritual automaton,” as long as one’s brain is affected by the right kind
of ideas [e.g., stories, morals, aphorisms] that introduce surreptitiously
the operation of the logic of reason into the very matter of the brain.)31

Beyond Reason: Intuition and Unity


We can now return to the issue Spinoza raised in his early letter to Olden-
burg concerning the conjectural bloodworm. Given the theory of the spiri-
tual automaton, Spinoza’s machine of reason that extricates an understand-
ing of cause and effect from the chaos that is sensibility, how can we even
know that we are truly understanding the nature of things when we cannot
clearly identify the genuine boundaries of organized systems? Recall that
the bloodworm has a rudimentary rationality that allowed it to map the fea-
tures of its material environment, to know, that is, how things behave in a
regular manner so it may predict the movements relative to its survival—
this is not mere induction. Human reason is profoundly more sophisticated
and with the proper technology of method can not only understand causal
relations and predict the future but also understand why things behave the
way they do—at least as material entities. However, what reason cannot do
is chart what I would call the topology of parts and wholes; the identifica-
tion of what we call “bodies” is deficient because it is dependent on a vastly
limited perspective. If all parts obey the mechanical laws of nature, and can
thus be tracked and mapped by reason without any error, the identification
of a genuine essence is another thing altogether. The mere existence of in-
terrelated bodies does not prove any divine “harmony” after all. Spinoza is
denying, then, that reason could ever be the path that will lead the mind
outside of its own contingency toward an understanding of unity in nature,
let alone the unity of nature itself.
    Spinoza says in the Ethics: “The order and connection of ideas is the
same as the order and connection of things” (2p7). If we seek the essence
of something in ideas only, we will get at best the “idea” of the universal, in
the sense Hobbes gave the term. For Spinoza, these universal notions (man,
horse, dog) arise from the multitude of images that are formed in the hu-

46   C H A PT E R 3



man body, which blur together to erase the slight differences of singular
images; however, this is mainly because the imagination has a limited ca-
pacity and cannot keep in mind “a determinate amount of singulars.” The
universal is just a forgetting of difference, the consolidation of a set of com-
mon affections of the body. As Hobbes emphasized in his own argument,
these universal notions are by definition derived from the affection of sin-
gular experiences of particular bodies. As Spinoza writes, universals “are
not formed by all in the same way but vary one to another” (2p40s1). For
Spinoza, this is why “it is not surprising that so many controversies have
arisen among the philosophers, who have wished to explain natural things
by mere images of things” (2p40s1).
   What Spinoza does in his philosophy is turn completely away from the
effort to discover the essence of things through abstraction (finding the
“common” properties) and by interrogating with reason the particular ex-
periences of things—the effort to wrest the universal from the singular.32
That process, however systematic and governed by a flawlessly automatic
spiritual machinery of reason, will always be contaminated by the contin-
gency of the particular and its essential lack—the lack of any presence or
trace of the comprehensive unity of an essence, or further, a trace of the es-
sential unity of nature itself. Spinoza’s alternative is, in fact, to return to the
singular but now in order to follow a wholly different path.
   Spinoza will introduce a radically novel capacity of the understanding,
one that is not simply an extension of reason (the “adequate ideas of the
properties of things”). This new capacity he calls intuition:33 “And this kind
of knowing proceeds from an adequate idea of the formal essence of cer-
tain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge of the [formal] essence
of things” (2p40s2). The adequate idea of such a formal essence cannot, of
course, be derived from the ideas that represent the sensible immediacy of
the body. However, it seemed to be the case that any insight into the formal
essences of things would require a comprehensive knowledge of the uni-
verse to even begin cognizing in the first place. How can we reconcile this
with Spinoza’s claim to intuitive knowledge?
   If we recall Spinoza’s disdain for those who pretend to see in nature the
“harmony” of parts that come together in, say, living bodies or cosmic sys-
tems, it is clear that Spinoza is not arguing that we can perceive directly the
necessity of any organization that exceeds the mechanical laws of cause and
effect. As he noted, the living body is just a machine that can be understood
as a matrix of causes and effects. However, as Spinoza went on to claim in
the Ethics, there is something about the living body that we can perceive
and that is not at all in conflict with our understanding of the causal ma-

                                                        S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA   47



chinery that is physiology. This insight is into the very union of the
system itself.
    Spinoza denies we need to know the genuine organization of the body in
all its physiological complexity in order to comprehend the essential unity
that is the body. The mere fact that parts of the living body can be replaced
by other parts without a change in the functioning of the organism demon-
strates the very existence of a nature (something that “is what it is” despite
its substantial or modal transformation—think of Cartesian wax) even if
the essential “topological” order of that nature is still unavailable to human
intellectual perception. The only spiritual lever needed here is the adequate
idea—intuitively recognized—that there exists some such essence, which
is to say, there is some form of bounded unity that maintains the body’s in-
tegrity despite the metabolic construction and destruction that takes place
throughout a life history.
    The insight into the existence of a bounded unity, a singular unity, that
is, opens up the mind then to an even more radical intuition: the unity of
the body (which exists certainly even if the precise specification of its in-
dividual organization escapes us) is immaterial and constitutes an indi-
vidualization of an attribute of the divine—the comprehensive unity that
encompasses all substance and all modification or representation of sub-
stance. There is no “reason” a living body can replace its materiality. But the
fact that it does so discloses the existence of some essential nature that re-
mains continuous in this transformation. It is also the case that the human
mind, which operates according to a logic entirely distinct from the causality
of the body, cannot avoid being conscious of the necessary unity that medi-
ates the body as physiological system, and the mind as an artificial machine
of reason. The insight is not produced by reason but is prepared by the aware-
ness of the constant tension between the corporeal logic of causality and
the psychic logic of reason.
    In both cases, then, the mind has an intuitive knowledge of a unity that
exceeds corporeal materiality (the autopoietic system) and a unity that
is the necessary ground for the interaction of psychic and bodily activity.
Both forms of activity are defined by Spinoza as resolutely particular and
therefore essentially limited in their contingency. There is not (as we en-
countered in earlier thinkers) any hint of a mystical or occult “connection”
between the mind and some higher power or reality. This is to all to say that
for Spinoza the intuition of the “attribute of God” that is nothing other than
unity itself is predicated on the direct confrontation with a resolutely sin-
gular and therefore particular form of unity—one’s own experience as an
experience unified with one body must be only ever just that experience

48   C H A PT E R 3



and not any other, and that experience is only ever dependent on the actual
affections of that body. As an individuation of the being that is the unity of
mind and body as system, the mind has access, intuitively, to the unity that
must precede the individualization of unity that is the human being—the fi-
nal unity that defines the absolute integration of everything. What Spinoza
calls God.
