4
Spiritual Automata Revisited
Leibniz and Automatic Harmony




Since the efficient containeth all ends in it self, as it were the instructions of
things to be done by it self, therefore the finall external cause of the Schooles,
which onely hath place in artificial things, is altogether vain in Nature.
                                                        Jean-Baptiste van Helmont



The early modern debates concerning the nature of the autopoietic body re-
capitulated the issues raised by Spinoza concerning the relations between
parts and wholes and the boundaries of the living being. The question of
the living being as system could at this moment hardly be bracketed from
the broader question of the relationship between systems and the com-
prehensive structure of nature as a totality. To even frame the problem of
human reason and other intellectual faculties required deep immersion
into both the physiology of the body and especially the nervous system and
the brain and the relationship of the body and mind to its own organismic
unity. The question was never whether or not the human mind was expli-
cable in terms of the body conceived as an automaton. The question was
whether or not the organization of the automaton could explain the intelli-
gence and rationality exhibited by the mind (and, perhaps, the “wisdom of
the body” in its own terms).
   In 1699, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz received from Joseph Hoffmann a
dissertation titled “Mechanical Nature of Medical Diseases.” Leibniz was
impressed, not least because Hoffmann affirmed many of his own ideas
concerning organic living bodies. Hoffmann’s main argument was that
the body, understood as an organization of systems (blood, sense, humors,
muscles), is explicable purely in terms of “physical corporeal causes,” with-
out introducing any spontaneous activity, even when considering the

                                                                                     49

50   C H A PT E R 4



organic “states of exception”—that is, disease and injury. The key to the
argument was the idea that the machine had been constructed with such
intelligence “it possesses sufficient forces for preserving the machine and
defending it against putrefaction and the destruction of its combinations of
mixtures, but also for repelling and avoiding all internal lesion that would
tend to ruin the machine.”1
    The body did not need independent intelligent control because it was
designed to function automatically; its “reason” was entirely internal to the
body’s organization. The body was able to sense interference, provoking a
“violent and extraordinary [extraordinarium] flow of spirits . . . for correct-
ing or eliminating the pathogenic matters” (104).2 For Hoffmann, and by
extension Leibniz, it was crucial to recognize that the mechanical “nature”
of the body acts not only in the internal administration of the parts but also
through the “whole mechanism or organism” [totum mechanismum organis-
mum] (102)—but without any “soul” acting as a representation or incarna-
tion of that unity.
    And so, a few years later, Leibniz read with great interest Stahl’s “Disqui-
sition on Various Mechanisms and Organisms” (1706) and the Theoria me-
dia vera (1708), in which the “Disquisition” was reprinted. For Stahl, the liv-
ing being was not simply a coordination of various mechanisms, but rather
a “functional integration” with specific ends of its own.3 The artificial ma-
chine, for Stahl, perfectly exemplifies this functional integration, with the
caveat that the artificial machine’s “agency” is external to the machine,
whereas the body’s is internal to its organization (106). Stahl’s “organism”
exceeded what was meant by “mechanism” because he believed that it
was not possible to explain the guided activity of the whole being without
some kind of conduit for that unity to act (105). This is why Stahl insisted
on the concept of soul, something that could operate through the “organ-
icus nexus” to preserve, defend, and restore the material body’s functions
(107). Stahl’s views were in line with other thinkers (most notably Locke,
who was of course trained as a physician), those who postulated a “mate-
rial spirit” of some kind, one that acted wholly within the body to form and
maintain its order—unlike Cartesian or Neoplatonic immaterial souls that
carried out higher intellectual functions that mirrored or channeled di-
vine rationality. What exactly was an automatic natural body? Where could
one locate the force of unity and integration in moments of disruption and
pathological breakdown?

                                                  S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   51



Organismic Unity and Cosmic Order


When Leibniz decided to write a critique of Stahl’s views on the physiolog-
ical organization of the body, the metaphysical stakes were rather high. As
Locke had argued, in the Essay concerning Human Understanding, the iden-
tity of any living thing was to be found in the “organization” that allowed
“fleeting” materiality to be unified in a single functioning body.4 The status
of organization was the site of key controversies concerning mechanism
and vitalism (or organicism). Leibniz’s position was in the end highly idio-
syncratic: he refused to accept that there was any fundamental difference
between the usually opposed concepts of “organism” and “mechanism.”5
Even more cryptically, Leibniz affirmed both the existence of the soul and
the independent “machine” of the body, arguing along the lines of Spinoza
that “when the soul desires some outcome, its machine is spontaneously
inclined and prepared by its inherent motions toward accomplishing it.”6
    Essentially, Leibniz was claiming that the two spheres, spiritual and me-
chanical, were entirely independent of one another, yet also perfectly coor-
dinated. Adopting Spinoza’s language directly, Leibniz wrote, “The opera-
tion of spiritual automata [automates spirituels], that is to say, souls, is not at
all mechanical; but it contains in the highest degree all that is beautiful in
mechanism.”7 How to make sense of the interaction of these two domains?
Given the terminology, Leibniz’s attempt to bring together intellectual spir-
its and physiological mechanisms through the infamous doctrine of “prees-
tablished harmony”—what I will call here automatic harmony—might seem
like an evasion of the problem that early modern thinkers struggled with
rather than a satisfying solution. And so to understand Leibniz we have to
see how he was redefining and reconfiguring the foundational concepts of
seventeenth-century thought.
    The first thing to note is that Leibniz was an early adherent to the me-
chanical philosophy and never wavered in his view that in the world of
bodies, everything can be explained in terms of the size, shape, and motion
of matter. What is not so obvious is that Leibniz early in his career recog-
nized that any theorization of mechanism had to confront the fact that the
fundamental elements of this philosophy were necessarily defined by their
form, which is to say the atomic element possessed a kind of “soul.”8 Leib-
niz’s argument is not too far from Locke’s: the laws of physics, for example,
do not explain themselves and cannot be deduced from the hypothetical
starting point of simple matter. There must be something that determines
the interaction of material bodies. As Leibniz explains, it was necessary to

52   C H A PT E R 4



reject Aristotelian forms in favor of a minimalist conception of the cosmos.
However, if the universe is a collection of aggregated matter, the essential
atomic starting point could not be a mere mathematical point, an abstrac-
tion. A material thing can, according to the mechanical philosophy, always
be divided. But it could not therefore be indivisible, a “true unity,” if it was
only matter—something Leibniz recognized early in his career.9 “Hence it
was necessary to restore, and, as it were, rehabilitate the substantial forms
that are in such disrepute today,” explained Leibniz in 1695.10
    The philosophical argument is that the essential nature of the atomic
element is force, which means that there exists at this fundamental start-
ing point of all natural things something akin to sensation and appetite,
“so that we must conceive of them on the model of the notion we have of
souls.”11 It is easy to misunderstand this claim. What Leibniz is saying is
that there must be something internal to the organization of the atom that
would specify its “direction” (which would then be the origin of the basic
laws of reaction) and at the same time something internal to its organiza-
tion that would allow it to receive from outside the configurations of force
inherent in another atomic body. Sensation and appetite are not anthropo-
morphisms at all but structural necessities if we want to have a pure mech-
anistic philosophy. Otherwise, we would need to introduce external forces
and organization that would coerce the dead material elements to behave
in certain ways. This would mark a return to the arbitrary (and for Leibniz,
incoherent) Aristotelian genre of matter and form—what we now call hylo-
morphism—or recent updates, such as the Cambridge Platonists’ concept
of plastic nature.12
    So when Leibniz goes on to assert that the analogy between the atom and
the human soul only goes so far, because some souls have not been “thrust
into matter,” he can justify the distinction. For the most part, he explains,
God “disposes of other substances like an engineer handles his machines.”
But with rational souls—minds—God “governs like a prince governs his
subjects, and even like a father cares for his children”; this is because minds
are “like little gods,” “made in the image of God, and having in them some
ray of the light of divinity.”13 These are not mere assertions. In other words,
Leibniz will try to demonstrate the necessary distinction between what he
calls “spiritual automata” and corporeal machines,14 in order to explain how
minds are “above the upheavals in matter” and resolutely synchronized
with living bodies, that is, living machines. The crucial link is the concept
of soul, or form, a problematic but essential dimension in all previous early
modern theories of the rational mind and the organized body.

                                                S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   53



Divine Machines, Human Minds


Leibniz lays the groundwork of his new approach with a thorough clar-
ification of the repeated error of “confusing natural things with artificial
things.” The mistake is that in comparing technical objects with living,
natural bodies, philosophers have inevitably come to the conclusion that
the difference between the two is simply one of scale. Of course, as we have
seen, sophisticated thinkers have noted that the distinction between au-
tomata and organisms lay in the “externality” of organization in the for-
mer. But Leibniz’s argument here is more radical. How can we actually un-
derstand the nature of this “integration” of organization and materiality in
the organism-machine? Even if it is “naturally” present in the living body,
conceptually speaking, the form of organization is still exterior to its mate-
riality. This is why Leibniz proposes a new way to distinguish natural and
artificial—and not by the presence of organs and organization. The “im-
mense distance” between masterpieces of the mind and the mechanisms of
divine wisdom lies in the fact that the machines of nature have a truly “in-
finite number of organs, and are so well supplied and so resistant to all ac-
cidents that it is not possible to destroy them.”15 For Leibniz, the key is that
natural machines are still machines (i.e., organized entities) in their “least
parts” and maintain their unitary form despite the “different enfolding it
undergoes” as it is extended, compressed, or concentrated.16 The artificial
machine simulates only one aspect, namely, the comprehensive unity of
organization. Because the organs and parts are finite, they cannot maintain
themselves and therefore cannot help preserve the enclosing organization
of the body operating as a whole.
    Addressing the mind in this context, Leibniz argues that the soul (like
“any other real unity”) is entirely self-enclosed as a structure: it has a “per-
fect spontaneity relative to itself.” This is what he means by “spiritual au-
tomaton” (which is not at all what Spinoza meant by this phrase, as we have
seen). Yet at the same time, despite its internal autonomy, the mind also has
a “perfect conformity to external things.” Leibniz explains that our inter-
nal sensations (the experience of the mind, that is, not the material activ-
ity of the brain and sensory system) are “merely phenomena which follow
upon external beings”; they are, he infamously states, just “well-ordered
dreams.”17
    The question is why do these sensations arise in the soul? There can be
no causal relation between the ordered body and the soul, since they con-
stitute two radically different modalities. Therefore, the logic of sensory

54   C H A PT E R 4



appearance must be purely spiritual and derived from the nature of the
spiritual automaton itself. The crucial link between the events of external
beings and the experiences of the internal mind is the concept of represen-
tation: the soul as “form” has a representational nature, capable then of
representing external bodies “as they relate to its organs.”18 This is not an ad
hoc solution, for Leibniz has already demonstrated that the world of mate-
rial beings is already, at the very foundational level of reality, organized by
form. The form of a material entity (even at the atomic level) is what allows
it to “represent” what is external to it through a kind of transduction, and
then it is the internal logic of the form that produces—like a machine—a
new effect in response.
    So if every substance (as formal organization of materiality) represents
the “whole universe” from its particular perspective (since anything it
“senses” is a result of the total configuration of the machinery of the cos-
mic system), then the soul can be understood as an immaterial representa-
tional organ. That simply means that its experiential order represents the
universe in the same way, and furthermore, that the transformation of its
experiential content is a function of the fundamental organization as spiri-
tual automaton, that is, according to the laws of form alone.
    The perfect automatic synchronicity of the body and the soul (despite
the complete lack of any causal relation or other form of connectivity
between the two realms) is the challenging question that Leibniz sets him-
self, and is often a stumbling block for readers.19 Leibniz’s own examples
(the infamous dual clocks that keep time together) are not always helpful,
since he implies that there are, literally, two fully independent machines
(body and mind) that just so happen to have been “organized” constitution-
ally that they mirror one another with precise exactness: perceptions occur
in the soul simultaneously even though it has its own unique laws, “as if in
a world apart.”
    The critical issue, however, is the relationship between the formal order
of the body as one kind of representational sensing and the formal essence
of the mind as an altogether different mode of representation. To under-
stand Leibniz on preestablished harmony we must tease out the specificity
of the mind-soul relation (and note this does not at all entail any notion of
causal connection). The crux of the argument, I propose, will lie within a
claim Leibniz has already made, namely, that every substance represents
the whole universe from its own particular perspective.
    What Leibniz suggests is that the relation of mind and body is not a rela-
tion between two substances so much as it is the perfect superpositioning
of two different perspectives (two “forms” of organizational unity) at exactly

                                                S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   55



the same point. As a unitary body, the living organism “senses” the external
bodies of substance by re-presenting them as transformations of its sub-
stantial being—we could say, as the deformation of the topological orga-
nization that relates organs (and organs of organs) in the natural machine.
The “point” of the body’s perspective is not a physical point, since there is
no such thing, for Leibniz, as a purely “physical” space—we are always in
the realm of force and relation and hence organization. The point of per-
spective is the location of the unity that is the body’s organizational form,
which is an aggregation of subordinate forms and organs.20 The next step
of the argument, then, is to show that the formal unity of the soul must oc-
cupy that exact same point, so that they coincide precisely—something that
is impossible for two material substances, given the solidity and impene-
trability of matter itself. However, there is no obstacle to a purely spiritual
form occupying precisely the same perspectival position, if we remember
not to think of this position as existing in some neutral Newtonian or Eu-
clidean “space”; it is located rather in something like a complex topological
domain, an infinite system of relations.
    For Leibniz, the order of the organism is self-enclosed (which is why it is
a unitary body), as is the mind—which is to say it is therefore absolutely im-
possible that they could ever “disturb” each others’ internal laws. Any “com-
munication” between soul and body must really be a parallel synchronicity,
guaranteed by their common perspective. The body will act by itself given
its representation of the external reality that affects it; the soul is affected
by the same representation of the same external reality and responds with
its own reaction. This means we see the machine act as if the soul “willed”
it, because each responds in its own way to the representations common to
both—“the spirits and blood then having exactly the motion that they need
to respond to the passions and perceptions of the soul.” The soul is “in” the
body, it is an “immediate presence,”21 Leibniz explains, just as the organis-
mic unity emerges from a multitude of other unities. The internal bodies
(tissues, organs, and their components) are all unities of organization, but
they are organized in a layering of superpositioning that identifies them as
one body (again, the superpositions are not strictly speaking “spatial” ones).
The soul is just one more level of superposition—a unity like the unity of
the form of the body, a unity that effectively repeats the very perspective of
the body. The real challenge for Leibniz (as it was for Descartes) is to explain
what value the soul adds to the body if it never truly (actively) participates
in its functioning.
    The first point to make is that Leibniz positions the soul “in” the body so
that we can see how it functions as a representation of the body itself.22 The

56   C H A PT E R 4



soul is not the entelechy of the body. But what happens in the body as an
organized system is always “expressed” in the soul, just like any other entity
in the universe, although to be clear, the laws of the spiritual automaton’s
own organization are what govern that expression.
   What makes this all much more legible is Leibniz’s discussion of the
body. Every organ of the body (up and down the infinite levels of the divine
machine) acts according to its own independent laws, derived from the for-
mal essence of its being. To have a coordination or organization of organs
does not ever entail the violation of these laws. Everything going on in the
“private” entelechies of individual bodies must agree (lit., “conspire”) with
the formal order of the body’s own entelechy, but they are not necessarily
derived from it. The illuminating example is the perspectival projection of
a two-dimensional architectural plan. The two forms express each other,
but each has its own organizational logic. The soul therefore expresses the
body whose perspective it occupies, more like a strange palimpsest written
over the body that changes in response to the transformations (representa-
tions) of the body as it responds to the impact of external bodies on it.
   The function of the soul might still seem superfluous in this context.
What purpose would the soul serve for the body? And what function does
the body serve for the soul? We can start with Leibniz’s rethinking of cau-
sality in this context. Remember that any body responds to another only
in the sense that the external is sensed (represented) by a deformation of
the topology, and then the body acts according to its natural transformation
of this original deformation. So the action is not “caused” by the external
entity; rather the body “expresses” in its own logic the relationship of the
external to itself. Now imagine the body as it forms a singular perspective
on reality—think of being in one part of a building or in a large city.23 If the
soul is draped, so to speak, over this body so that it is in the exact same to-
pological “space” defined as a particular relation in the networked order of
the whole universe, then it must also represent that same exact perspective.
The difference between the soul and the body is that the organization of
the soul cannot be affected by material substances. So what is the soul rep-
resenting?
   As is well known, Leibniz will eventually adopt the term “monad” to re-
fer to any organizational unity insofar as it is a pure unity that cannot at all
be divided into parts. He allows for the interaction of monads but also what
we can describe as the superpositioning of monads. The mark of unity of
any substance, for Leibniz, is not a totalizing imposition of a complex orga-
nization on some material substrate but instead the way that a number of
monads can come under the “domination” of one monad. The natural ma-

                                               S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   57



chine is a unity of monads, and that unity is itself a monad. The Aristotelian
idea of a single form for any unified body gives way here to a more complex
notion: a unified body is an organization of organized bodies, which helps
explain the extraordinary capacity of the body for self-repair, reproduction,
growth, and so on. Organic bodies are “machines of divine invention, and
“divine machines have this noblest feature beyond what is had by those
machines that we are able to invent, that they can preserve themselves and
produce some copy of themselves, by which the operation for which they
are defined is further obtained.”24 The highest monad defines a new function
that does not violate the subordinate functions of the other monads—but
does take advantage of them. A living body is such a unity, not a mere as-
semblage of independent entities—the difference between a living fish and
a pond of fish, as Leibniz will explain. One is what we will call autopoietic,
the other a merely contingent, or apparent, unity.
    Each monadological unity of animate life is therefore “purposefully de-
signed for a definite kind of function,” Leibniz writes, and the function of
the divine machine of the human is clearly stated by Leibniz: it is to dis-
play reason. However, the reason of the body is resolutely unconscious—
like a keyboard player performing unconsciously by habit.25 Leibniz’s ex-
planation of this unconscious reasoning is subtle. He notes, in an evocative
example, that a human being with limited skills, a manual worker for ex-
ample, can easily make use of a semiautomatic calculating machine. (Leib-
niz had of course designed one such machine himself, as had Pascal.)26 No
actual knowledge of the reasoning process (or the machine) is necessary
to generate the result. Similarly, Leibniz argues, the “plastic nature” of the
divine machine as embodied layers of organization is also an expression of
rationality—even if it is completely unconscious. As he explained in the
letter to Masham, the organization of the individual bodies and organs that
make up the organic being constitutes a rationalization of matter itself: the
monadological entity is now the vehicle of a means-end relation as it senses
and reacts to what it is not. The difficult question concerns the relationship
between the unconscious body as a rational system of individually ratio-
nal subsystems and the self-conscious soul that co-occupies the singular
perspective of the dominant monad that gives some direction to the whole
integrated assemblage.
    The fact that the soul appears to be “the primary source of action” and
the body a merely passive instrument does not at all mean that the soul
is somehow affecting the body and causing it to deviate from its own in-
nate principles, Leibniz emphasizes. The soul must be operating in agree-
ment with these intrinsic principles. What the soul does is perceive changes

58   C H A PT E R 4



in the body but without the body “disturbing” the laws of the soul, or vice
versa. However, the soul in perceiving the changes of the body is perceiv-
ing (or better, representing, consciously or not) the very rationality of these
changes at the same time. Therefore, the soul never responds to the body
but rather to the representation of the rationality of the body’s own operations—
which is to say, the perception of a change cannot be separated (logically
speaking) from an understanding of both the monadological continuity
(i.e., structure of unity) and the laws of its transformation or “deformation”
(a process analogous, it seems to me, to a functional transformation in the
mathematical sense of the term).
    The memory that is maintained in the soul is therefore not a storehouse
of “perceptions” akin to a collection of single experiences. The memory of
the soul is a collectivity of insights into the body’s functionality. So when
the soul responds to a specific perception of change in some moment, it is
perceiving a change and at the same time draws into its conscious field new
perceptions from its own prior (albeit sometimes “confused”) perceptions,
intensifying the insight into the logic of the body as a monadological sys-
tem of monads. As Leibniz described it, in a reconceptualization of Locke’s
“dark closet” of the understanding, we have to imagine a “screen” in the
closet, a kind of sensitive membrane, one that continually receives the im-
pressions of the senses that are represented by its movement. However, this
screen is not merely a passive transducer, according to Leibniz. We need
to think of it as under constant tension, imbued with a “kind of elasticity”
that makes it dynamic and interactive. Therefore, when the screen vibrates
in response to one new impression from without (the “images and traces
in the brain”) it produces new tones and forms because the screen has been
continually “folded” (organized) in response to past impressions.27 Each
new impression (and for Leibniz, we should remember, the soul represents
all states of the body, even if it is not conscious of them, or only dimly
aware) is mediated by this complex topology of prior experiences. More-
over, the mind can itself think new ideas, which means that the elasticity of
the screen will allow for internally produced vibrations.
    Here we get closer to seeing how the human soul can function as a spiri-
tual automaton without seeming to be a useless representational mirroring
of the body. The soul mirrors the logic of the body, whatever the specific im-
pression might be, and however conscious or unconscious that impression
might be. Whatever the logic of any one impression (which is always an im-
pression of a transformation), what is registered is the specific rationality
of a response. The soul’s collection of representations, even if they do not

                                               S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   59



display perfect organization, are all internally consistent in the sense that
all of the responses of the body—from the atomic to the molecular to the
level of tissue and organ—conspire in agreement with one another under
the domination of the primary monad. The clearest and strongest impres-
sions are those of the senses, for those are the organic systems designed to
react to the external world in a peculiarly focused manner. So the soul per-
ceives most clearly through the senses—and gains even more insights via
the representation of the common sense in the brain, where features of sen-
sation are mapped together, overlain one with another, revealing common-
alities of structure and differentiations.28 The common sense becomes, for
Leibniz, a space that generates the first concepts—in their material form—
which are then represented in the soul.29 The soul acts, so to speak, as the
amplification of the harmonies revealed first in the body’s own sensible op-
erations. The first kind of reasoning—inductive reasoning—is a logic based
on these conceptual repetitions and can be expressed both in the body as
a learning machine and in the soul as an induction machine. The extent
of the soul’s reasoning is opened up by the experience of the body but also
limited by its contingency.
    Still, as Leibniz will emphasize, the soul as a thinking entity might re-
quire external senses, but sensory information is not in fact its essence. The
soul is capable of active reasoning, even if reason always has its medium
sensory impressions.30 What is this “inborn light,” and how does it escape
the body while still being subject to the doctrine of automatic harmony? As
we know from Descartes and Spinoza, inductive reasoning on the senses
can never lead to insight into a universal truth. To understand absolute ne-
cessity, one must go beyond particular examples. This will be the distinc-
tion between human and animal reason. Leibniz’s position is tricky here.
He wants to avoid the implication that the “light” of the soul is somehow
absolutely distinct from the origin of experience in the sensible response
of the living body, because it is then impossible to understand how the two
domains interact or maintain any relation. This was Descartes’s trap.
    Leibniz insists, then, on the fact that the rationality of the body and its
sensory apparatus in particular are already constituted by the integration
of the immaterial and matter, the monadological mode of being. The rep-
resentational status of the body’s immaterial form is in fact the key to the
soul’s own representational activity; it perceives how the body is organized,
even if those impressions are only glimpses. We can see, then, that the field
of representation in the soul, for Leibniz, is also a revelation of the laws
governing external bodies as well, since their presence in the body’s own

60   C H A PT E R 4



system of representation (“sense”) remains traced in the corporeal trans-
formations of sensation—although of course again these laws might only
be glimpsed.31
    Here Leibniz can identify the special nature of the human soul: our
capacity for knowledge of order and not just participation in order. “This
makes us resemble God in a small way,” because with the conscious knowl-
edge of order the human is capable of imitating that order. We can, he says,
organize “things within our grasp in imitation of the order God gives the
universe.” The incorporeal automaton is one whose natural end is to create,
to produce the artificial in the very midst of the natural—that is, to reorgan-
ize the natural in imitation of creation. The artificial machine is, in a real
sense, a kind of artificial monad, a materialization of the activity of the
mind, the spiritual automaton.32
    This radical exteriorization of the human spirit into nature, the inven-
tion of the artificial machine, introduces interesting and also challenging
complexities into Leibniz’s thought, most notably how to understand pre-
established harmony in the context of a new zone of materiality—artificial
embodiment—that establishes a problematic new relationship between the
human living body and its spiritual palimpsest.
    We can begin to unravel this thread by looking at Leibniz’s thought ear-
lier in his career, when he attempted to invent a new comprehensive sym-
bolic logic. There he emphasized, as many others in the period, the impor-
tance of artificial techniques in the development and progress of human
knowledge. However, what distinguished his approach from Descartes,
Hobbes, Locke, or Spinoza—all of whom advocated a certain form of me-
thodical training of the mind to prepare the way for true knowledge—is
Leibniz’s focus on technical instruments. Spinoza’s spiritual automaton
must, Leibniz suggests, be formed through a machinic intermediary (and
not just on an analogy with technology, as with Hobbes’s idea of “registra-
tion,” for example.)
    When Leibniz wrote to Oldenburg in 1675, a time when he was devel-
oping his “universal characteristic” based on an ideographic and diagram-
matic theory of meaning drawn from both philosophical sources and theo-
rizations of the Chinese language, he believed that the errancy of the mind
could only be regulated by a method that was quite literally mechanical.
Belief in concepts should be withheld “until they have been tested by that
criterion I seem to recognize, and which renders truth stable, visible, and ir-
resistible, so to speak, on a mechanical basis.” As is well known, Leibniz had
in mind here a kind of algebra of thinking, but note the specific practice of
algebra was an image of a universal technique that was a kind of technology:

                                                 S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   61



algebra will show that “we cannot err even if we wish and that truth can be
grasped as if pictured on paper with the aid of a machine.”33 The goal was
the “perfecting of the human mind,” and the result would be a future where
we could know God and mind as easily as numbers and invent machines
as easily as creating geometry problems. This “mechanism” would lead to
the revealing of nature’s secrets. As he put it in another text, on the method
of universality, the “characteristic” akin to the algebraic fusing of function
and variable is what “gives words to languages, letters to words, numbers
to arithmetic, notes to music. It teaches us how to fix our reasoning, and to
require it to leave, as it were, visible traces on the paper of a notebook for
inspection at leisure.” The method “enables us to reason with less effort”
by relieving the mind.34 This method is, Leibniz says, a tool: once symbols
of concepts are established, “the human race will have a new instrument
which will increase the power of the mind much more that optical lenses
strengthen the eyes and which will be as superior to microscopes or tele-
scopes as reason is superior to sight.” With this form of artificial intelligence
humanity would have a “lodestar” to “navigate the sea of experiments.”35

Enforcing Automatic Harmony: Regimes of the Mind


Leibniz’s dialogue on the connection of words and things is illuminating
on this score. Positioning himself between the more radical nominalism
of a Hobbes and the more mystical Neoplatonic theories, Leibniz shows
that while a system of substitute characters is always arbitrary, nonethe-
less, the relations of the networks connecting the characters are not. And
more radically, Leibniz proposes that without any signs, rational thinking
itself would not be possible. Basic arithmetic requires numerical signs, for
example, and geometry requires diagrammatic figures. Characters them-
selves can be vehicles of ratiocination. Truth resides not in the arbitrary
element of the sign but in its permanent element—what connects it to the
relational order that gives all of the signs their specific position.36
   Perception functions in a similar way for Leibniz, in that the mate-
rial specificity of a body’s transformation is also a manifestation of a
monadological principle (“shapes and motions”)37 that is not at all ex-
hausted in the moment but in fact relates the monad to every other dimen-
sion of nature as a system. The complexity of an animal, with its “height-
ened perceptions” (§25), allows the central monad to have more avenues
of response to its environment. It mirrors the universe in a more detailed
and intensified manner, which is to say, more directly because it receives
(“senses”) more external bodies and also then has access to the relations

62   C H A PT E R 4



between impressions and transformations taking place in all the individual
“incorporeal automata” (§25).
    Genuine reasoning, for Leibniz, is an escape from the complex interre-
lated sequences of perceptions flowing from the body’s dynamic organs and
an escape from our intellectual automaton with its own sequences of stored
memories. As Leibniz says, the sequences of memory are an imitation of
reason, in that any striking perception will evoke a memory of that per-
ception as well as any other perception that was attached to it. This in turn
evokes the original sensations and allows for a kind of anticipation or “rea-
soned” action. For example, a dog will be shown a stick, remember the pain
it caused them, and then flee before it can be beaten again (§26). Leaving
aside the problem of explaining how the soul and the body are coordinated
in this example, the important point is that reason is what gives us access
to “eternal and necessary truths” and not just the empirical inductions that
stem from accumulation of experiences in memory. The rational soul dis-
engages from the relations of contingent occurrences in order to perceive
the operations of the automata themselves—the sources of all action—and
then the necessary relations that organize the monads in their mutual co-
ordination.
    The mind’s capacity for reason is not a supplemental feature but derived
from the nature of the monad itself. If the concrete materiality is the “arbi-
trary” element of a body and the entelechy its “permanent” aspect, we can
also trace another feature of the monad that reveals the nature of the sys-
tem of universality itself. The monad is defined by its fundamental unity of
organization, however simple and limited that unity might be. “God alone
is the primitive unity or the first simple substance,” Leibniz writes, which is
to say that distinction within the universe of nature is the result of the crea-
tion of monads within that first substance. The key idea here for Leibniz is
that monads are generated by what he calls “continual fulgurations of the
divinity” (§47). The monad is not simply a fragment of the divine totality.
Yes, a monad is a limited form of organization with a limited form of “recep-
tivity.” And yet every monad also contains a perfect representation of God—
namely, in the presence of unity itself.
    The rational soul of the human body, draped over the central monad that
organizes all of its subordinate organs, is capable of representing all the
“sensations” and appetitions of the body, but at the same time it can rep-
resent consciously, in a way precluded from the monad that is the body’s
defining modes of order, the unity of the monad.38 The soul perceives the
order of the body in its activity, yet can also within that order intuitively
comprehend the defining unity that is the law of the living organism. As we

                                               S P I R I T UA L AU TO M ATA R E V I S I T E D   63



saw with Spinoza, every genuine unity of organization is an individualiza-
tion of the total unity that is the comprehensive integration of all nature.
The unity of the monad has no material substantial form and therefore can-
not be accessed through the sensible representations.
    The soul is therefore a conscious articulation of the unity of the laws of
the organic body and “rules” that body (if that is the right word) as a “rec-
tor.”39 “Rector” is a term from Roman law that refers to an appointed rep-
resentative of the state in a local region—what we can call the governor.
The rector, significantly, did not possess “imperium” and therefore could
not change or suspend the law. The rector only makes visible the law that is
already in operation; it articulates its presence and thereby gives clarity to
the law that already defines the order of the locality.
    What Leibniz describes here is a process wherein the automatic opera-
tions of the monadological organization of the body are first represented
in the soul and thereby made “visible” to the human being, and then the
order relating the operations is also represented and made visible, before
finally the unity of the order of the body is also expressed in the soul as a
representation. We can see how this is a process in which the body writes
itself onto the soul; it is a kind of exteriorization of the body’s automatic
system into a representational diagram. The value of this representation is
its clarity; the soul knows more clearly what the ends of the organic body
are and is able to see more clearly what would possibly attain those ends
most efficiently. Nothing the soul does is in contradiction to the system it
represents in its own characters. What we call volition, Leibniz says, is an
action that is clearly visible in the operations of the soul; however, there is
nothing actually interfering with the body’s functions. Similarly, there are
times when the body seems to act on its own, yet here it is just that the soul
has not clearly represented that particular event. The value of the visibil-
ity of the soul’s logic of operations is not that it reveals genuine volition;
rather, the soul expresses the complex logic of the body, an automatic sys-
tem that is often absolutely opaque to observation. The writing of the soul
is produced by all operations, remember: all perceptions of the monads are
represented. The conscious, and then consciously systematized, represen-
tations are condensations of these originary representations. The soul’s
cognition is a symbolization of the living being, a window into its divine
structure.
    What escapes the logic of the body is the soul’s own capacity to read the
order of nature through its own representations—and to produce for itself
what are essentially artificial monads, these imperfect human imitations
of the unitary systems that are organized forms of materiality: machines.

64     C H A PT E R 4



     Souls, in general, are living mirrors or images of the universe of creatures,
     but that minds are also images of the divinity itself, or of the author of
     nature, capable of knowing the system of the universe, and imitating some-
     thing of it through their schematic patterns [échantillons architectoniques]
     representing it, each mind being like a little divinity in its own realm. (§83)


At this point, we look ahead to the importance of technicity for thinking
the human as both in and out of nature. The structure of monological order
will have to be rethought under the sign of the organismic body—how a
natural human will bring itself out of nature, artificially, precisely through
the use of artifice, the tool as mind, the mind as tool.
