5
Hume’s Enlightened Nervous System




Habits of Spiritual Automata


The early modern idea of “spiritual automata” figured the mind in terms
of a productive automaticity that nonetheless preserved the intellect’s ca-
pacity to see beyond the body, and even beyond reason itself. The spiritual
automaton was predicated on the recognition—even idealization—that
human cognition was an artificial automatization of the mind. The figure
of the automaton in early modern thought, so often understood to be a
model for the mechanistic reduction of life and the life of the mind, is per-
haps more importantly a way of understanding the artificial construction of
the mind.
   As Pascal wrote in the Pensées, “We must not misunderstand ourselves:
we are as much automaton as mind [esprit]. And therefore the way we are
persuaded is not simply by demonstration. How few things can be demon-
strated! Proofs only convince the mind; custom provides the strongest and
most firmly held proofs: it inclines the automaton, which drags the mind
unconsciously with it.”1 The automaton here is not at all the body-machine
of Descartes; it is the automatism of culture impressed on malleable ner-
vous systems. The automaton of habit could be transformed into an auto-
matic reasoning machine, although of course the risk of wayward habits was
extraordinarily high. Pascal puts it this way:

   We must acquire an easier belief, one of habit, which without violence, art,
   or argument makes us believe something and inclines our faculties to this
   belief so that our soul falls naturally into it. When we believe only through



                                                                                   65

66     C H A PT E R 5



     the strength of our convictions and the automaton is inclined to believe
     the opposite, that is not enough. We must therefore make both sides of us
     believe: the mind by reasons which only have to be seen one in a lifetime,
     and the automaton by custom, and by not allowing it to be disposed to the
     contrary.2


The important point to be made here is that Pascal is fully aware that the
automaton that is unconscious thought is not a natural machine but in-
stead very much an artifact. It is only because this automaton is an artificial
construct that it is possible to reconstruct it through new formations.
    For Nicolas Malebranche, this forming of the mind is a matter of form-
ing the very structure of the brain. Thinking in particular is dependent on
the capacities of the brain, as we see so starkly when, in old age, people lose
their mental acuity and even their reason, all because of the drying and
hardening of the material of the brain. Where the child’s fibers “are soft,
flexible, delicate,” in older people they are “inflexible, gross, and intermix’d
with superfluous humors.”3 There is always a potential for material inter-
ference on the part of the brain, as it deteriorates, as the “solidity” of the
fibers also solidifies error and resists “the attempts and force of reason.”
Malebranche argues that these facts show the urgency of properly forming
the youthful mind, so that its habits are well established in the brain. For
habit is nothing more than memory consolidated in the traces “imprinted
on the brain.”4 And like a new machine that runs best after some practice,
the brain consolidates its impressions the more there is repetition, as the
animal spirits work the fibers in such a way so as to make them respond
promptly in the same fashion in the future. We cannot overemphasize the
physicality of this process as described by Malebranche—like a sculpture
molded by instruments, or the engraving of a printing plate, the depth of
the impression is a direct result of the force of impression. The variation of
impression—we might say, inscription—in individual brains constitutes the
very diversity of minds we see in human society.
    Much in line with the speculations of Malebranche and others, Locke
admits that we are often subject to “strong combinations of ideas” that are
“not allied by nature.” Hence the wide diversity of human beings, with their
“different inclinations, education, interests.” The power of habit reigns in
all spheres: “Custom settles habits of thinking in the understanding, as well
as of determining in the will, and of motions in the body.” Surprisingly per-
haps, Locke believes that it is likely habit can be reduced to the “trains of
motion in the animal spirits, which once set a-going, continue in the same
steps they have been used to.” Repetition wears the path smooth so that

                                          H U M E ’ S E N L I G H T E N E D N E RVO U S SYST E M   67



“motion in it becomes easy, and as it were natural.” The musician only has
to start a melody and the rest of it flows automatically “without care or at-
tention.” The point is not that these thoughts are reducible to the opera-
tions of the brain, even if they are the “natural cause.” What is crucial is that
the natural automaticity of the animal spirits can help us understand how,
in the psychic sphere, ideas seem to be produced and connected so “natu-
rally” once they are made habitual.5
    The mind must be able to direct its own train of thought, which means re-
jecting ideas that are not relevant to inquiry. However, unlike the body, with
its automatic processes of self-repair, the unity of the psyche, for Locke, is
not self-organizing. The foreign thought is not so easily excised from ratio-
nal discourse of the mind: “This may be, if not the chief, yet one of the great
differences that carry some men in their reasoning so far beyond others,
where they seem to be naturally of equal parts.”6 Hence Locke’s proposal
that we inure children to “attention” rather than distract them with admo-
nitions when they stray from the rational course—this will, he says, “intro-
duce a contrary habit.”7 And so even if reason is a natural faculty, attention
is not. Wandering of the mind, forgetfulness and unsteadiness, these are all
natural forms of errancy at work in the youthful mind. But is there such a
thing as a “habit” of attention? What kind of automaticity would be at work
in such a habit? If the mind does not already naturally have the ability to
control its own psychic organization, how can it be transformed into a ma-
chine of indifference? Because to “wander” in thought is to be forced away
from the weak—because difficult—lure that is the work of reason.
    If early modern thought had consistently positioned human auton-
omy as something parallel to creation itself, in the most cosmic sense of
that term, with the advent of the Enlightenment the challenge was to un-
derstand how the human mind could be at once a product of nature and
nature’s own exception. This would prepare the way for theories of intelli-
gence and freedom that could not be fully captured by any strict distinction
between the technical and the natural, or a collapsing of these categories.
The human only emerges on the threshold of that distinction, that is, as an
expression of what could possibly comprehend this duality.
    In the eighteenth century, the idea of an independent realm of spiritual
thought was dismissed. The mind had to be understood as a product of
some kind of biophysical self-organization.8 The movement from the natu-
ral condition of the self-regulating body to the artificial nature of the ratio-
nal mind demanded a new form of philosophical inquiry, which points us to
David Hume’s revolutionary and, we can say, ruthless dismantling of early
modern epistemology.

68   C H A PT E R 5



The Errant Automaticity of Reason in Hume’s “Treatise”


Some small touches given to Caligula’s brain in his infancy, might have
converted him into a Trajan.
                                        Hume, Dialogues on Natural Religion



Hume’s critical philosophy takes aim at one of the central conceits of the
line of early modern thought I have been tracing here—that the compari-
son of organized machine technologies with natural systems of order will
reveal something important about the relationship between human cog-
nition and the inner secrets of the universe. His avatar for this position is
Cleanthes, who, in the Dialogues, compares the universe to houses, ships,
furniture, and machines. But as Hume’s Philo points out—and here we can
locate one of the key markers of a new naturalism characteristic of what
will be called Enlightenment—“thought, design, intelligence, such as we dis-
cover it in men and other animals, is no more than one of the springs and
principles of the universe, as well as heat or cold, attraction or repulsion,
and a hundred others, which fall under daily observation.”9
   Hume’s philosophy is much more than a critique of the analogy be-
tween mind and nature. Hume will in fact leverage his interrogation of
“natural” intelligence into a dismantling of all claims concerning the na-
ture of things. Even if we admit that aspects of nature affect others, why,
he asks, do we privilege one principle, especially one “so minute, so weak,
so bounded a principle, as the reason and design of animals is found to be
on this planet? What peculiar privilege has this little agitation of the brain
which we call thought, that we must thus make it the model of the whole
universe?”10 Hume’s critique draws on a novel way of conceptualizing hu-
man thought: the essential ground of intellectual cognition, the laws of
Leibniz’s incorporeal automaton, can constitute the foundation of a human
nature but only if we acknowledge their fundamentally artificial character.
Hume’s skepticism, on this reading, is a meditation on the weakness and
fragility of an artificial form of intelligence as it confronts the overwhelm-
ing natural forces of the mind. But even these forces have already been dis-
rupted and have reorganized themselves, by the no less artificial invasion of
alien thoughts. Here Hume will point to a new way of conceptualizing the
relationship of mind and brain—and underline the importance of material
forms of intelligent thought.
   As Gilles Deleuze argued in his penetrating analysis of the Treatise,
Hume’s account of the mind begins without a beginning, with a radical
questioning, that is, of the status of the spiritual automaton governed by a

                                         H U M E ’ S E N L I G H T E N E D N E RVO U S SYST E M   69



cognitive logic independent of physiological organization. As Deleuze puts
it, for Hume the mind is not nature; it has “no nature” because at its origin
it is just “identical with the ideas in the mind.” An aggregate collection of
ideas is not a system.11 To identify a “mind” in the midst of the givenness of
experience, we have to first separate the mind from its experiences, and this
requires the mind to be constituted as a new organization of the givenness
of experience. But it is crucial to remind ourselves that the constitution of
the mind as organization is predicated on the initial separation of experi-
ence from the mind. This is what Hume means by the almost insensible
“reflection” that accompanies all experience.12 So the mind is neither given
(as a faculty of organization) nor constituted from experience—it is at once
inside and outside of itself from the very beginning. Hume’s name for this
liminal space is “the imagination.” There is no logic of the imagination;
rather it is the name for the possibility of freeing the idea from its given-
ness. It is the space where ideas enter a new zone of possible connection.
     We can easily misread Hume as if he were continuing the tradition of
analyzing the functions of the mind (whether corporeal or intellectual) and
through his analysis reveals for the first time their deep epistemological
failing. However, taking our cue from Deleuze, the skeptical epistemol-
ogy is much better understood if we acknowledge that the starting point
of Hume’s philosophy of mind is the absence of any mental function alto-
gether. The mind begins as an empty space of liberation where new things
happen. These events are what constitute the mind as a new system, a new
logic of organization. Reason, intelligence, memory, all of these “faculties”
are reconceptualized by Hume as not necessary within the foundational
economy of experience. These functions are all derived, then, from new be-
havior on the part of ideas, behavior made possible only by their separation
from the very origin of these ideas.
     One way to think about the origin of the mind, then, is to emphasize
with Hume that the mind is not some kind of faculty; it does not impose
structures on given ideas. The ideas that come from the “impression” of
the senses are transformed by no longer being given; they appear, now, only
as the possibility of an association.13 The challenge of reading Hume is
this: How do we give a critical account of the mind when we begin with
the recognition that the mind is not the origin of association, only its space
of activity, so to speak? If cognition cannot be modeled according to the
“principles” of order governing its operations, then what is the function
of human thought? How can we critically evaluate reason and unreason,
productive and unproductive thinking, without norms? The advantage of
Hume’s radical starting point is that we no longer must explain at one and

70   C H A PT E R 5



the same time the nature of the mind and the possibility of its violation. The
difficulty, however, will now be establishing any critical perspective what-
soever. My suggestion is that the slippery boundaries between nature and
artifice in Hume’s thought can point to a new way of addressing these ques-
tions. As Deleuze suggested, the space of imagination becomes a system
when the subject appears as the vehicle of a new synthesis of the mind. Yet
this synthesis is never given; it is not, we might say, automatic.

The opening of the mind for Hume is the constitution of the imagination as
a pure possibility of new relations between reflected ideas. It would seem
that Hume believes that there must be an intrinsic logic to the mind, “some
universal principles, which render it, in some measure, uniform with it-
self in all times and places.” Without such principles, ideas would be “en-
tirely loose and unconnected,” and they would be joined only by chance.
How else to explain the regularity of “complex ideas” (not to mention the
correspondence of these ideas across different languages) if there wasn’t
some kind of “associating quality, by which one idea naturally introduces
another” (1.1.4.1)? At the same time, we know that the pivot of Hume’s
critique of induction will be his claim that the imagination can undo any
connection between ideas. The resolution is found in Hume’s careful dis-
tinction between the association of ideas and the mental perception of as-
sociation. The mind therefore does not discover resemblance between two
ideas, say, through comparison or some other method; “resemblance will
at first strike the eye, or rather the mind,” and the same goes for any other
relation—there is no “enquiry or reasoning” involved (1.3.1.2). So what is
the activity of the mind as such?
    Crucial for Hume is not so much the immediate affirmation of a rela-
tion between ideas but instead the suggestion that the mind is where as-
sociations are transformed by repeated experiences into what Hume calls
“habit.” That is to say, what the mind introduces to the economy of sensory
association is the consolidation and artificial intensification of always singu-
lar experiences, which makes possible an experience that will not have yet
taken place: the experience of an “anticipation.”14 Once experiences of asso-
ciations are layered in this way within the mind, with the new experience of
a single idea “our imagination passes from the first to the second, by a natu-
ral transition, which preceded reflection, and which cannot be prevented
by it” (1.3.8.2). This is the first articulation of “human nature” for Hume—
not the association of ideas (which we will see is a logic external to the mind
in an important way) but the integration of associations and the production
of automatic anticipations of a future that does not in fact exist.

                                          H U M E ’ S E N L I G H T E N E D N E RVO U S SYST E M   71



    This logic of anticipation (what Deleuze called a kind of “fiction”) is
stronger than the “reality” of even our own bodies and nervous systems.
Hume notes, for example, that someone who has lost an arm or leg to
amputation “endeavours for a long time afterwards to serve himself with
them” (1.3.9.18). Both the initial association of ideas in experience and the
production of a “habit” that naturally produces artificial anticipations are
“independent of, and antecedent to the operations of the understanding”
(1.3.14.28). For Hume, it is the cognitive construction of habit that underlies
our particular reality, a system that does not simply store ideas and their
associations in memory, but actually constructs out of past associations
and present impressions a comprehension of what is, a comprehension
grounded on a field of interconnected expectations of how this reality will
behave. The fact that expectation is the basis of our cognized reality means
that the system of stored associations can be artificially supplemented by
“habits” that have not in fact been personally experienced by the subject—
what Hume sometimes calls “custom,” although the terms are often used
interchangeably.
    The important point is that anticipation is equally natural in habit and
custom, whatever their origin. For Hume, the “easy transition” is the result
of a “curious and almost artificial preparation” (1.3.9.16). So the artifice of
education (the repeated installation of prepared ideas in the young mind)
is thoroughly consistent with the logic of habit precisely because there is
no difference for the mind. The artificial idea of education can even over-
whelm the ideas that are “naturally” produced by sense, memory, or reason
when they are “strongly imprinted” on the mind (1.3.9.19).

Of course, Hume’s philosophical reputation rests to a large degree on the
way he dismantles the presumption that the anticipations of repetition
that emerge from mental operations are in no way implied by the original
experiences themselves, and any belief in some underlying “identity” that
would guarantee the anticipation is absolutely unfounded. But what is the
function of reason in this system? If belief and even judgment itself are an
effect of some “secret operation” that is completely unthought, how can the
mind’s habitual tendencies (if that is the right word) be internally critiqued?
   It is very clear that for Hume reason is not an independent critical fac-
ulty of some kind that could intervene and interrupt the natural logic that
is habit and custom. Hume describes reason as another form of automa-
tism: “Reason is nothing but a wonderful and unintelligible instinct in our
souls, which carries us along a certain train of ideas, and endows them with
particular qualities, according to their particular situations and relations”

72   C H A PT E R 5



(1.3.16.9). This instinct, to be clear, is not physiologically grounded. Like
habit, reason is a function of the system of ideas, associations, and experi-
ences. Indeed, reason is folded into habit: “Nature may certainly produce
whatever can arise from habit: nay, habit is nothing but one of the prin-
ciples of nature, and derives all its force from that origin” (1.3.16.9). That
force is felt by the mind but remains absolutely impenetrable. The system of
association and the logic of anticipation that produces new ideas appropri-
ate to whatever is the state of things—this system is quite literally for Hume
formed by a “magical faculty in the soul” (1.1.7.15). This magical power is at
the heart of reasoning. The specific kind of expectations that are inferences
will automatically recall counterexamples from the past if the new ideas are
contrary to experience as organized in the mind. The overlooked possibil-
ities “immediately crowd in upon us, and make us perceive the falsehood
of this proposition.” The failure of automaticity marks the “imperfection”
of the faculties, “often the source of false reasoning and sophistry.” Still,
Hume notes that the failure is usually in cases where ideas are unusually
abstruse and compounded. “On other occasions custom is more entire, and
it is seldom we run into such errors” (1.1.7.8). Reason is the automatic de-
tection, then, of a “mismatch” between the expectation implied by some
proposition and the system of expectations forged from natural and artifi-
cial memories of association.
    Hume is of course intensely interested in the ways in which habitual
thinking consolidates untenable beliefs. In particular, he admits that the
admixture of opinions and notions introduced by learning, which takes
“deep root” from infancy, is impossible to eradicate “by all the powers of
reason and experience” (1.3.9.17). To be clear, Hume is arguing that we
could not explain the power of automatic belief and expectation if ideas
were associated only by “a reasoning and comparison of ideas” (1.3.9.17).
But the consequence of this view is that reason will not be able to interrupt
that automaticity of belief.
    In this context, Hume’s somewhat marginal remark in a section discuss-
ing animal reason is quite significant. One way to allow the mind to con-
strain its own operations is to circumvent automaticity through the use of
a technological prosthesis. In order to see how we can maintain a complex
line of thinking (i.e., “reasoning”) to produce an inference without relying
on the steadiness of mind, we can look to the example of the merchant: “In
accounts of any length or importance, merchants seldom trust to the infal-
lible certainty of numbers for their security; but by the artificial structure
of the accounts, produce a probability beyond what is derived from the skill
and experience of the accountant” (1.4.1.3). This externalization of cogni-

                                         H U M E ’ S E N L I G H T E N E D N E RVO U S SYST E M   73



tive relations into the artificial structure is a disembodiment that short-
circuits the weakness of rational thought in the face of intensive, affective
experience.
    For Hume, this must be understood in relation to the physiology of the
nervous system. The problem with reason is that it tracks the implications
of ideas that have not always been experientially associated; rather the
links are made through “general terms” and propositions. In this kind of
thinking, “the action of the mind becomes forced and unnatural, and the
ideas faint and obscure” (1.4.1.10). Here the train of thought is always sub-
ject to competition from the “more natural conception of ideas,” and atten-
tion can falter. This is because “the posture of the mind is uneasy; and the
spirits being diverted from their natural course, are not governed in their
movements by the same laws, at least not to the same degree, as when they
flow in their usual channel” (1.4.1.10). The materialization of habit as sec-
ond “nature” cannot be countered by the artificial and weak thought that
is rational inference—unless that weak thought can be materialized else-
where, safe from the interference of powerful neuronal flows. To “strain”
the imagination is to disturb that flow, and the stronger the agitation of the
brain, the more difficult it will be to resist that flow. As Hume explained
earlier in the Treatise, “It would have been easy to have made an imaginary
dissection of the brain, and have shewn, why, upon our conception of any
idea, the animal spirits run into all the contiguous traces, and rouze up the
other ideas that are related to it” (1.2.5.20). This process is physiologically
imprecise because the spirits seldom maintain their direction and “natu-
rally” deviate from their track, falling into nearby traces and thereby rous-
ing the wrong (or at least alternatively associated) ideas.
    Philosophy is the name for the activity that is not quite purely artificial
but that does operate in the absence of “nature,” whether of the habitual
sort or not. It is thinking with the minimum of passion, the effort to escape
the natural—if sometimes deviant—course of nervous communication,
to think in the absence of the animal spirits, we can say, in other words, to
think through the relationship between ideas and not through the always
material, because physiological, association of ideas. However, as we might
expect, thought cannot so easily disembody itself. “When the soul applies
itself to the performance of any action, or the conception of any object, to
which it is not accustomed, there is a certain unpliableness in the faculties,
and a difficulty of the spirit’s moving in their new direction” (2.3.5.2). And
in the process of thinking passions may well be awakened. Novelty itself
(as Descartes also argued) can enliven the spirits with the passion of won-
der. As Hume explains, this passion agitates the spirits. Hume’s point is that

74    C H A PT E R 5



philosophy as attention to the course of ideas is always threatened by the
economy of the brain and the automatisms of habit.

     There is a great difference betwixt such opinions as we form after a calm and
     profound reflection, and such as we embrace by a kind of instinct or natu-
     ral impulse, on account of their suitableness and conformity to the mind. If
     these opinions become contrary, it is not difficult to foresee which of them
     will have the advantage. As long as our attention is bent upon the subject,
     the philosophical and studied principle may prevail; but the moment we re-
     lax our thoughts, nature will display herself, and draw us back to our former
     opinion. (1.4.2.51)


Nature and reason are therefore figured as opposed and unreconcilable en-
emies; the mind must feign a kind of “dual existence” in order to satisfy the
demands of these two automatic systems.
   Interestingly enough, it is the very weakness of radical reason that is its
saving grace for Hume. The relentless and destructive skeptical conclusions
he follows to the bitter end would make the life of a sociable human being
intolerable. So, as Hume admits, it is nature, that is, the neurological force
of habit, that “cures me of this philosophical melancholy and delirium,”
relaxing—literally—the philosophically focused mind, or alternatively at-
tracting it with “lively impressions” (1.4.7.9). As Hume wrote elsewhere:

     To what purpose should I pretend to regulate, refine, or invigorate any of
     those springs or principles, which nature has implanted in me? Is this the
     road by which I must reach happiness? But happiness implies ease, content-
     ment, repose, and pleasure; not watchfulness, care, and fatigue. The health
     of my body consists in the facility, with which all its operations are per-
     formed. The stomach digests the aliments: The heart circulates the blood:
     The brain separates and refines the spirits: And all this without my concern-
     ing myself in the matter.15


Still, if the “mild” sentiments of philosophical thought cannot “interrupt
the course of our natural propensities,” the trace of philosophical doubt re-
mains, that “cold and general speculation”(1.4.7.13) lingers, perhaps, even
in the “heated” brain.

                                         H U M E ’ S E N L I G H T E N E D N E RVO U S SYST E M   75



Reason and Plasticity: Enlightened Habits


Hume’s thought makes visible a threshold that marks the transition away
from an early modern preoccupation with the relationship between the or-
der of nature (and especially the organization of nature’s bodies) and the
order of cognition—not, as we usually think, to establish the connection
between the mind and the body but in fact to isolate the privileged state of
the intellectual sphere in comprehending the order of the natural world.
The predominance of machinic metaphors and analogies in this period
does not at all reveal an inclination to what is assumed to be a mechani-
cal metaphysical position. The key concept of organization was interrogated
with respect to both artificial machines and what Leibniz called “divine ma-
chines.” The mind, then, was in turn conceptualized as both an indepen-
dent form of organization and a capacity to identify and reproduce—or even
create—forms of order. What Hume’s method reveals is the possibility that
the organization of the mind is inherently contingent, dependent first on
the array of impressions given to it by the sensible machinery of the body
but also dependent on the secret forces that make and consolidate the asso-
ciations between ideas that produce the anticipations that order our experi-
ence of the world. Moreover, the mind is susceptible to “alien” associations
in the form of imported customs—that is, education. Ultimately, for Hume,
the two logics (of mind, of body) are steered by the dynamics of the nervous
system—the formation of habit and custom through the literal writing of the
brain. The possibility of a pure logic of thought (itself a form of automatism)
depends on the contingency of the state of the brain and the passions that
excite it. (Figure 5.1.) Only in the absence of lively impressions and heated
passions will the brain be willing to succumb to the pursuit of reason—the
tracing of a cognitive logic of ideas, often against customary association,
often forging a path through the brain that has never been followed. Fleet-
ingly, Hume will suggest that the technologies of disembodiment—writing,
in particular—might liberate reason or at least offer it a space of refuge.
    In the wake of this turn we can see that if reason and intelligence in the
Enlightenment will be played out on the terrain of the nervous system, it is
not in the way we might suspect. The question will not be the how the mind
is connected with the brain, and whether or not this implies a reduction
of the mind to the body. With Hume, we can now ask: How does the con-
tingency of an organized mental system relate to the organizational capaci-
ties of the sentient body? Against early modern philosophy, Enlightenment
thought recognized that the challenge of actually explaining the develop-
ment and reproduction of organic bodies precluded any easy method for

Figure 5.1. From Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond D’Alembert, L’Encyclopédie
(1751–66). Source: Wellcome Collection. CC BY 4.0 / https://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

                                            H U M E ’ S E N L I G H T E N E D N E RVO U S SYST E M   77



linking these living systems with the systems of thought generated within
minds. For these systems were not strictly speaking analogs of one another:
they had independent logics of development. How could the contingency
of belief, reason, passion, anticipation, memory, categorization, language
be mapped on to the complex physiological systems that maintained their
unity and reproduced it without any obvious vehicle of organization?
    The sterile opposition of mechanism and vitalism fails to grasp the cru-
cial significance of contingency in Enlightenment concepts of mind. Yes,
there were many schools of thought competing to understand the nature of
the organized body and the nature of the human mind. However, what links
these efforts is a radically new naturalism that takes as central the origin of
organization, or, to put it another way, the possibility of self-organization.16 If
in the seventeenth century the technological object could serve as a model
of order as active organization, in the eighteenth century the automaton
demonstrated a crucial absence: how the living being could construct it-
self. Or at least: how the living system could produce and reproduce its
own organization, without the assumption of some immaterial presence of
purely formal order, the Leibnizian “monad.”
    In the Enlightenment, then, the contingency of the mind’s formal de-
velopment could be linked with the constitutive openness of the dynamic
body rather than the body’s abstracted (and theologically framed) formal
unity. Enlightenment psychology, unlike its predecessors, offered models
that would account for the recognized regulation of our mental life and the
singular human capacity for creative insight and invention. Habit was the
liminal zone that laced together organismic order and distinctly human
minds, via the neurophysiology of automaticity.17 As Charles Bonnet put it,
cultural education marks a “second birth,” since the brain is literally rewrit-
ten.18 Denis Diderot argued that the life of the mind was a constant writing
and reading of the brain by itself.19 But the original natural order of the ner-
vous system never disappears entirely. As David Hartley would explain, the
human is defined by twin automaticities: the automatic physiological orga-
nization of the body and what he called the “secondarily automatic” func-
tioning of cultural habit, the deformation and re-formation of the brain
from the outside.20 It will fall to Kant to systematize these two automatici-
ties, the a priori logic of the mind and the empirical formations—and often
errant deformations—of concrete experience.
