Threshold



KANT’S CRITIQUE OF
AUTOMATIC REASON

6
The Machinery of Cognition
in the First Critique



“The role of a human being is perhaps the most artificial [künstlichste],
the most arduous, but also the most exquisite in all of this planetary sys-
tem.”1 Kant offered this dense but illuminating reflection in notes written
in the 1780s, on the topic of metaphysics. The relationship between these
terms is not entirely obvious. Given the legacy of Enlightenment thinking
on the nature of the human mind, or at least the organization of the mind,
Kant might well be echoing Rousseau or Herder, suggesting that it is the
special difficulty of human existence, its radical lack, that is, that necessi-
tates the turn to artifice, to the nonbiological prosthetics of technology and
language—thereby becoming the most magnificent of all creatures. Per-
haps. It is also possible that Kant is defining the human here as the most
artificial of all creatures, and hence it is human life that is the most chal-
lenging.
   From the perspective of Kant’s critical philosophy, at least, the essence of
the artifice peculiar to human beings is worth exploring carefully, since the
term is entangled with the crucial problem of judgment, linked as it is to
novelty, spontaneity, and the independence of the organization of the mind
from any external causality. Still, the slightly incongruous reference to the
“planetary system” is puzzling and does not seem to point to any particu-
lar issue raised in the description and analysis of the architectonic system
of cognition. The astronomical frame does recall the more cosmic specu-
lations of the early modern thinkers navigating the thresholds separating
and connecting the order of nature, the capacities of the mind, and the di-
vine unity but now in a new, Enlightened context.
   Decades earlier, Kant (in his first, anonymously published work on uni-
versal natural history, which appeared in 1755) had in fact already addressed

80

                                T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   81



the grand question of the position of the human in nature, combining lead-
ing edge neurophysiological theory, natural history of the organic body, and
new psychological accounts of cognition in order to revisit the fundamen-
tally theological tradition of metaphysical thought. For Kant, in this early
work, the distinction of the human would be found, as Rousseau argued in
the near-contemporaneous Essay on the Origin of Inequality, in some kind of
lack—or at least deficiency. The limitation of human thought and action,
Kant said, was due to “the coarseness of the matter into which his spiritual
part is sunk, in the rigidity of the fibers and the sluggishness and immo-
bility of the fluids that ought to be obedient to its stirrings.” The cognitive
psychic system was trapped, so to speak, in the nervous system, and over-
powered by the sheer intensity of organismic demands on its attention.

   The nerves and fluids of his brain supply him with only coarse and unclear
   concepts, and because he is unable to balance the stimulation of sensory
   sensations in the interior of his faculty of thinking with sufficiently pow-
   erful ideas, he is carried away by his passions, dulled and disturbed by the
   tumult of the elements that maintain his machinery.2


This might serve as a relatively faithful précis of Hume’s Treatise. What dis-
tinguishes Kant in this work, however, is the belief (or maybe faith) that the
mind is somehow capable of increasing its strength. The logic of cognition is
not expediency but reason, and Kant understood reason to be in a constant
struggle with the body’s own existential orientation. Kant laments, “The ef-
forts of reason to rise against this and to expel this confusion by the light of
the power of judgment are like the flashes of sunshine when thick clouds
constantly interrupt and darken its brightness.”3
    Why this struggle in a creature of nature? As Kant explains, the mind
has a function in the economy of the organism: the “invisible spirit” is
what conceptualizes the external world, and repeats and combines these
concepts with its specific form of internal action.4 The problem is that the
coarseness of the fibers makes this internal reflective activity especially
difficult; the soul is, he says, in a state of “constant exhaustion” because
the body resists the reorganization of its sensorial flow. So the mind suc-
cumbs, and “soon falls back into the passive state by a natural tendency of
the bodily machine since the sensory stimulations determine and govern
all its actions.” But this is for Kant not natural, in that the spirit of rational
cognition should be governing the “lower” functions of the physical body.
Our “excellent abilities” are being wasted, and with age, the situation is
even more dire, as weak circulation and increasingly inflexible fibers and

82   C H A PT E R 6



ossified spirits make thought even more sluggish and prone to error. It is
this unnatural, or at least highly problematic, condition that stages Kant’s
analysis of the human mind.5
   However, it is important to note that for Kant the question is not to what
extent the mind can liberate itself from its materiality, to aim, that is, for
a certain kind of disembodiment. What is at stake is the coordination or
harmony between two related but also radically independent systems that
together constitute a living, sentient being—namely, the psychic and the
physiological.
   In contrast to Locke’s speculations on the cognitive capacities of angels,
Kant’s conjectures concern the relative rationality of extraterrestrials in
the solar system.6 Given that the other planets are most likely inhabited,
Kant argues, the structure of the sensory and nervous systems of these alien
creatures would vary according to their distance from the sun: the fibers of
a resident on Jupiter or Saturn, say, would have to be extraordinarily fine in
order to be able to respond to the slightest impression from the weak heat
and light, whereas those on Venus would be even coarser than our own. Our
middle position on Earth puts us in the middle rank of intelligence, where
the power of the mind struggles against the coarseness and inelasticity of
our sensory and nervous organs. This is what makes the life of the human
so arduous. Unlike virtually all other living creatures, who live, reproduce,
and die in a more or less seamless existence, the human being struggles be-
cause its nature is not so fixed. As Kant puts it, the human can both debase
itself and strive beyond itself, seeking “gratifications” for which “he is not
organized and which conflict with the arrangements that nature has made
for him.” This is to say that the human is the being capable of disturbing
nature, leaving his “post” in creation. Kant’s argument here is that the hu-
man must rediscover its place in nature, its original sphere—because “out-
side the sphere of a human being he is nothing, and the hole that he has
made spreads its own damage to the neighboring members.”7

I recognize the danger of overreading these passages in light of Kant’s fu-
ture philosophical development. Still, it does seem appropriate to frame his
critical project with these questions, for one thing Kant is trying to accom-
plish in the three Critiques and related writings is a systematic survey of
the exact capacities of the human mind, so that we can understand the ten-
dency to stray from the very strict limits of reason and cognition and only
then formulate a certain intellectual regime that will guard against stray-
ing and guide us in the pursuit of knowledge. Unlike all previous thinkers,
however, Kant will refuse to separate the logic of corporeal cognition from

                              T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   83



the intellectual faculties or capacities, and he will resolutely avoid the met-
aphors of liberation they entail. Kant will emphasize, then, the unitary in-
tegration of all forms of cognition, drawing on the early modern philosoph-
ical and medical concept of organismic unity that we can trace back to at
least the seventeenth century.
    The key issue motivating my reading of Kant here is reconciling Kant’s
relentless systematicity (i.e., the essential automaticity of the cognitive
functions and their interrelationships) with the profoundly important role
that disruption (in the form of error, interruption, and pathology) plays in
the very constitution of the psychic space and the topological organization
of the organic body. This reading suggests that there is something cognitive
that Kant will locate outside of all understanding, a presence in thought of
what is necessarily radically outside of all thought. To explain this, I focus
attention on the status of the human as artificial. Kant will directly (and
often not so directly) explore the ways in which human artifice, and espe-
cially human technical artifice, can interrupt the automatic integrity of the
human mind. In so doing, he will open up new possibilities for the reinte-
gration of the materiality of the body and the organization of the mind.

Automaticities in Conflict


We can start with a look at Kant’s various lecture series on logic. Here the
cognitive faculties are staged, as psychic phenomena, independent of any
determining causality; however, that did not mean they were not natural
and hence not subject to their own natural laws. This claim was important
for Kant because it allowed him to evade some philosophical traps. For now,
I want to focus on the implications of Kant’s invocation of law in his lec-
ture notes on logic: “We can only become aware of error through our un-
derstanding, and thus we can err only when the understanding acts con-
trary to its own laws. This, however, is impossible. No force of nature can
act contrary to its own laws if it acts alone.” Error, then, is a deviation re-
sulting from the interference of other natural laws—just as the motion of a
body subject to gravity can be deflected by the force of air resistance, Kant
remarks. The mind is, therefore, a kind of spiritual automaton in Leibniz’s
sense of the term. “The understanding by itself does not err because it can-
not conflict with its own laws.” “Pure reason does not err.” And so on.8
   But what is the function of this automatic system? If, as Kant says, we
can conceive the continuity between the form of an external object and the
way that object is represented in the nervous system and brain, and perhaps
even a continuity between those brain representations and the psychic rep-

84   C H A PT E R 6



resentations that constitute the mind’s sensible experience, it is not possi-
ble to assert any continuity between the active functions of the mind (com-
bining ideas, assigning predicates, isolating properties) and the very nature
of the world itself. To argue (as Spinoza and Leibniz seem to) that there is
a relationship between the two spheres established by God is to abandon
philosophy, according to Kant. Hume offered the radically skeptical alter-
native: human cognition is just a kind of grand fiction. For Kant, as is well
known, the third alternative is a systematic grasping of the nature of cogni-
tion in and of itself. The laws of cognition are what determine freely acting
humans. But not as if humans were mere machines with no alternatives.
What Kant says in the lectures is that different laws can interfere with one
another; to be free is to be determined by the independent and autonomous
system of the understanding and reason. These are the laws of cognition
and not a displaced, externalized origin of action. We must recognize that
we are not machines driven by the nature of our embodied experience—the
logic, that is, of embodiment. To be free is to follow rational laws.
    The function of cognition is to see and process relations that are not in
the “appearances of nature” that constitute the sensory field of experience.
That is the point of the understanding for Kant: to draw from cognition’s
own logic of organization an orientation in nature, a knowledge that is not
itself given by nature.9 It is also the source of the struggle that fractures the
integrity of the human. A natural automaton would be driven by the logic
of instinct, the laws of automatic behavior that flow from the organization
of the living body. As Kant says, the understanding “makes everything un-
ruly when it fills in for the lack of instinct”—when it tries to substitute it-
self, in other words, for that other nature, to imitate the laws of the organis-
mic and therefore material automaticity governed by physical laws rather
than operating properly as the purely incorporeal (or “spiritual”) automa-
ton that it is. The freedom of the understanding is precisely the fact that it
“enjoys an exception” from dependency on any sensible ordering.10
    This challenge can serve to prepare the transition to Kant’s critical phi-
losophy. Kant will, beginning with the First Critique, at once determine the
“external” limits and internal boundaries of the forms of human cognition
and the nature and power of its systematic integration. Ultimately, the devi-
ations, disruption, and pathologies of the mind will point to an even more
radical interruption of the laws of cognition, namely, the spirit of technicity.
A rethinking of the place of unity in Kant’s work will be necessary to make
sense of the emergence and development of techne.

                                    T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   85



The Automaticity of Pure Reason


For a first rough orientation the structure of the Critique of Pure Reason
should be thought of in terms of various materials falling into a machine
where they are then processed; and that what then emerges as the result of
this processing is my knowledge.
                      Theodor Adorno, Kant’s “Critique of Pure Reason” (1959)11




The Critique of Pure Reason cannot be reduced to the architectonic typol-
ogy that it articulates with such precision and systematicity. By that I mean
Kant begins with the fact of mental experience and proceeds to identify
and demonstrate the necessarily independent logic and economy of each
faculty. That independent logic is what Kant refers to as the “pure” instan-
tiation of that faculty, even if that particular subsystem cannot at all be
entirely separated from the others in reality. The mind must, then, be ap-
proached as a system with rules that bring together these individual capac-
ities: “By an architectonic I understand the art of systems. Since systematic
unity is that which first makes ordinary cognition into science, i.e., makes
a system out of a mere aggregate of it, architectonic is the doctrine of that
which is scientific in our cognition in general, and therefore necessarily be-
longs to the doctrine of method” (A832/B860).12 The beginning point of the
system must not be thought of, then, as a foundation for subsequent modes
of organization and reorganization. For as Kant shows, the nature of ap-
pearance for an experiencing being implies the necessity of a law of appear-
ance, and it is only by pinpointing the different forms of appearance that
we can see the interaction of different faculties and their role in cognition
more generally. If we assumed that the “raw material” of cognition was the
givenness of sensory information, which is “worked upon” by the faculties,
we would be unable to locate the origin of thought because it would always
be conditioned by what was not thought itself.
    The beginning of thought, then, is the first structuring of the experi-
ential wholeness of the field of thought as thought, whatever may be the
connection between the body’s sensory organs and our experience of the
world. For Kant, the first internal division of experience is the appearance
of what he calls intuitions. Literally a form of “seeing,” the intuitions are
what delineate in experience the givenness of structure, the structure first
of objects and their properties. Without this primordial differentiation of
the unity of thinking, there could be no possibility of any perception or
identification of relations within thought.
    Having established the necessity of the division and distinction that in-

86    C H A PT E R 6



tuition introduces, Kant demonstrates that in order to maintain the inter-
nal unity that has now been fractured into individual fields of organization,
the mind must reunite the intuitions. Or to put it another way, the internal
differentiation cannot lead to a multiplicity of experiences (since that is
impossible in one mind), but if the mind is one system of experience, then
the unity must reappear in some form: that is the law of the imagination,
which must, simultaneously with the appearance of difference, reunite
the intuitions by forging a real unity out of this plurality—what Kant calls
the manifold. At this stage, all that is required of the imagination is that it
exist in order to synthesize back into unity what was initially divided. The
objects of experience now appear to us as aspects of one genuine singular
world, necessarily—that is, not as simply juxtaposed in an ad hoc and con-
tingent manner.
    Now, if we can see how this double move of intuition and imagination
resolves the continuity of the cognitive unity of experience, it also raises a
new question, a new challenge, that was not present to the mind in its origi-
nal undifferentiated state—namely, what laws govern the manner in which
this new unity of experience is produced and maintained. What marks the
synthesis of the manifold plurality? In the synthesis of the manifold, the
imagination must now relate, using principles of organization, what was
not fundamentally capable of any relationality before the initial cuts of
articulation. This is why Kant can demonstrate the absolute necessity of a
new faculty, the faculty that can provide the law for the appearance of regu-
lar organization within the synthetic unity of experience.
    This is the understanding: the faculty that produces the “forms of
thought” (B288) of relational structure that could give a substantial form to
what would only be a “pure” but empty synthesis. The categories are the ba-
sic, foundational forms of relational order that are intrinsic to that synthe-
sis, applied to the manifold so that we cognize it as organized in a seamless
way. The categories (spatial position, number, succession, etc.) all depend
on the prior articulation of the field of experience and the synthesis of that
field: the need for relations stems from the fact of creating independent
sites of organization that nonetheless demand to appear under an embrac-
ing unity that relates them. That unity is essentially “immaterial” and must
be actively reengaged with the sensibility.

     We can, however, trace all actions of the understanding back to judgments,
     so that the understanding in general can be represented as a faculty for
     judging. For according to what has been said above it is a faculty for think-
     ing. Thinking is cognition through concepts. Concepts, however, as predi-

                                T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   87



   cates of possible judgments, are related to some representation of a still un-
   determined object. (A69/B94)


Kant’s point here is that the fact of articulation and the need for a new syn-
thesis does not imply any particular form of relational order. However, it is
not possible for us to actually cognize an alternative order, since the order
that appears to us appears as necessary, a priori, and hence absolutely uni-
versal.
    Kant’s method protects him from any obligation to account for the rela-
tionship between the laws of cognition and the “reality” of any world that is
not just external to the mind, but radically outside of experience itself. What-
ever the connection might be between our thought and the nervous sys-
tem, or our thought and the physical world, or even our thought and God,
thought itself cannot conceive the relation of what is mental experience to
something that is not experience. This is not to say that the mind is not part
of nature. Rather, metaphysics in this new key will consist of the consider-
ation of “everything insofar as it is,” which is to say: insofar as it is thinkable
in terms of the operation of this incorporeal automaton that is mind. Kant
occupies an uneasy middle ground between Leibniz and Locke: the first
philosopher “intellectualized” (intellectuirte) the appearances in order to
link them with the order of things in themselves, the second “sensitivized”
(sensificirt) them to bind them to an empirical reality (A271/B327). As Kant
says, a cognition that could cognize what it is not is one that would have to
belong to nonhuman beings, “beings we cannot even say are possible, let
alone how they are constituted” (A 278/B 334).
    That said, the initial portrait of the mind seems excessively limited, in
that the automaticity of the interplay of sensible intuition, imagination,
and the categories that understanding continually applies via judgment,
this all leaves no room for what we might call active and productive cogni-
tion that is spontaneous and not, we might say, automatically necessary. We
have seen that the division of the faculties can be read as an unfolding of an
internal and consistent organization from within a foundational unity that
is always preserved in this internal differentiation. The interruption of the
purely automatic determinism of thought (the origin of individual cogni-
tion) is not, for Kant, an intervention from a lawless “outside” of thought
but rather a consequence of the fundamental contingency of the content
and even formal order of the intuitions—appearing as they do in the dy-
namic flow of experience that cannot, as sensible, ever be derived from the
laws of thought, even as their appearance and possibilities of organization
are utterly dependent on those laws. It is not hard to see in this develop-

88   C H A PT E R 6



ment an exact analogy with contemporary theorizations of biological gene-
sis, in particular morphogenesis.
    As Jennifer Mensch has brilliantly shown, Kant’s unfolding of the fac-
ulties in the First Critique parallels exactly the kind of speculative natural
philosophy of organismic development, in that the structural form of orga-
nization is given in the initial undifferentiated unity (the egg, that is), but
in the very process of development, the contingencies of interaction with
what that entity is not (however that is understood) will greatly affect what
can be called the individuation of the living being from its generic univer-
sality of organization (the species of unity).13
    This perspective is important because for Kant, the contingency of sen-
sible properties in the synthetic form that is an intuition sparks the appear-
ance of a new form of cognition and a new faculty that will, of necessity,
emerge to maintain the foundational unity of the mind—this will be, even-
tually, what he calls the faculty of reason. Once intuitions within a struc-
tured synthetic unity appear to the mind, it is possible to mark out relations
between aspects of the manifold, relations that may be governed by a priori
principles (e.g., the way colors or shapes appear to us) but are not in and of
themselves absolutely necessary. In other words they could be “unthought,”
or cognized in completely other ways. This identification of relations and
order within the manifold is for Kant the formation of empirical concepts,
which can only be made contingently on the basis of contingent appear-
ances, though the concepts take the form of—maybe “borrow” from would
be a better phrase—the normative universality of the categories, as Hannah
Ginsborg persuasively suggests.14
    Kant’s theory of empirical concept formation is notoriously obscure and
the topic of much scholarly debate (and speculation). But it seems to me
that we can at least agree that their origin can be understood as epigene-
tic (that is, an internal contingent development) and not the result of an
automatic function that is an a priori “preformation.” The formation of an
artificial concept would have no positive function if it did not lead to some
new possibility of thought, and this is where Kant must introduce again
the faculty of judgment—because without judgment, the empirical con-
cept would never be capable of producing active thinking that is not deter-
mined by past cognitions. The general principle of the empirical concept
(whether it is a formal recognition of the relational topology of intuitions
or itself a kind of “meta-intuition” of structural homology across discrete
intuitions) must be applied to new intuitions in order to generate some kind
of novel insight. The function of judgment is just that: to ascertain whether
or not an intuition can be subsumed under the empirical concept—a priori

                               T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   89



concepts, the categories, are of course automatically applied. “Synthesis in
general is . . . mere effect of the imagination, of a blind though indispens-
able function of the soul, without which we could have no cognition at all,
but of which we are seldom conscious” (A78/B103).
    It is the contingency of the empirical concept that demands an active,
and singular, exercise of judgment, appearing now within the contingent
flow of sensible intuitions, which is to say, not automatically. The intuition
will be recognized, that is, in light of its having been judged, via the media-
tion of a concept, to be an instantiation of the general principle articulated
in that concept. However, intuitions are susceptible to being cognized un-
der many different concepts. If the difficulty of explaining how, why, and
when empirical judgments are made remains, it seems still that the dis-
tinction between pure a priori and empirical concepts lies in the perpetual
automaticity of the first kind of judgments and the necessary contingency
(i.e., always epigenetic origin) of the latter.
    The crucial implication drawn in the First Critique is that the judgments
mediated by the imagination are a structural necessity within the system
of cognition (since concepts cannot apply themselves). Yet judgment is es-
sentially spontaneous and creative, otherwise it would never exceed pure
automaticity. The problem of identifying the principle of judgment arises
only with the recognition of the very contingency of its empirical activi-
ties. There, its appearance is not at all predictable or even necessary, at least
from the perspective of the other faculties. According to the developmental
model of the mind, it is clear that the need to introduce the new, very spe-
cific faculty of reason arises in just this moment. For the contingency of
the interruption that is empirical judgment cannot help but interfere with
the internal organization and unity of the mental sphere. Empirical con-
cepts, exercised through judgment, serve to reorganize the very appearance
of things—though never violating, of course, the categories, or escaping
the synthetic unities. Nonetheless, judgment is a novel and not necessary
(again, an epigenetic) complication of the mind that always threatens cog-
nitive integrity from within. This is because empirical concepts are not nec-
essarily congruent with one another, as they might be triggered by different
sensible experiences in different contexts, producing inconsistent expecta-
tions, anticipations, and therefore incoherent actions.

The emergence of reason, explicitly (and infamously) described by Kant as
the “epigenesis of pure reason” (B167), is the emergence of a new faculty
whose task is to track the logical forms of concepts in order to compare and
make visible these threatening conceptual contradictions.15 At the same

90   C H A PT E R 6



time, reason can in the process identify conceptual relations across con-
cepts themselves, creating new incarnations of the complex wholeness
of the mind. Reason is necessarily protected, so to speak, from sensibil-
ity because it does not arise within that sphere and could not do its work
if its own activity was governed at all by the contingency of that experi-
ence. Reason sees only conceptual order. And this is what makes reason
so powerful, once it appears as a contingent development that nonetheless
becomes necessary because of the inevitable existence of the contingent
yet functionally “general” empirical concept. For reason can see past the
content of any one concept and understand the logical implications of its
configuration—whether the concept is a priori or not.
    If an empirical concept is formed, say, the concept of “sphericity,” from
the layering and integration of common features in a multitude of in-
tuitions, the leap to the claim that there is such a “thing” in nature is an
obvious error, an example of what Kant would call a transcendental illu-
sion. However, once the concept of a sphere is established, reason is ca-
pable of developing the implications of that particular organization of
relationships—and discovering, for example, certain geometric truths as
a result. Reason forms “ideas” that are much more abstract (but also less
concrete) than empirical concepts, and these are useful precisely for or-
ganizing cognition at a structural level beyond the production, reproduc-
tion, and synthesis of sensible intuitions. The contingency of the empirical
concept (its intrinsic artifice and its “accidental” sensory content) does not
threaten the necessity of the logical form of the concept. Reason is involved in
a continual and always incomplete mission to recognize, correct, and de-
velop the internal formal unity of the whole cognitive system.16 This does not
mean that reason can somehow ever synthesize conceptual knowledge into
a genuine unity. Reason, I suggest, is more a machine of reconciliation that
aims to give presence to a unity that itself never appears as such. Reason
serves as the representative of the concrete whole forged by the mutual ac-
tivity of the cognitive faculties, in its endless (because specific and sequen-
tial) clarification of the internal relations of cognized and a priori concepts.
    The unity that pure reason brings to the mind is therefore the unity of
the understanding, because it is there that the fracture of two “universal-
ities” (a priori and empirical) takes place. Kant’s explanation is complex,
to say the least. But crucial to his account is the denial that reason some-
how provides a logical synthesis on the basis of some a priori principle of
unity. Reason does not practice synthesis of this kind. Pure reason tracks
the relations, the sequences, that condition the movement of judgments,

                              T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   91



and, as Kant says, it relentlessly seeks the unconditioned that must initiate
any logical series of connected judgments. These judgments (applications
of concepts to sense) are aimed at identifying possible experiences. The un-
derstanding, says Kant, “has to do only with the objects of a possible expe-
rience, whose cognition and synthesis are always conditioned” (B365). “All
principles of the pure understanding are nothing further than a priori prin-
ciples of the possibility of experience” (B294). The very condition of that
“universality” is itself unconditioned, in the sense that the cognitive un-
derpinning of the judgment is taken for granted (i.e., “the subsumption of
its condition under a general rule”) (A307). Reason is the necessary supple-
ment to the understanding because in tracking the conditions and expos-
ing the necessity of the unconditioned, reason is capable of identifying the
field of possible cognitions.
    To put this more concretely, the pure understanding is blind—must be
blind—to the unconditioned ground of the conditions of its own cogni-
tions. For example, the structural artifice of the categories makes possible
the continuity of experience that experience itself cannot generate: conti-
nuity cannot be experienced in and of itself but is the condition for a uni-
fied experience (A103).
    Or take judgment. In the application of an a priori or contingent prin-
ciple, judgment conditions itself by obeying the intrinsic demand of the
“universal rule” (as norm) so that it can generate a singular and necessary
conclusion. Reason, in contrast to the judgments of the understanding,
identifies these occluded unconditioned principles in order to critically
organize the possible cognitions that could be produced from the interac-
tion of a priori and a posteriori concepts, all of which are conditioned by
their inherent normativity. Reason does not judge these unconditioned
principles on the basis of some specified condition (which would entail as-
suming yet another norm). Rather, it just recognizes their status as uncon-
ditioned, the contingency of their normativity, that is.17 Only then can rea-
son evaluate the internal consistency of the comprehensive system of the
understanding—the knowledge that organizes all experiences on the pri-
mordial condition that concepts are normative. “If the understanding may
be a faculty of unity of appearances by means of rules, then reason is the
faculty of the unity of the rules of understanding under principles” (B359).
    And I would stress that the epigenetic appearance of reason is predi-
cated on the emergence of empirical concepts that exceed the categories
and the logic of intuition and therefore always threaten to introduce a dis-
turbing element into cognition: the presence of radical disorder (i.e., con-

92   C H A PT E R 6



flicting norms that nonetheless share a logic of normativity) and hence
the threat of a malfunctioning system. Which is another way of saying the
death of the system qua system.
    But what exactly is the principle of this system? That is probably the
wrong question, because a principle must always be applied and this is ex-
actly not what reason does. Reason must perceive the unitary wholeness
of the mind as a system while at the same time taking on the responsibility
for maintaining its integrity from within.18 For Kant, reason is most defi-
nitely what must “govern” and thereby constitute a cognitive system if the
mind is going to be understood as something that is not a “mere rhapsody
[keine Rhapsodie].” A true system involves mutually supportive efforts that
all strive together to advance the shared essential ends. The mind as sys-
tem, as Kant will carefully explain, lies not in some independent synthetic
action but rather in the rational unity of differentiated forms of cognition.
The necessary unity of the mental sphere that Kant demonstrates is in fact
an empty origin and a formless limit. The transcendental unity of apper-
ception deduced from the continuity of thinking has by definition no ac-
tual presence in thought itself. “There must be a condition that precedes all
experience and makes the latter itself possible” (A107). (This will become
crucially important when we turn to the Third Critique.)
    What gives cognizability to the system of its own systematicity is just
the idea of wholeness—and ideas are, according to Kant, what pure reason
alone produces—because the idea gives actual “content” (of a formal kind)
to the integration of the differentiation of mind into absolutely separate
spheres of activity. “This is the rational concept of the form of a whole, in-
sofar as through this the domain of the manifold as well as the position of
the parts with respect to each other is determined a priori. The scientific
rational concept thus contains the end and the form of the whole that is
congruent with it” (A832/B860).
    The transcendental apperception of unity cannot act cognitively since it
is radically inaccessible to thought, absolutely noncognizable; and since it
is incapable of intervening within thought as thought, the mind generates
an idea of the whole that will allow its unity to appear to itself, in the form
of what we might call a “concrete unity.” Reason produces and enforces the
foundational articulation of the mind: the perfect structural coordination
of the differentiated parts and their wholeness. Kant is very precise here:
the parts, he states, are in fact related to the unity of the end only through
the idea of the unity of the end, not the genuine unity of thought itself.
    This is a crucial issue. As Kant wrote in the Critique of Practical Reason, if
our actions were conditioned by our concrete determination in time, as if

                                T H E M AC H I N E RY O F C O G N I T I O N I N T H E F I RST C R I T I Q U E   93



we were a kind of thing, then “freedom could not be saved.”19 We would be
mere automata.

   Here one looks only to the necessity of the connection of events in a time
   series, as it develops in accordance with natural law, whether the subject in
   which this development takes place is called automaton materiale, when the
   machinery is driven by matter, or with Leibniz, spirituale, when it is driven
   by representations; and if the freedom of our will were nothing other than
   the latter (say, psychological and comparative, but not also transcendental,
   i.e., absolute), then it would at bottom be nothing better than the freedom
   of a turnspit, which, when once it is wound up, also accomplishes its move-
   ments by itself.20


By this he means that in either case the conditions of the determination
would be external to our own being—even if we were still very much self-
aware, even if these determinations were divinely established. As Kant ex-
plains, a human being would be just a marionette, or, with an explicit ref-
erence to the famous eighteenth-century automata of Jacques Vaucanson,
an “automaton, like Vaucanson’s.”21 And in a footnote to this passage, Kant
would add: “Such an automaton could mistake his spontaneity for free-
dom, but which would be an illusion, for everything would be determined
by his original makeup conveyed by God.”22
    As I am suggesting, the epigenetic arrival of reason marks the transi-
tion of an automaton seamlessly synchronized with life, reproduction, and
death, within the whole that is nature, into an autonomous system capable
of cognizing its own “ends” and steering itself in the face of obstacles. The
organization of the living animal is what determines its action via natural
needs (instincts). What turns this automaton into an autonomous23 human
is the grasping of its own organization through itself, through its own idea.
    This is all to say that the unity that is the system of the mind—and this
is of course the core subject of transcendental philosophy, the work of pure
reason—can now act, Kant suggests, because the rational idea of whole-
ness “allows the absence of any part to be noticed in our knowledge of the
rest, and there can be no contingent addition or undetermined magnitude
of perfection that does not have its boundaries determined a priori” (A832/
B860). What does it mean to say that the epigenetic arrival of reason itself
is determined a priori? If the wholeness of the mind, like the integrative
unity of the “animal body,” as Kant notes in a famous passage, is an articu-
lated whole and can therefore grow only “internally,” and “without any al-
teration of proportion,” where exactly does reason fit?

94   C H A PT E R 6



    In light of a strong epigenetic reading of the First Critique, the answer
might come down to this: reason is not an additional “part” of the mind,
analogous to a new limb or organ. Reason is the coming to concrete aware-
ness of the fact of the wholeness that is the “organism” of mind developing
according to its internal organizational potential.
    Two issues are raised here. First, does the appearance of reason entail
that the mind is governing itself, which is not the same thing as saying
that the unity of the mind is automatically maintained and preserved by its
“parts”? The whole (whether mind or organism) must be actively governed.
Or more subtly, as Leibniz put it, reason appears as a necessary supplement
to the order, a “rector” of the province and not its sovereign authority. Sec-
ond, Kant leaves aside the problem of conceptualizing the link between this
idea of the rational whole and that which is represented in that idea. Does
the mind ever make an appearance as a unity within the proliferation of dif-
ference that is the mind, in effect bypassing the representation?
    Tracking the biological concepts present in the First Critique, we can
turn to the status of the organism and its pathologies in Kant’s work—
especially the Third Critique—to elucidate these possibilities. Both mind
and body will turn out to be more radically open than they first seem, and
it is here that technicity will intervene as a crucial moment in the constitu-
tion of the human being qua human.
