18
Lotka on the Evolution of
Technical Humanity



What an organism feeds upon is negative entropy.
                                   Erwin Schrödinger, What Is Life? (1944)1



The American evolutionary biologist and statistician Alfred Lotka clearly
knew of Von Uexküll’s work. There is a marked-up copy of a review of Von
Uexküll’s 1909 book on the Umwelt in Lotka’s papers at Princeton. It is not
clear what he thought of the Estonian’s ideas, although it is likely Lotka
would have criticized the “vitalist” orientation of the work, as well as the
outright rejection of Darwinian models of evolution. But Lotka was hardly
doctrinaire, famous for taking a physical perspective on evolution, arguing
in his major work, Elements of Physical Biology (1925), that the total envi-
ronment of the earth must be understood as one single, physical, thermo-
dynamic system. Entropy was only forestalled in our biological world be-
cause of the continuing influx of solar energy. Biological “life” was less a
distinct category for Lotka than just another form of energy consumption
and storage. The living being, he said, is a topological ordering of chemical
and physical processes whose organization allows for a channeling of en-
ergy that can then be used to maintain its “environment.”2 Human beings,
he notes in an aside, are the beings who effect the most extreme reorgan-
ization of the environment.
   In any case, the evolution of life should, according to Lotka, be framed as
the history of systems undergoing irreversible changes. For the physicist,
these irreversible changes would be defined in terms of entropy, the inevi-
table increase of disorder in an isolated system. What marks the biological
as an independent science is precisely that the irreversible changes in the
system are ones that maintain order, violating (at least locally) the Second

194

                                LOT KA O N T H E E VO L U T I O N O F T E C H N I CA L H U M A N I TY   195



Law (46–47). As we have seen with the new physiology of the period, the
body is never a static system that merely regulates changes in variables; it
is a kind of system always on the edge, constantly in a struggle to maintain
its unity and order in the face of dissolution. Lotka emphasizes the same
point in his work: the “equilibria” of living beings are not true equilibria, or
steady states, because all living, dynamic systems require a constant source
of “free energy” in order to continue to live (144). Indeed, Lotka will point to
the importance of moving equilibria in biology. This will help comprehend
the often productive effects of internal instability, as it appears “both in nor-
mal and pathological life processes” (294).
    To understand evolution, then, requires a comprehensive, total view of
all life and its relationship to the material earth, because, as Lotka will ex-
plain (mathematically and conceptually) the interconnected system of liv-
ing beings is really a vast network of energy transference. The only source
of “free” energy is the sun, so the system relies first of all on the ability of
plants and other organisms that can take solar energy and transform it,
storing it in some form. Other entities can then feed off of this captured
energy, taking it to fuel its own struggle against entropy. Lotka calls these
kinds of entities “transformers” (335). Evolution of the system (described
thermodynamically) is not really about individual transformers, or catego-
ries of them (what we would call with Darwin “species”). For Lotka, the only
way to understand evolution as a process is to define it in terms of a sys-
temic improvement in the capture and circulation of energy.
    The elements of the system are the individual living beings, entities that
must seek energy stores to survive. From the smallest organisms on, life
depends on “more or less accurately aimed collisions” between transformers
and energy sources and the avoidance of “harmful” collisions with other
beings or dangerous physical features of the environment (337). As the in-
dividual system becomes more complex in its organization, that system will
require more and more energy to maintain itself—to preserve its internal
processes but also to fuel the search for energy itself. This is why we need
to take a broad view of evolution, according to Lotka: every living creature
is involved in this constant transformation of energy, and the total system
of life is always limited by the amount of free energy available to the system.
    However, in assessing the form and activity of individual beings, Lotka
admits that the kind of organs and faculties that appear in nature cannot
themselves be explained purely in thermodynamic terms. Echoing Von
Uexküll’s approach in a way, Lotka explains that to make “collisions” with
energy sources productive, statistically speaking, an organism needs a “cor-
relating apparatus” to guide its behavior (338–39). What is key is the inde-

196   C H A PT E R 18



pendent logic of this apparatus. Its organization will have its own form of
evolution, linked to the organism and its place in the environment. In this
space Lotka will locate the exception that is the human. The apparatus of
the organism is a kind of natural technology. What marks the human as hu-
man will be a special relationship to this technology, one born from a radi-
cal reorganization of the “correlating apparatus.”

To account for the transition from higher organism to human, Lotka breaks
down the different components of living beings. First, there is a need for
some kind of representation of its world, and this is provided by what he
calls “depictors,” sensory organs (“receptors”) that interface with the envi-
ronment, and the “elaborators” that process and organize the “crude infor-
mation.” Reactions to the information are determined by “adjustors,” which
then provoke the final step: the operation of “effectors,” the motor organs
(wings, feet, hands) that provide actual physical movements. We have here,
in other words, something akin to Von Uexküll’s function circle. As Lotka
explains, the process of “elaboration” is perhaps the most opaque link in
the system, since it takes place in what we normally think of as “mind”—
the faculties of memory, reason, and so on, which are not identifiable as
“organs” in the usual way (339). Of course, this would be the site for the for-
mation of an Umwelt, arrived at through some kind of primitive Kantian
synthesis. But Lotka’s interest here is different. He wants to understand the
implications of increasing complexity and in particular the temporalization
of these processes of elaboration. With human beings, certain actions can
take months or years to plan and execute. Our behavior is still correlated to
the environment but in an indirect or at least temporally complex way, and
this is mediated by the organization of our internal information states (340).
   However, correlation cannot radically distinguish human life from that
of all other animals. Indeed, as Lotka will show, correlative responses are
not even limited to living beings. He gives the example of a toy beetle, a
wind-up mechanism that has a “sense organ” (a feeler) that detects the edge
of a table and then causes the machine to turn away and avoid falling. (Fig-
ure 18.1.) No consciousness is required. And Lotka also notes that we can
imagine ever more complex systems of automated technologies that could
act as artificial “elaborators,” giving the example of automated telephone
switching devices (341–42). For Lotka, the hierarchy of beings (natural be-
ings at least) can be gauged by the relative “elasticity” of their behavior pat-
terns. The automaton-like organisms are relatively fixed in their response
patterns (like the artificial insect), whereas highly mobile animals have
more complex repertoires. The elasticity of high organization is “promi-

                                           LOT KA O N T H E E VO L U T I O N O F T E C H N I CA L H U M A N I TY   197




Figure 18.1. From Alfred J. Lotka, Principles of Physical Biology (1925).




nently displayed to us in our own selves” (350). This would be Lotka’s bio-
logical explanation for integrated consciousness (an echo of Von Uexküll):
the organism can now react to images of possible futures that are not yet,
not just to memories of actual past experiences. Behavior is adjusted to a
conjectural reality.
   For whatever reason, consciousness evolved as a simpler and more effec-
tive tool for elasticity, an alternative to some “purely mechanical structure”
that could perform the requisite diversity of tasks” (402). Lotka points to
Sherrington’s conception of the nervous system as the “acme of integration”
for the organism, and cites Clerk Maxwell to suggest that the mind as an
integrative process could still affect the organism in profound ways, given
both the “unstable equilibria” of the body and the appearance of “points of
singularity” in these unstable systems, critical moments where the status
can change significantly (407). “This conception makes the interference of
consciousness (will) in physical events an exceptional occurrence” (408).
Elsewhere, Lotka would speculate that consciousness is a “phenomenon
associated with, or attendant upon, matter in a state of strain, or perhaps
matter in the process of yielding to a strain.”3
   However, the emergence of integrated consciousness does not clearly
mark a radical distinction between human and nonhuman, only a scale of
relative complexity. In the end, Lotka will locate the exception of the hu-
man not in the increasing complexity of the elaboration system but instead
in what might seem at first to be the less interesting domains of the “recep-
tors” and “effectors.” Unlike any other being (and this is something Lotka
believes has never been taken into account by theorists of evolution), hu-
mans make use of artificial receptors and effectors. Without fully address-
ing the question of origin, Lotka recounts how our “ingenuity” has allowed
us the use of “artificial aids and adjuncts to our senses,” from simple eye-
glasses to microscopes and telescopes (364). And alongside the expansion

198     C H A PT E R 18



of our sensory systems comes the technical extension and even displace-
ment of the effectors: machines now produce physical movements not only
independent of human power, but at scales and with forces well beyond any
living creature on Earth.
    The appearance of artificial organs introduces into the world system
a whole new evolutionary factor, Lotka argues, because humans are now
evolving (as natural-technical hybrids) at such a rapid pace, compared to
other organisms. Our technological apparatuses have their own evolution-
ary dynamic, and especially in the age of modern science and industry, the
human forms of life have been transformed dramatically.4
    Perhaps more radically, we could say that Lotka’s account points to a
transformation of the very “nature” of the human itself. We are no longer
biological but instead a “strange species” inseparable from “artificial or-
gans vastly more efficient than their ‘natural’ (that is, physiologically com-
pounded) prototypes.”5 The development of artificial organs is critically
important, but lying behind the evolution and progress of technology is a
new capacity that animals are barred from. As Lotka explains in Physical
Biology:

      The artificial portion of our correlating apparatus differs in several import-
      ant respects from our native endowment. My microscope does not die with
      my body, but passes on to my heirs. There is thus a certain permanence
      about many portions at least of the artificial apparatus. And for that very
      reason the development of this artificial equipment of human society has
      a cumulative force that is unparalleled in ordinary organic evolution. (368)


Artificial organs are shared in the sense that they can survive only with in-
herited knowledge, which opens up the possibility of the technical amplifi-
cation and reorganization of our inborn elaborating apparatus itself. “This
cumulative effect is most of all marked in the artificial aids to our elabora-
tors” (368).
   With technology the human mind is now constituted by “information”
and elaboration that comes from alien nervous systems (or, we can pre-
sume, artificial information processors). The implications are profound:
the self is no longer a function of the individual living being but instead
something distributed across a field of conceptual organization that defies
the traditional division between natural and artificial.

      Any attempt to establish boundaries between the self and the external world,
      or, for the matter of that, between two selves, is not only useless but mean-

                                 LOT KA O N T H E E VO L U T I O N O F T E C H N I CA L H U M A N I TY   199



   ingless. Coordinate reference frames have no boundaries, and freely inter-
   penetrate each other, being merely immaterial aids to fix our ideas. (373)


The peculiar status of the human mind as part of a conceptual field that is
at once inside and outside of the nervous system is facilitated by yet another
technical innovation, according to Lotka, namely, the “highly specialized”
system of receptors and elaborators that make up communication net-
works. The human evolution of knowledge and technology is predicated on
a technology of knowledge transmission, whether that is speech, tradition,
or the various forms of material storage (carvings, writing, printing). In the
end, we might redefine the human in terms of its “thought-transmitting
propensity” and the orthogenetic evolution of its technical systems. Lotka
will warn that this kind of “internal” evolutionary progress can be both
destructive and constructive, and the pace of development can accelerate
tremendously. Just as the mechanical beetle can anticipate a “threatened
catastrophe” through its antenna technology, and change its direction in re-
sponse, the implication is that humanity needs to anticipate its own poten-
tially catastrophic future (381–82).
    Lotka would return to this theme in a 1929 article, where he repeated
the theory of technical evolution, describing the industrial society as “one
greatly magnified organization of artificial sense and motor organs and re-
productive apparatus” that is now necessary to support the Earth’s human
population.6 However, the artificial organs do not live and die on the same
cycle as human beings, and Lotka warns that we have yet to think seriously
about the regulation of consumption and regeneration in this context and
to take into account the very real problem of the “exhaustion of natural re-
sources.”7 And he would add, in another essay, the observation that techni-
cal evolution has led to increasingly more brutal warfare. The irony is that
“the most advanced product of organic evolution” may very well become
“the first of all living species so clever as to foresee its own doom.”8
    When Lotka published his iconic essay, “The Law of Evolution as a Max-
imal Principle,” in 1945, it is hardly surprising that the dark implications
previously hinted at would come to the fore.9 What Lotka now called exoso-
matic evolution (the development of humanity through its artificial, tech-
nical organs, as described in his Physical Biology) took on a more sinister
tone. Quoting Bertrand Russell, Lotka now described human evolution as a
form of imperialism, a systematic destruction and reorganization of the en-
vironment with only one goal: “to transform as much of the earth’s surface
into human bodies” (174). Repeating his critique of traditional evolution-
ary perspectives, Lotka argues that we must shift our emphasis from the

200   C H A PT E R 18



species and its struggles, with the environment, with competitors, and in-
ternally between individuals, and think of evolution in terms of the whole
system (178). Evolution, understood in thermodynamic terms, can be de-
fined as the increasing flow of energy in the system, since there is never any
increase in energy that comes from the sun. Natural selection, for Lotka, is
a matter of regulating and amplifying the movement and transformations
that take place in the energy “reservoir,” though alteration of the relation-
ships between organisms that store energy (e.g., plants) and those that dis-
sipate it (animals).
    This process of evolution is all mediated by genetics—with the excep-
tion of the human. Leaving behind genetic evolution for an exosomatic
evolution through technology, human beings radically maximize the flux
of energy with their vast and complex systems of transformation and stor-
age, leading to the capture of “excess” energy and opening up the possibil-
ities of culture, something that is itself inessential for biological life. The
flip side of this exosomatic revolution within natural history is the escala-
tion of violence—the incomprehensible violence of World War II exempli-
fies one trend in history, the turning away from the “preservation of life” to
its “destruction” (189). But Lotka also points out other implications of our
artificially sustained existence, including economic instabilities and vast
inequalities in wealth, and, perhaps most ominously, the reliance on the
reservoirs of stored solar energy that will never be renewed—fossil fuels
(190). Lotka pleads, in the end, not for a restriction of the artificial, since
that is what human beings have become. Rather, he calls for a new tech-
nical development, one focused not on the improvement and extension of
artificial receptors and effectors central to the industrial economy but on
the adjustors, the psychical “responses” that intervene between sense and
action. The zone, that is, of intelligence.
    It is fitting, then, that Lotka’s archive contains a program for a conference
that took place in New York in October 1946, “Teleological Mechanisms.”
This meeting included presentations by Norbert Wiener, Warren McCul-
loch, John von Neumann, Arturo Rosenblueth, and Gregory Bateson—all
luminaries of what will soon be called the new science of cybernetics. Lotka
was, in his own way, already raising the most complex question of the day:
what could be the future of our own artificial intelligence?
