PART TWO



Embodied Logics of
the Industrial Age

8
Babbage, Lovelace, and
the Unexpected



Were we required to characterise this age of ours by any single epithet,
we should be tempted to call it, not an Heroical, Devotional, Philosophical,
or Moral Age, but, above all others, the Mechanical Age. It is the Age of
Machinery, in every outward and inward sense of that word; the age which,
with its whole undivided might, forwards, teaches and practises the great art
of adapting means to ends. Nothing is now done directly, or by hand; all is by
rule and calculated contrivance.
                                 Thomas Carlyle, “Signs of the Times” (1829)



The Spirit of Technology in an Industrial Age


As social and economic life in industrial Europe became increasingly in-
dustrialized, human life would become more and more habituated to the
operation of the machine. And the machine was now more than a machine.
In The German Ideology Marx and Engels had defined the human as the spe-
cial creature that created its own form of life through productive—that is,
technological—labor. But as Marx would later see so clearly, the modern
industrial economy was grounded in a complex system of integrated ma-
chinery. In other words, human life as a technical form of being was being
reorganized in terms of the logic of networked technology.

      An organized system of machines, to which motion is communicated by the
      transmitting mechanism from a central automaton, is the most developed
      form of production by machinery. Here we have, in the place of the isolated
      machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole factories, and whose
      demon power, at first veiled under the slow and measured motions of his



108

                                        BA B BAG E , LOV E L AC E , A N D T H E U N E X P E C T E D   109



   giant limbs, at length breaks out into the fast and furious whirl of his count-
   less working organs.1


In this system, according to Marx, the individual human functions as a sup-
plement to the increasingly automatic operation of the factory and, we can
also say, the interconnections of communication and energy.
    No longer is the machine a technology utilized by the worker to pro-
duce something tangibly related to the hybrid of human-machine. Marx
reflected on this development in his “Fragment on Machines.” Now the au-
tomatic systems of machines (and not just the single automatic machines
of early industrial production) require human intervention as a “conscious
linkage” that enables the system to function as a dynamic interconnection
of technologies. The actual machines are not intermediaries or artificial or-
gans: they possess their own skills and their own strength, and they feed
on their own forms of fuel. The worker is now regulated by the machines.
Going beyond the concept of alienation of labor, Marx proposes an even
more sinister condition. The alien power of the machine—this new form
of artificial life—is acting through the worker, who becomes an accessory
of the machine, or to put it more radically, the individual human worker is
an organ of this system, which Marx does describe as a “mighty organism.”2
    A tool was once a “modified natural thing,” a productive turning or de-
flection of nature that was used in the service of human nature, the nature
that must produce its own life. With industrial automation and industrial
systems of production, human technology is not a deflected nature but in
some ways an independent process of nature, or at least an artificial simula-
tion of such a process. What does it mean then to work and live in the midst
of tools that seem to have escaped the original “organic” logic of supple-
ment, the time when the tool was precisely what was not natural, an artifi-
cial organ of our natural life, of the life of the brain, the hand, the mind, and
even the social body as collective being?

Mechanical Intelligence and Industrial Automation


The appearance of the first major technological advance in mechanical
intelligence—namely, Babbage’s Difference Engine project (and later, the
more sophisticated but unfinished design of a general purpose Analytical
Engine)—coincides with the intensification of industrialization in Europe
and the increasing automation of large-scale industrial processes of pro-
duction and distribution. These automatic calculating machines are always

110   C H A PT E R 8



positioned as important forerunners of the modern computer (philosoph-
ically and technically) and hence haunt any understanding of the postwar
project of artificial intelligence that emerged seemingly inevitably from the
development of digital machines in World War II. But we can ask another
question here at this historical juncture: How were these engines under-
stood in relation to the strands of thought we have traced in early modern
thought up to Kant’s radical critique? Can the organization of the living
body and the cognitive powers of the psyche be rethought in light of this
important foray in what was not just automatic reason, but an artificial em-
bodiment of that reason?
   The project of the Difference Engine started as a dream—quite literally.
Babbage’s dream took place in 1812, at least according to his recollection,
and was only written down decades later. At any rate, the instigation of the
dream was the daunting challenge of the logarithmic table, an essential yet
error-prone tool for every practical mathematician and engineer in the pe-
riod. As Babbage would note, the standard published tables were (under-
standably) rife with errors, which were often corrected in errata sheets that
of course themselves might contain errors. (Babbage would cite the Nauti-
cal Almanac of 1835, with its “Erratum of the erratum of the errata of Tay-
lors’ Logarithms.”) As Babbage saw, only a “mechanical fabrication” would
ever ensure absolute accuracy. This was what Babbage supposedly dreamed
as he dozed in a stupor one evening at the Analytical Society: “I am think-
ing that all these Tables (pointing to the logarithms) might be calculated
with machinery.”3
   The fascinating and complex story of Babbage’s epic quest to design and
build the first fully automatic calculator (which would also automatically
print its own results, bypassing another weak human link) has received
significant attention and historical analysis. The close, even constitutive
relations between the processes of industrialization, human labor, social
organization, and new conceptualizations of intelligence have been as-
tutely critiqued, none better than by Simon Schaffer.4 As William Ashworth
has detailed, Babbage and other elite representatives of the new industrial
era in Britain, such as Babbage’s colleague William Herschel, argued that
the model of the efficient factory would be usefully applied to the mind; it
would function best if it was well organized to retrieve ideas (“data”) with-
out unnecessary waste of energy or its storage capacity. The “speed and
precision” of an industrial technical process depended on a rational orga-
nization, so the aim was to increase the productivity of the mind in an anal-
ogous manner.5 The Difference Engine project can be understood in this
light, according to Ashworth, as a technical model of an intelligence mod-

                                      BA B BAG E , LOV E L AC E , A N D T H E U N E X P E C T E D   111



eled on industrial technology: “Babbage’s work on his calculating machine
was the march of the material intellect set to the rhythm of the factory.”6
   However, this analogy (which can hardly be denied) does raise questions
about the “materiality” of the intellect, questions that exceed this frame-
work altogether. What was driving the mechanization and thus material-
ization of human intelligence in the Engines if human intelligence was it-
self the inventor of this vast new industrial organization?
   If we go back to one of Babbage and Herschel’s early texts, namely, the
preface to the Memoirs of the Analytical Society 1813, written precisely in the
period of Babbage’s “dream” of mechanical calculation, it is clear that intel-
ligence is not strictly defined by industrial metaphors. Intelligence (like hu-
man life itself perhaps) is something that can be perfected through the de-
ployment of its own technical inventions. “Modern calculators”—and here
they mean by that term error-prone human mathematicians—have been
able to devise a highly refined and general system of mathematical anal-
ysis that allows the mind to “trace through successive developments” the
many “varied relations of necessary truth.” The analytic itself is a system,
a tool that supplements the human mind, allowing it to pursue “trains of
reasoning, which, from their length and intricacy, would resist for ever the
unassisted efforts of human sagacity.”7
   While it could of course be argued that all forms of mathematical in-
quiry function in this fashion—as artificial, instrumental prostheses of
reason—the singular advantage of analytics, for the two authors, lies in the
particular accuracy and conciseness of its wholly arbitrary and hence dis-
passionate mode of symbolization. This symbolization is not the substitu-
tion for intelligence at all: it is the zone that allows the necessary exercis-
ing of human judgment at every step in a train of reason to be much more
precise and therefore less prone to error. This is because the ideas are pre-
sented so clearly and particularly in one delimited space. Unlike the texts
expressed in common language, with “all its detail” and texture that often
force the intellect to “suspend its decision” while it seeks related clear con-
ceptions to compare with one specific idea it is holding in mind, the “me-
chanical tact” of the new symbolic language allows the mind’s eye to see at
“one glance” the most intricate relations, “shortening the road to discovery,
and preserving the mind unfatigued by continued efforts of attention to the
minor parts, that it may exert its whole vigor on those which are more im-
portant” (ii). Reasoning is anything but automatic here; it follows, in many
ways, the structure outlined by Descartes.
   Moving to Babbage’s most important and influential text, the Ninth
Bridgewater Treatise published in 1837, it is immediately clear that even in

112   C H A PT E R 8



the wake of developing the Difference Engine, he is hardly interested in
reinventing or even reconceptualizing the mind as an automatic machine
analogous to the Engine. Babbage instead proposes to use the machine as
a way of arbitrating a central question in science, that of the universality
and automaticity of the laws governing nature. Is the universe a system
where the “contriver” intervenes at times with a “restoring hand,” or is it
one whose order is maintained automatically via “the necessary laws of its
action throughout the whole of its existence” (32–33)? What is interesting
is that Babbage argues that the distinction between these two possibilities
can only be illustrated with “recourse to some machine, the produce of hu-
man skill”—because, like the natural universe the machine is a “contrived”
or artificial order. The challenge is whether the seemingly unfathomable
complexities of natural systems could ever be reduced to the operation of a
“few simple and general principles” (32).
    Babbage’s deployment of his Difference Engine in this thought exper-
iment is ingenious and goes in a completely different direction from that
of the analogical investigations of the early moderns. He uses the results
of his calculator to demonstrate (and not merely conjecture) that an ut-
terly mechanical and purely automatic object can produce what appears to
be something like a “miracle,” or at least an exception to a “natural” law.
Babbage explains how he can arrange (we would say program) the machine
with a function that will print a series of numbers—an exceptionally long
series, say, the series 1 to 100,000,000—that clearly reflects the principle of
adding one numeral to the previous one. Using inductive reasoning, a hu-
man mind would no doubt assume the existence of a fixed and determined
law governing the production of the series, especially because the calcu-
lator is a mere machine. There is therefore great astonishment, Babbage
says, when the law suddenly appears to change as numerals are printed
that are clearly being produced on the basis of an entirely new principle
(38–39). (Babbage supposedly delighted in performing this demonstration
with guests to his home.) The point was to show that a “hidden” law was
behind the manifestation of both the original law-like series and the sud-
den transformation that interrupts the continuity, at least for the mistaken
human mind.
    As Babbage points out, any natural phenomena with similar “cata-
strophic” aspects (like the historical geology of the earth revealed in strata)
need not count as a violation of natural law if we understand that the abrupt
changes themselves “have been throughout all time the necessary, the in-
evitable consequence of some more comprehensive law impressed on mat-
ter at the dawn of its existence” (48–49). The fact that the Difference Engine

                                      BA B BAG E , LOV E L AC E , A N D T H E U N E X P E C T E D   113



can—without any intervention—mimic these abrupt shifts proves that it is
at least possible to discover these laws that would govern even what seems
to be a discrepancy, a deviation, or exception, even a total transformation
of the law itself. As Babbage says, the Engine that works automatically to
generate its own simulated “anomalies” without interference from the op-
erator is not itself “more intelligent” than a machine that would produce
that same effect but only with an interventional adjustment from outside.
    This is not about artificial intelligence per se. The Difference Engine as
an automatic exception simulator is just an exemplar of greater contriv-
ance, of more intelligent and elegant artifice, and therefore a better model
for an understanding of how the laws of nature could be unified at a foun-
dational level by relatively simple general principles (40–41). The presence
of incredibly complex differentiation in nature—Babbage points in partic-
ular to the way organic forms fit so perfectly into the successive upheavals
of the world—demonstrates the incredible technical skill of the original en-
gineer who established the set of laws that could generate such complexity.
    So, far from advocating a mechanistic understanding of human thought
or the automation of intelligence in the Bridgewater Treatise, Babbage un-
derscores the significance of technology as an expansion of natural intelli-
gence through invention. “It is not a bad definition of man to describe him
as a tool-making animal.” After replacing the “skill of the human hand” in
the industrial era, newer technologies “of a still higher order,” like the cal-
culating engines, are substituting for “the human intellect.”8
    The rapid advance of humanity in modern times is explained by Bab-
bage as the consequence of the materialization of thought in the printed
book. In oral cultures, human knowledge was a function of the “accidental
position” of the individual. In society, the knowledgeable mind could only
address a small number of other minds (52). Truths would be lost, opinion
maintained through traditions. With printing, the cultivation and improve-
ment of the mind first becomes possible. Externalized storage and distribu-
tion of thinking is like the analytic method, a prosthetic instrument that
prepares the mind for self-transformation. “Until the invention of print-
ing,” Babbage writes, “the mass of mankind were in many respects almost
the creatures of instinct” (51). The printed book is not for Babbage merely a
substitute or extension of the traditional form of instruction; the key to the
book is its material objectification. The book exists in a new community
of thought that purges it of its individual origin; it is an instrument that
transmits in an intensified form the distillation of thought across space and
time to one single individual, the student. The production of knowledge as
material, circulating objects enables a “sifting” of expertise from a vastly

114     C H A PT E R 8



collective effort, and an efficient means for “communicating thought from
man to man” (55). Society can now benefit from a new form of collaboration
where the “reasoning” of one class can unite productively with the “obser-
vations” of another.
    However, there is no question that Babbage understood his Analytical
Engine to be something like a universal reasoning machine. Designed on
the model of the Jacquard automatic loom, where punch cards would en-
code a sequence of operations to be performed, this automatic machine was
far more flexible than the calculating engine that preceded it. Still, the in-
ternal openness of the Analytical Engine—the fact that the “patterns” were
not limited by any one sequential logic—reveals starkly the essential role
of the “artist” who creates and encodes the pattern; indeed, the encoder of
a textile design for the automatic loom could be described, Babbage says,
as a “peculiar artist.”9 While it is true that Babbage strove to protect the op-
eration of the Engine from human error (by insisting, for example, that it
punch its own cards and by including an automatic error detection system
for occasions that required human assistance) the operating structure of
the engine depended on what we would call its algorithmic programming.
    Ada Lovelace recognized immediately that the brilliance of the Analyt-
ical Engine was its capacity to embody a general “science of operations.”10
That is, instead of merely calculating numbers, the Analytical Engine was a
“material and mechanical representative” of analysis, the symbolic repre-
sentation of relationships: the machine literally “weaves algebraic patterns”
(696), Lovelace commented in a memorable line. The engine is an acceler-
ation and intensification of the very method it embodies. “The mental and
the material” are thereby “brought into more intimate and effective con-
nection with each other” (697). She explained:

      It were much to be desired, that when mathematical processes pass through
      the human brain instead of through the medium of inanimate mechanism,
      it were equally a necessity of things that the reasonings connected with op-
      erations should hold the same just place as a clear and well-defined branch
      of the subject of analysis, a fundamental but yet independent ingredient in
      the science, which they must do in studying the engine. (692)


In the end it is Lovelace—often heralded as the first computer programmer
based on her algorithm designed to calculate a particular function on Bab-
bage’s Analytical Engine—and not Babbage who crosses the line into what
we now call the cognitive sciences. It is not that Lovelace wants to make
analogous the mind and the automatic reasoning engine. She proposes (in

                                      BA B BAG E , LOV E L AC E , A N D T H E U N E X P E C T E D   115



a letter from 1844) to mathematize “cerebral phenomenon”—to discover,
that is, “a law, or laws, for the mutual actions of the molecules of the brain;
(equivalent to the law of gravitation for the planetary and sideral world).”
In an unconscious reenactment of Descartes’s research, Lovelace imag-
ines herself becoming a “skillful practical manipulator in experimental
tests; and that, on materials difficult to deal with; viz: the brain, blood, and
nerves, of animals.” As she declares, “I hope to bequeath to the generations
a Calculus of the Nervous System.”11
