Hinge



PROSTHETICS
OF THOUGHT

22
Wittgenstein on the
Immateriality of Thinking



Zettel. Slips of paper in a box, dating from 1929–48 (most of them written in
the three years following World War II).1 A number of slips have fragments
addressing questions that have been hinted at but will come to concern the
leading edge of thought and the new sciences of cognition: What is think-
ing? How can we tell if someone is really thinking? (Can machines think?)
   First, let’s take note that in this threshold moment, one of global war and
colonial disruption and reorganization, how Wittgenstein blurs the bor-
der between machine, animal, and slave. He proposes a strange thought
experiment:

      Suppose it were a question of buying and selling creatures (anthropoid
      brutes) which we use as slaves. They cannot learn to talk, but the cleverer
      among them can be taught to do quite complicated work; and some of these
      creatures work “thinkingly,” others quite mechanically. For a thinking one
      we pay more than for one that is merely mechanically clever. (108)


The added value, presumably, would be in the kind of work the thinking
creature can accomplish. But what would that be? Or, to put it another way,
why not assume that the more able creature is just more clever but still me-
chanically clever?
   What is thinking? The question indicates a crisis—if that is not too
strong of a word.

      “Thinking,” a widely ramified concept. A concept that comprises many
      manifestations of life. The phenomena of thinking are widely scattered.



228

                                  W I T TG E N ST E I N O N T H E I M M AT E R I A L I TY O F T H I N K I N G   229



      We are not at all prepared for the task of describing the use of e.g. the
   word “to think” (And why should we be? What is such a description use-
   ful for?)
      And the naive idea that one forms of it does not correspond to reality at
   all. We expect a smooth contour and what we get to see is ragged. Here it
   might really be said that we have constructed a false picture. (110–11)


As Wittgenstein will observe, we learn to use the word think in very specific
contexts. If I asked, for example, if a fish was thinking, the question would
hardly make sense. That is not a context in which we would normally de-
ploy that concept.
   What is thinking? Part of the problem is that we cannot locate it. But we
know what it means (roughly) to participate in it.

   Compare the phenomenon of thinking with the phenomenon of burning.
   May not burning, flame, seem mysterious to us? And why flame more than
   furniture ?—And how do you clear up the mystery? And how is the riddle of
   thinking to be solved ?—Like that of flame? (125)


Thinking—something impalpable (rätselhaft) like a flame? If it cannot be
grasped, how will it be conceptualized?

Indirectly . . . where does thought appear, where can it be grasped? What
makes a sentence, a series of words, let’s say a series of printed words, an
example or manifestation or expression of thought? Is there something
“more” than the words (or signs) that are present? How can some words
have “life” and the very same words not have life? (143).
   This is to risk verging into theology—the idea that there is a spirit in the
body, or a life added to the body. Where is the “life” that is thinking if not in
the words? Wittgenstein will propose:

   There could also be a language in whose use the impression made on us by
   the signs played no part; in which there was no such thing as understand-
   ing, in the sense of such an impression. The signs are e.g. written and trans-
   mitted to us, and we are able to take notice of them. (That is to say, the only
   impression that comes in here is the pattern of the sign.) If the sign is an
   order, we translate it into action by means of rules, tables. It does not get
   as far as an impression, like that of a picture; nor are stories written in this
   language. (145)

230      C H A PT E R 22



In this case one might say: “Only in the system has the sign any life” (146).
   So can we agree with Wittgenstein? Or at least with what this comment
expresses:


      Knowledge is not translated into words when it is expressed. The words are
      not a translation of something else that was there before they were. (191)


The words, the signs . . . they are not a medium. The meaningful sign is a
grasping that is recognition. (Recall Spinoza. Or Leibniz.) As in Heidegger,
the example of a technical object:


      For someone who has no knowledge of such things a diagram representing
      the inside of a radio receiver will be a jumble of meaningless lines. But if he
      is acquainted with the apparatus and its function, that drawing will be a sig-
      nificant picture for him. (201)


Of course, there are different kinds of recognition—every “seeing” of the
world is an interpretation, a hypothesis, and our understanding can switch,
like a Gestalt (. . . a duck / a rabbit).
   The system, the organization, the frame of interpretation—where is it?
How does it work? When does it appear? What if thinking is just a matter
of a system? As Wittgenstein says, talk is transmissible, but it is not like a
disease. Yet language is decidedly not a medium. A question to get at this
issue: What is happening when we talk to another through a technical ap-
paratus?


      Philosophers who think that one can as it were use thought to make an ex-
      tension of experience, should think about the fact that one can transmit
      talk, but not measles, by telephone. (256)


Systems. Organizations. Is invention also a form of sharing? Wittgen-
stein: “Compare: inventing a game—inventing language—inventing a ma-
chine” (327).

What about a machine inventing machines? Or, at least, what about a ma-
chine that is thinking or one imitating thought. If the animal is such a ma-
chine, as Descartes argued, it would have no “soul,” which was just another
way of saying it cannot think.

                                  W I T TG E N ST E I N O N T H E I M M AT E R I A L I TY O F T H I N K I N G   231



Wittgenstein returns to the example of slavery; in this fragment it is a more
complicated kind of slavery, and a more disturbing one to be sure.

   An auxiliary construction. A tribe that we want to enslave. The govern-
   ment and the scientists give it out that the people of this tribe have no souls
   [keine Seelen haben] ; so they can be used for any arbitrary purpose. Natu-
   rally we are interested in their language nevertheless; for we certainly want
   to give them orders and to get reports from them. We also want to know
   what they say to one another, as this ties up with the rest of their behaviour.
   But we must also be interested in what corresponds in them to our “psycho-
   logical utterances,” since we want to keep them fit for work; for that rea-
   son their manifestations of pain, of being unwell, of depression, of joy in
   life, are important to us. We have even found that it has good results to use
   these people as experimental subjects in physiological and psychological
   laboratories, since their reactions—including their linguistic reactions—
   are quite those of mind-endowed human beings.
      Let it also have been found out that these automata [Wesen] can have
   our language imparted to them instead of their own by a method which is
   very like our “instruction.” (528)


What if we teach our slaves to calculate? On paper or not. But also: we teach
them to act as if “reflecting”—that is, waiting to give the answer to the ques-
tion posed to them. It’s as if there was “something going on” beneath the
surface (a “process” of calculation).

   Of course for various purposes we need an order like “Work this out in your
   head”; a question like “Have you worked it out?”; and even “How far have
   you got?”; a statement “I have worked . . . out” on the part of the automaton
   [Automaten]; etc. In short: everything that we say among ourselves about
   calculating in the head is of interest to us when they say it. And what goes
   for calculating in the head goes for all other forms of thinking as well.––If
   one of us gives vent to the opinion that these beings must after all have some
   kind of mind, we jeer at him. (529)


But what does it mean to have a mind?

   Writing is certainly a voluntary movement, and yet an automatic one. . . .
   One’s hand writes; it does not write because one wills, but one wills what it
   writes. (586)

232     C H A PT E R 22



The extended system; circuits of behavior. This is why (I believe) Wittgen-
stein will tell us:

      No supposition seems to me more natural than that there is no process in
      the brain correlated with associating or with thinking; so that it would be
      impossible to read off thought-processes from brain-processes. (608)


Organisms, systems, networks. Why do we think that thinking, writing,
speaking, should be centered somewhere, in the brain of all places?

      I mean this: if I talk or write there is, I assume, a system of impulses going
      out from my brain and correlated with my spoken or written thoughts. But
      why should the system continue further in the direction of the centre? Why
      should this order not proceed, so to speak, out of chaos? The case would
      be like the following—certain kinds of plants multiply by seed, so that a
      seed always produces a plant of the same kind as that from which it was
      produced—but nothing in the seed corresponds to the plant which comes
      from it; so that it is impossible to infer the properties or structure of the
      plant from those of the seed that comes out of it—this can only be done from
      the history of the seed. So an organism might come into being even out of
      something quite amorphous, as it were causelessly; and there is no reason
      why this should not really hold for our thoughts, and hence for our talking
      and writing. (608)


The action of a human being is not reducible to physiological processes, be-
cause action is embedded in a system that operates in and through bod-
ies. What is “occult” for Wittgenstein is not the idea of thinking outside the
body, a normal phenomenon. What is occult is the idea that thinking takes
place “inside” us, in the head, in the brain (606).

Artificial intelligence—can we really imagine the intelligence of a system
(thinking, speaking, reading) itself having a technical substitute?

      Is thinking a specific organic process of the mind, so to speak—as it were
      chewing and digesting in the mind? Can we replace it by an inorganic pro-
      cess that fulfils the same end, as it were use a prosthetic apparatus [Proth-
      ese] for thinking?
         How should we have to imagine a prosthetic organ of thought [Denk-
      prothese]? (607)
