12
Prehistoric Humans and the
Technical Evolution of Reason



Any effort to locate the exceptional status of the human was, in nineteenth-
century scientific discourse, necessarily framed by the question of the
brain as itself an exceptional organ, capable at once of the most automatic
and dependable routines and the “new movement that has never occurred
before.”1 This cerebral version of the human as lack offers a critical angle on
the position of the human in evolutionary theory, entangled as it was in the
progress of neuroscience and all biological study in this period. The human
could be seen as both in and out of the logic of evolutionary processes. If by
nature humans possessed some cognitive capacity to invent, then one of the
key factors in human evolution (neural, social, and otherwise) will have to
be our propensity for artificially organizing nature—even “human nature”
itself.
   The empirical development of the concept of plasticity and its role in the
organization and reorganization of behavior in the disciplines of neurolog-
ical science and medicine were productively reappropriated in the evolu-
tionary debates spurred by the Darwinian thesis of “natural selection,” first
introduced in The Origin of Species in 1859. Understood as an analogue of
the artificial breeding of animals and plants that has long been undertaken
in human civilization, the idea of natural selection in the context of human
origins and development posed a challenge for evolutionary science, not
just because of the thorny theological implications. From the start the rad-
ical problem of studying the natural evolution of a human being defined
by the capacity for artifice was entangled with the neurological and psy-
chological blurring in this period between “natural” forms of cognition and
what Hartley had called the “secondarily automatic” operations, conven-
tional habit, that “second nature” (Hegel) impressed on the brain not just

                                                                            141

142   C H A PT E R 12



by “experience,” but often through educational institutions and cultural
practices.
    As George Lewes noted in 1873, the brain is highly plastic and thus at
the center of human cultural difference: “The brain of a cultivated English-
man of our day, compared with the brain of a Greek of the age of Pericles,
would not present any appreciable differences, yet the differences be-
tween the moral and intellectual activities of the two would be many and
vast.”2 Unlike the world of animals, human life was defined by its cultural
organization—which is to say, different individual brains resulted from the
varied historical conditions of human societies. Even our very perception
of the world itself could be modified by “experience, training and habit [Er-
fahrung, Einübung, und Gewöhnung],” as Helmholtz famously argued in his
influential treatise on optics.3 As Lewes would remark, the Kantian a priori
would have to be reinterpreted in light of “concrete conditions” as well as
in relation to our “ancestral influences” (175–76)—not to mention the pros-
thetic extensions of industry, which mark, for Lewes, the appearance of “the
equivalent of new senses” (156). Crucial to any full understanding of mind,
then, was the essential assumption that human brains could be influenced
by individual psychic “feeling” as well as the “residua of ancestral stimula-
tion” (177), as Lewes put it. However, what is absolutely crucial here is the
recognition that the individual brain can also be determined, quite literally,
by the experience of other minds, as manifested in the cultural accumulation
of knowledge, which is again what separates us from the animal mind, lim-
ited as it was to inherited capacities and individual learning.
    The transmission of thought—Lewes here highlights “the great human
privilege to assimilate the experiences of others.” As he observed, “Our
knowledge is the product of our own experiences, and of the stored-up ex-
periences of our fellows” (177). The action of the human individual is lit-
erally “guided by the thoughts of others.” Lewes wrote, “I have never seen
the Ganges, nor measured the earth’s diameter; but these enter my world of
experience, and regulate my conduct, with the same certainty as my direct
experience” (166). Indeed, for Lewes, the individual mind cannot be easily
separated into personal and “shared” knowledge. The mind is constitutively
formed by the collective experience of the community: “What I have di-
rectly experienced by sensible contact forms but a small part of my mental
wealth; and even that part has been largely determined by the experience
of others” (166).
    As Lewes will go on to explain, the medium of this transmission and
assimilation of mental experience is the symbol, the “condensation” of
thought into material form. Language—at once individual and social—was

                   P R E H I STO R I C H U M A N S A N D T H E T E C H N I CA L E VO LU T I O N O F R E AS O N   143



the “great instrument” for minds that were constitutively defined by both
participation and assimilation (160). So human societies were fundamen-
tally cultural organizations, directly analogous to organisms, for Lewes, be-
cause individuals cooperated in light of a common goal. The strength of the
mind as human derives from its development in the medium of the nation
or the tribe. Lewes cites August Comte here on the force of history deter-
mining the present.4
    And so the evolutionary status of the human would have to contend
with the fact that the distinction between animals and humans was the col-
lective transmission of knowledge. Lewes makes the analogy with technolo-
gies here: our thinking depends on its external supports developed over
centuries; we literally cannot think without them, just as our social and
economic orders depend on inventions like the railway to sustain life (169).
More radically, technology is itself the space where the mind as human re-
veals itself. As Lewes observes, we used to dig up ancient cities and tombs
searching for golden objects or sophisticated works of art. However, what is
more important today is the study of the origin and history of the mind—an
archaeology of cognition, where “every little detail which tells of the men-
tal condition of ancestral races is now of priceless value.” The archaeolo-
gists now “dig with greater eagerness for flints and the rude implements of
prehistoric races, because these throw light on the evolution of Mind” (170).

Darwin on the Evolution of Consciousness


Darwin’s own efforts to explain the evolutionary conditions of human de-
velopment were hardly satisfactory. In his book on the expression of emo-
tions he could not evade the problem of how to distinguish between “in-
nate” expressions and those that are “conventional” in the human sphere.5
Noting that he consulted with Henry Maudsley on the psychology and
neurophysiology of expression, Darwin deploys an updated version of the
long-standing theory of habit as the product of repetition within a nervous
system that was capable of transformation (28). The challenge is that the
system determined by natural (i.e., inherited) instinct is also generating
unnatural behaviors that will come to function just as automatically and
“naturally” as innate ones. Darwin’s examples include dogs and horses
trained by humans to walk or perform “naturally” in completely artificial
ways, and he will point to human behavior as well, where it is always easy
to “confound conventional or artificial gestures and expressions with those
which are innate and universal” (50). Darwin will make the tantalizing sug-
gestion that seemingly natural human gestures have really already been

144   C H A PT E R 12



learned, just “like the words of a language” (353). Inevitably, the question
of the distinction between human artifice (the power to produce new organi-
zations) and the “second nature” of habit that even animals can acquire will
still have to be addressed.
    In The Descent of Man (1871; rev. ed. 1874) Darwin will indeed admit the
exceptional nature of the human but will locate that exception in the moral
domain rather than the cognitive more generally. If the gradual emergence
of the human form from animal ancestors was taken as given, then the in-
telligence demonstrated by other higher animals was necessarily “capable
of advancement” and differed only in degree from human intelligence.
However, as Darwin states, “the development of the moral qualities is a
more interesting problem.”6 The appearance of the moral sphere as a break
in evolutionary continuity is conditional on the specific group practices of
human social organizations, Darwin will say—but in doing so, he is displac-
ing the problem of the human mind altogether by identifying yet another
origin, the radical origin, that is, of a genuine distinction that can clearly
(for Darwin at least) mark humans from animals, namely, our specific com-
munal form of life.
    Darwin mixes—maybe confuses is a better word—many of the strands of
thought I have been tracing in nineteenth-century European and American
intellectual discourse when he claims that the appearance of higher mental
faculties among human groups entails that “images of all their past actions
and motives would be incessantly passing through the brain of each indi-
vidual” (95). This would lead, Darwin believes, to the formation of an en-
during sense of the social commitment of the individual, since it is always
present as a motive, unlike the other desires and instincts that disappear
once satisfied. The new form of cognition makes conscious what is already
the natural necessity of group life. Then, according to Darwin’s rather ca-
sual explanation, “after the power of language had been acquired, and the
wishes of the community could be expressed,” society itself becomes con-
scious. At this stage, the newly aware “society” can actively impress itself
on the individual, indicating “how each member ought to act for the public
good” (96). What is interesting is that this new articulation of the logic of
social form will be literally imprinted on the nervous system of the indi-
vidual in the form of habit. As Darwin concludes, the moral imperatives of
the group will now “naturally become in a paramount degree the guide to
action” on the part of the individual (96). At the same time, Darwin is very
much aware that the human has the capacity to lose instincts (105).
    The evolution of human society is therefore inextricably entangled with

                    P R E H I STO R I C H U M A N S A N D T H E T E C H N I CA L E VO LU T I O N O F R E AS O N   145



the question of the human mind and its capacity to remake itself into some-
thing that is, if not purely artificial, at least not entirely natural. And signifi-
cantly, Darwin will point to the tool-making capacity of human beings as
one of the key indicators of the “immense” gap between the least of human
minds and the highest form of animal cognition. Animals have cunning
and “art” but would never have “the thought of fashioning a stone into a
tool,” Darwin writes, before tying the origin of technology to the human
ability to “follow out a train of metaphysical reasoning, or solve a mathe-
matical problem” (122). Almost as if he senses the difficulty of covering this
gap in the origin of the human, he claims that the difference between ani-
mal and human mind is one of “degree and not of kind,” noting that human
infants are hardly born with the “power of abstraction” or reflection. The
“highly-advanced intellectual faculties” are most likely “the result of the
continued use of a perfect language” (122). Again, this is just a displacement
of the problem that is more radical: How did humans become capable of
acquiring the tools of technology and language, the implements that trans-
form infants into civilized beings capable of advanced sequential thought?
    With a nod to Alfred Russel Wallace, Darwin brings together the evolu-
tion of the human with the evolution of human culture, understood now
as an artifact of human invention exemplified by the production of the
artificial. Unlike other animals, human beings become less amenable to
“bodily modification” via natural selection once they can use mental facul-
ties to solve the problems of adaptation. The human has “the great power of
adapting his habits to new conditions of life.” Crucial here is the invention
of tools (clothes, sheds, fires) alongside both weapons and “stratagems.” So
the evolution of the human is now conditional on the selection of the most
“inventive” individuals whose superior technology allows society to sur-
vive in “new” conditions—which might be another way of saying unnatural
conditions (125).7 Animals cannot adapt so flexibly, since they must actu-
ally acquire new bodily tools and weapons through the vast, eons-long pro-
cess of modification and selection. We can see, then, that the evolutionary
perspective did not so much transform the question of the human mind as
exceptional as it put renewed emphasis on that distinction. The nature of
a brain that can challenge nature with technology and social organization
that is not natural would have to accommodate both the instinctual inher-
itance of our corporeal evolution and the emergence of a peculiar capacity
to dis-automate that same inheritance.

146   C H A PT E R 12



Primeval Prosthetics: On the Evolutionary Exception of the Human


This evolutionary conundrum structures George Campbell, Duke of Argyll’s
innovative work on “primeval man,” exactly contemporaneous with Dar-
win’s texts concerning human development.8 The issue raised by Argyll’s
early effort in paleoanthropology is that any effort to assimilate humanity
to a natural history of biological evolution will come up against the chal-
lenge of explaining how the “chasm” between humans and all other ani-
mals could ever be crossed by some kind of gradual development (21). Given
the exceptional importance of human cognition, that has to be the place to
start—as Argyll states clearly in his introduction: “There is an inseparable
connection between the phenomena of Mind and the phenomena of Orga-
nization” (17). Every creature, he explains, has functions that correlate with
its essential unity, and this means that instincts and the “mental charac-
ter” must be “strictly correlated.” Argyll will pose the question: What kind
of organism is the human in nature? Unlike all other creatures, it seems
that the physiological constitution of the human body has in fact been de-
evolving: “it diverges in the direction of greater physical helplessness and
weakness” (21). This tendency could never, Argyll concludes, be understood
as the result of natural selection; it is exactly the opposite of what would
be expected in that framework. And this leads to the key insight: without
prosthetic, that is, artificial, protections, our lack of speed and strength,
“the absence of teeth adapted for prehension or for defense,” and our com-
paratively weak senses, all would mitigate against survival in challenging
and competitive natural environments.
    Argyll’s strategy here is to show that the weakening of the human frame
would only have been possible in the evolutionary context if our organs had
already been substituted with alternative behaviors enabled through sup-
plementation. Bipedal humans would never have been safe with their “use-
less arms,” for example, “until the brain was ready to direct a hand” (22).
The brain is the site for what he calls the “gift of reason,” which was the pre-
requisite for this deviation of the human from the usual forces of natural
selection, which always tend to the improvement and perfection of bodily
forms and functions with respect to the environment. This is all to say that
the physical evolution of the human was not the precursor of our eminent
position in nature; rather, our physical state itself is a direct result of our
“capacities of thought” (22). What is essential to humans, then, is their ra-
tionality, which is not akin to other animals’ ability to adapt to the environ-
ment; humans are able to gain knowledge and inherit it. Distinctive to the
human is the “ability to acquire, accumulate, and to transmit knowledge”

                    P R E H I STO R I C H U M A N S A N D T H E T E C H N I CA L E VO LU T I O N O F R E AS O N   147



(43). For Argyll, this means that we have to understand how even the insig-
nificant actions that might seem “the most purely instinctive” are in fact
highly specific to the human mind. Throwing a stone, wielding a stick as
a weapon—“both these simple acts involve the great principle of artificial
tools” (48).
    This capacity for artifice, for invention, is the attribute that is “absolutely
peculiar to Man.”9 As Argyll notes, the natural animal uses implements
but only those that are given as bodily organs, as guided by “implanted in-
stincts.” While it is true that some animals might make “artificial use of
natural forces” (when birds drop shellfish on the rocks, for example) there
is an “immeasurable distance” between these animal behaviors and the hu-
man capacity to fashion an artificial implement. And, Argyll adds, humans
are constantly engaged in this activity because of their peculiar evolution-
ary status. Our goals require the “intermediate” organs that are tools. This
is why our physical weakness is accompanied by a mind that is, so to speak,
naturally “capable of Invention” (48). Or at least, with the human mind
comes an “intuitive” understanding of causation in nature, due to a natu-
ral inductive reasoning ability. In any case, the diversity and diffusion of
human cultures across the globe points to a fundamental and essential uni-
versality among humans, namely, their intelligent adaptation to conditions
via the fashioning of various artificial technologies, these prosthetic inter-
mediaries. There is no “primitive” culture, for Argyll, in that even the “rud-
est” nations exhibit the same remarkable and astonishing capacity for the
technical organization of social life. There was no “Eskimo” Adam, for ex-
ample. According to Argyll, the ancestors of these people must have come
from somewhere else, driven to migrate, perhaps by war, and they would
have originally had “wholly different habits” (54). And of course, if they had
been, say, farmers or shepherds in their old territory, such a life would have
been absolutely impossible in the icy north. The old arts would therefore
have to be forgotten and new modes of life created from scratch. For Argyll,
then, the origin of the tool is identified with the invention of substitutes for
the “missing” natural implements of an animal body.
    This idea of the prosthetic nature of the artificial tool animates the work
of the German philosopher (and philologist) Lazarus Geiger, who explored
the origin of human language and culture in a series of important lectures
in the 1860s.10 A key argument was developed in a talk from 1868, whose
title alone is evocative: “The Earliest History of the Human Race in the Light
of Language, with Special Reference to the Origin of Tools.” There he pro-
posed a theory that would distinguish between “primary” and “secondary”
tools. The original tool was—as Argyll had argued—the direct substitute of

148     C H A PT E R 12



an original, natural organ (41). Geiger imagines these tools emerging in a
liminal period of evolutionary time, when humans will start to “recognize”
somehow the similarity between certain found objects and their own natu-
ral organs, leading them to use these external objects to modify and am-
plify the natural behaviors enabled by the body. This was a process whereby
creativity comes about through imitation (44).
    However, as Geiger will go on to explain, once the tool appears in this
early, imitative form, it can itself evolve in new directions and generate en-
tirely new usages through a series of transformations, exceeding in the end
its originary prosthetic origin. One example Geiger gives is the radical re-
use of the bowstring (a weapon) as a musical instrument, which would have
perhaps been occasioned by the accidental observation of the vibrating
string’s “beautiful sound”—to quote Homer (42). The point is that the use of
tools in any one historical moment gives no indication of their origin since
technologies, along with their social contexts, are constantly undergoing
significant transformations. As Geiger emphasizes:

      The use of implements shaped by himself is more decidedly than aught else
      an evident distinctive characteristic of man’s mode of life. For this reason
      the question as to the origin of the tool is a subject of the greatest moment
      in our early history. (43)


At the conclusion of his argument, Geiger leaves the reader with human-
ity on the cusp of a great epochal transformation: the emancipation of the
tool itself in the modern machine. Gaining in power and continually be-
ing perfected, the contemporary technology had become an implement
“emancipated from the hand of man, and inspiring its own maker with a
peculiar admiration” (47). What Geiger demonstrates is that our historical
consciousness—beginning with our “primeval origins” and looking to our
unknown automatic future—will always be defined by our technical con-
dition.

Projecting Organization: Kapp on the Evolution of Technology


Technology operated in this period as a hinge linking (while separating)
the dominant evolutionary paradigm in biology with the philosophical
question concerning human cognitive power and humanity’s uniquely
historical-cultural form of being. As Eduard Reich states, “It is certain that
the hand of civilized man must be regarded as an expression of the highest
organization of the gripping tool, just like the brain of civilized man is an

                   P R E H I STO R I C H U M A N S A N D T H E T E C H N I CA L E VO LU T I O N O F R E AS O N   149



expression of the highest organization of the organ of thought.”11 However,
in making ourselves through our artificial organs, we open up the possi-
bility of technical evolution, where the implements are more than mere ap-
pendages, more than just prosthetic extensions, and therefore expressions
of some other kind of organization.
    The proposal was taken up and pushed to the limit by the somewhat ne-
glected theorist of technology Ernst Kapp, a German “Free Thinker” forced
to emigrate after being charged with sedition who eventually settled in
Texas, where he became a farmer. Kapp’s idiosyncratic and illuminating
book on technology, published in German in 1877, proposed that the tools
of human beings are not so much “prosthetic” substitutes of organs but are
more like transmissions, what he called projections, of our own “spirit” of
organization. This process of Organprojektion is according to Kapp an un-
conscious transmission that creates a materially doubled world—our tech-
nical culture—which is animated by the same forms of order given to us
in our living bodies.12 The machine world is one in which our own organs,
not defined literally but more expansively as our own possibility of organi-
zation, are abstracted, dematerialized, and sent out beyond our bodies and
minds to take new forms in artifacts. Kapp’s interest in this book is, in part,
to study human technology as if it were a visible field that can reveal the
hidden logic of our own, necessarily unconscious (because physiological)
forms of life. Reading technology becomes a means of reading the human,
a project that is so often impossible or at least profoundly difficult.
    Kapp’s history (or better, historicized typology) of technology tracks the
different “planes” of organizational projection, rewriting Geiger’s simplis-
tic two-stage account. The earliest tools are quite literally projections of the
basic identifiable organs of our body, as Argyll and others had already ar-
gued. These more primitive tools were at first substitutes for the hand, say,
or the tooth, which are the implements of our natural condition. The early
tool is the material substitution and improvement of the “inborn tool” (35).
And as Kapp will proclaim, this initial substitution marks the radical ori-
gin of human culture: the human becomes “human” in this act of exteri-
orization. As Kapp puts it, “In the hand—the external brain [auswendigen
Gehirn]—tools establish culture” (151).
    The next phase of technical (and hence cultural) development is marked
by the unconscious projection of our body’s kinematic structure, Kapp will
explain. No longer a concrete projection of individual organs with concrete
and self-contained properties, these new tools are an exteriorization of
what we can call the functional organization of the skeleton, that is, a mate-
rial remaking of the articulation and interaction of the moving armature of

Figure 12.1. From Ernst Kapp, Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik:
Zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Kultur aus neuen Gesichtspunkten (1877).

                   P R E H I STO R I C H U M A N S A N D T H E T E C H N I CA L E VO LU T I O N O F R E AS O N   151



the body, the way forces pass through machinic levers, springs, and other
transductive elements. The machines of technology are projections, then,
of the “natural” machinery of a complex physical organization system.
    The most advanced stage of projection, for Kapp, is the introduction
into these complex machines of certain systems of communication; the ex-
amples given here are the more recent technical advances of Kapp’s day,
such as the electromagnetic telegraph. In this stage, we can come to know
our own nervous system in a newly intimate way, as it is writ large on the
vast projections of communication technologies in industrialized settings
and, increasingly, at a global scale in the context of colonial cable informa-
tion networks. What Kapp argues here is that the function of the human
nerve is an exact “miniaturization” of the submarine telegraph cable; the
cable networks, too, are the “nerves of mankind” traceable on the maps of
telegraph companies. (Figure 12.1.) Neurology and communication tech-
nologies are mirrors of one another.13 The point is that once we no longer
understand tools as mere implements, however complex and sophisti-
cated they become, we can begin to confront the nature of technical systems
(95), which would then be the path toward the revelation of the networked
nature of human life itself—a theory of social and even global organization.
    Yet Kapp hints at an even more fantastic opportunity—a future when the
functions of the mind itself, the content of the messages being transmitted
by the telegraphic infrastructure of the global system, these meanings, will
be unconsciously projected into new technological forms, what could be
called spiritual machines. We can speculate here with (and, it must be said,
against) Kapp: for if, as he says, language is the ultimate “self-production”
of human minds, then what kind of technical apparatus or system will con-
stitute its externalization? In other words, can there be “unconscious” pro-
jections of conscious thought? It would be interesting to speculate on what
Kapp might have said about the coming era of wireless communication
technologies.
    At least we can say that in the context of late nineteenth-century con-
cepts of unconscious cerebration, or theorization of intelligence as techni-
cal practice, the evolution of what Kapp termed Organprojektion was going
to be unpredictable, to be sure. But we can also say that the possibility of a
technical projection of the organ of thinking (namely, the brain) is hardly
contradictory, as we well know in the twenty-first century. Less easy to con-
ceptualize will be the projection, or exteriorization, of the technical process
of exteriorization itself, the very constitution of the mind as a tool-making
and symbol-using creature, in and beyond nature.
