PART FOUR



Thinking Outside
the Body

23
Cybernetic Machines
and Organisms



Cybernetics was centered on a fundamental analogy between organism
and machine. As W. Ross Ashby asserted, “I shall consider the organism . . .
as a mechanism which faces a hostile and difficult world and has as its
fundamental task keeping itself alive.”1 Because cybernetics intention-
ally blurred the boundaries between humans, animals, and sophisticated
technological objects, it has often been accused of reducing living beings
to the mere interplay of mechanisms. However, cybernetics always wanted
to infuse machinic beings with the essence of life—purpose, adaptive re-
sponsiveness, learning, and so on—while opening up new insights by com-
paring organisms to some of the most innovative technologies of the era,
namely, servo-mechanisms, scanning instruments, electronic communica-
tion systems, analog computers, and, perhaps most notably, the new high-
speed digital calculators that were emerging from secrecy in the postwar
era. Cybernetics drew together advanced automatic machines and organ-
isms on the basis of their shared capacity to respond flexibly to a changing
environment—whether the external world or that inner domain (Claude
Bernard’s “internal milieu”) governed by what interwar physiologists called
the regulative principle of “homeostasis.”
    Cybernetics was a provocative, multidisciplinary, and self-consciously
revolutionary intervention into the fluid conceptual world of the interwar
period. The recurring and overlapping questions concerning order and or-
ganization in physiological, technical, and cognitive domains were recon-
ceived by cybernetics in a new context. The new science would not explore
“relations” between these domains. What was proposed instead was a new
project that sought the essential features of all adaptive and reactive sys-
tems, whatever their origin.

234

                                       CY B E R N E T I C M AC H I N E S A N D O R GA N I S M S   235



    We can see clearly the resistances (but also affiliations) between inter-
war thought and new cybernetic initiatives as figures in the individual dis-
ciplines engaged with the new thinking in the early postwar period. The
fact that so many important intellectuals had fled Europe (Germany in par-
ticular of course) meant that the contestation was staged in new sites and
in new contexts. The United States would be a key space; centers of cyber-
netic research and theory would also emerge in the United Kingdom and in
France. The Hixon Symposium, and then the series of famed Macy Confer-
ences, included a wide array of presenters and commentators whose lines
of thought between and across disciplinary—and chronological—gaps can
be detected.

Artificial Insight


One example is illuminating for the question of intelligence in particular.
As we have seen repeatedly, one of the touchstones for interwar thinking on
creativity and intelligence, in animals and humans (and perhaps even ma-
chines), was Wolfgang Köhler’s influential book on ape intelligence, where
his Gestalt framework informed the concept of insight, the capacity to use a
“detour” (Umweg) from normal routines in order to provoke a new organiza-
tion of thought and perception in the solution of challenging problems.
    In 1951, Köhler (now in America as an émigré, along with other Gestalt
psychologists and Kurt Goldstein, all exiled from Nazi Germany) in fact
published a review of Norbert Wiener’s seminal work, Cybernetics, Or, Com-
munication and Control in the Animal and Machine (1948), which included
a famous chapter titled “Computing Machines and the Nervous System.”
Though Köhler praised certain features of the book, including the innova-
tive theorization of feedback, he had serious reservations about the idea
that electronic calculators and other machines could serve as models for
the human nervous system and thereby help explain the origin and nature
of human thought. As Köhler put it, this “now popular comparison” was en-
tirely ungrounded. The kind of information processing carried on by these
new computing machines was, he believed, “functionally” and “generically”
different from human thinking. As Köhler pointed out—anticipating Hu-
bert Dreyfus and other critics of postwar artificial intelligence research—it
was obvious that only the “intelligent” decisions of human mathemati-
cians gave any value to these blind mechanical processes; the machines
could not really know anything, he concluded, “because among their func-
tions there is none that can be compared with insight into the meaning of
a problem.”2

236   C H A PT E R 23



    So Köhler would hardly have been surprised to find the influential cy-
berneticist and polymath Warren McCulloch admitting, a decade later,
that “the problem of insight, or intuition, or invention—call it what you
will—we do not understand.”3 On various occasions, McCulloch would ac-
knowledge that imitating this kind of insight artificially with machines was
quite problematic (though still possible, he believed).4 That a leading cy-
berneticist like McCulloch would become so entangled in the question of
insight and “productive thinking”—a question taken up by virtually all the
leading Gestalt psychologists—was rather ironic. For it was in fact McCull-
och’s early work with his young colleague Walter Pitts, undertaken in the
1940s, that initially spurred the “popular” idea that human thinking could
be compared to the work done by calculating machines, a central theme of
cybernetic theories.5 McCulloch and Pitts famously argued, in 1943, that it
was possible to consider neuron structures as if they were in essence digital
switching devices, and, armed with this idea, they went on to demonstrate
(mathematically, that is) that networks of these “idealized” neurons were
entirely capable of representing and calculating logical propositions and
their consequences.
    In effect—following here the revolutionary work of Kurt Gödel, Alonso
Church, and Alan Turing in mathematical logic from the 1930s—McCulloch
and Pitts argued that the brain, seen as a simplified, interconnected net-
work of digital relays, was perfectly capable of fulfilling the functions of a
Turing machine, an imaginary (at that point) form of digital computer that
was capable of calculating logical sequences, by representing propositions
and relations as a series of computable numbers. The implications of this
brilliant and startling argument were obvious, and the two authors did not
fail to make this explicit, closing their essay with this powerful claim: “Both
the formal and the final [i.e., purposeful] aspects of that activity we are wont
to call mental are rigorously deducible from present neurophysiology.”6 As
McCulloch would go on to explain, in a talk at the celebrated Hixon Sympo-
sium, which centered on the relationship between brain and behavior, held
at the California Institute of Technology in 1948, we did not need to postu-
late anything “extra” in thought to explain mental functioning. Indeed, we
should not entertain the idea that something “new” could happen in the
mental domain. “Our knowledge of the world, our conversation—yes, even
our inventive thought—are,” he stated emphatically, “limited by the law
that information may not increase on going through brains, or computing
machines.”7
    This seminal attempt to redescribe thinking as a kind of bio-logical
mechanism may have fit well with the behaviorism that was dominant in

                                        CY B E R N E T I C M AC H I N E S A N D O R GA N I S M S   237



American psychological research. And in an academic environment that
valued “facts” and empirical research in these areas, the materialist impli-
cations of these arguments were hardly problematic.

The End of the Machine


Incisive critics of cybernetic thought and research would, however, repeat-
edly press on the fundamental analogy made between feedback-driven ma-
chines (such as servo-mechanisms, self-regulating industrial machines,
or self-guided weaponry) and complex organisms. But not because they
thought cybernetics was inherently reductionist, though that was always an
issue lurking in the literature of this period. However, what was often at
stake was the opposite problem, namely, the attempts by cybernetics to in-
fuse vital “purpose” and teleological organization into technological objects.
   This project would distort our understanding of the essential nature of
organismic life: so argued Georges Canguilhem in his 1947 lecture “Ma-
chine and Organism.” As he explained, artificial machines do, of course,
have “ends” that govern their design; that is what makes a technical object
recognizable. However, unlike an organism, the teleological orientation
of a machine is always given to it from the outside. This purpose is there-
fore never (by principle) intrinsic to the machine’s own organization. This,
according to Canguilhem, was the crucial error of Descartes’s exercise in
what I called “virtual robotics.” That is, the analogy between the mechani-
cal automaton and the living being relied on the original divine creation of
the organism, which was in Descartes’s vision itself based on concept of the
artificial machine of human engineering—a machine that internalizes an
essentially external “telos.” A machine governed by externally given ends,
Canguilhem pointed out, is always a slave to its given, already determined
order: the machine must then affirm “the rational norms of identity, consis-
tency, and predictability.”8
   In contrast, the organism is organized by the internal goal of its own sur-
vival, and it was therefore capable, Canguilhem observed, of genuine im-
provisation in the event of crisis or even internal failures. Here we see the
influence of Kurt Goldstein’s concept of the dynamic and perennially un-
stable organism. Without a completely fixed structure restricting its poten-
tiality, the organism was, unlike the rigid machine, able to find new paths
to success. The essential unity of the organism was maintained even in the
event of catastrophic error because its organs were, as Canguilhem put it,
fundamentally “polyvalent,” not limited to previously defined, specific de-
terministic functions, as the parts of a machine were. The organism could

238   C H A PT E R 23



be saved by what are in essence pathological responses. There was, Can-
guilhem declared, no possibility of such a machine pathology; there would
never be any machine “monsters,” because the machine could never create
for itself new norms, new forms of existence.
    Canguilhem’s critique of the machine as model of the living amplifies
the argument made first in his dissertation, published as the book, On the
Normal and the Pathological (1943).9 Canguilhem’s understanding of these
concepts was explicitly influenced by Kurt Goldstein’s earlier work.10 The
idea that Goldstein’s “catastrophic reactions” were, in a certain sense, en-
tirely normal informed Canguilhem’s approach to medical ideas of pathol-
ogy. Pointing to the great plasticity of the nervous system, Canguilhem
noted that if a child suffers a stroke that destroys an entire half of the brain,
that child would not suffer aphasia (as is the case with many brain inju-
ries later in life) because the brain reroutes language performance to other
regions in order to compensate for the damage.11 Organisms are stable as
unities precisely because their organization is not fixed into any one rigid
structure—they are open and thus equipped to surmount even a traumatic
loss of functions in some cases.
    The influential Austrian biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy formulated,
in the early years after the war, a new discipline of “systems theory” that,
like cybernetics, aimed to transcend different disciplinary approaches to
dynamic, ordered systems, living or not. However, according to Bertalanffy,
cybernetics was on the wrong path: it could never hope to account “for an
essential characteristic of living systems,” namely, their ability to maintain
stability despite constant metabolic creation and destruction of its own
material foundation.12 Like other critics of cybernetics, Bertalanffy believed
that “a mechanized organism would be incapable of regulation following
disturbances,”13 since a machine could not radically transform itself—as
the organism could—to accommodate shock and injury.14 Open systems
were plastic and hence never fully determined; they possessed what Ber-
talanffy called “equifinality,” the capacity to follow multiple paths for the
maintenance of life—an echo of Lashley’s “equipotentiality” of the brain.15
    In a later critique of automation, the American sociologist cum philoso-
pher Lewis Mumford affirmed the distinctions made by more expert figures
such as Canguilhem and Bertalanffy. Unlike machines, he argued, “organic
systems [have] . . . the margin of choice, the freedom to commit and correct
errors, to explore unfrequented paths, to incorporate unpredictable acci-
dents . . . , to anticipate the unexpected, to plan the impossible.”16 Again,
the possibility of error was a critical theme. As the idiosyncratic, cybernet-

                                        CY B E R N E T I C M AC H I N E S A N D O R GA N I S M S   239



ically inspired thinker Gregory Bateson would observe, “An organism is ca-
pable of being wrong in a number of ways. . . . These wrong choices are
appropriately called ‘error’ when they are of such a kind that they would
provide information to the organism which might contribute to his future
skill. These will all be cases in which some of the available information was
either ignored or incorrectly used. Various species of such profitable error
can be classified.”17

Cybernetic Failure


And yet . . . We have to recognize that cyberneticists were, from the very
beginning, intensely interested in pathological breakdowns and the im-
portance of radical plasticity for adaptive and reactive beings (whether ar-
tificial or biological). Describing the early cybernetic “animals” created by
W. Grey Walter (introduced to the public on a BBC broadcast in the 1950s),
the French cybernetic thinker Raymond Ruyer noted, “Their errors must
precede exploration, because these errors constitute the driving force.”18
    Paying attention to plasticity in this new discipline in fact reveals some
important, often unexpected facets of the cybernetic project to analyze
and construct “living” machines. In his classic Cybernetics, Or, Communica-
tion and Control in the Animal and Machine, Norbert Wiener observed that
certain psychological instabilities could be conceptualized through rather
precise technical analogues: “Pathological processes of a somewhat simi-
lar nature are not unknown in the case of mechanical or electrical comput-
ing machines.”19 There was, then, a strict parallel drawn between systemic
breakdowns in the psychological and technological spheres.

   The task of the modern therapist can be compared to the task of the main-
   tenance engineer or of the trouble-shooter who repairs the great overland
   power lines. Abnormalities of behavior are described in terms of distur-
   bances of communication. In the past, these disturbances have been sum-
   marized under the heading of psychopathology.20


As Bateson would explain elsewhere, both the technical device and the hu-
man mind can exhibit “symptoms” that indicate a breakdown or patholog-
ical turn within the “body” as a whole. “If the TV suffers from a blown tube,
or the man from a stroke, effects of this pathology may be evident enough
on the screen or to consciousness, but diagnosis must still be done by an
expert. . . . The TV which gives a distorted or otherwise imperfect picture is,

240      C H A PT E R 23



in a sense, communicating about its unconscious pathologies—exhibiting
its symptoms.”21
    In an important sense, then, cybernetics as a transdisciplinary science
had its very origin in the insight that pathological physiological behaviors
(in, say, neurological movement disorders) could be mapped, structurally
and with precision, onto technological failures that could be described in
identical mathematical forms. While investigating the behavior of feed-
back systems in steering mechanisms, for example, Wiener and his engi-
neering colleague Julian Bigelow discovered that excessive compensation
could sometimes lead to increasing oscillations that eventually became
uncontrollable, leading to great disorder and a failure to find equilibrium.
When they asked the medical researcher Arturo Rosenblueth (who had
been working for years under Walter Cannon at Harvard) if there were any
similar pathologies known in human physiology, Rosenblueth immediately
answered that there was indeed an exact neurological parallel: voluntary
motion could degenerate into the same state of oscillation when the cere-
bellum was injured in very specific ways.22 Mathematical analysis of other
forms of physiological disorder (e.g., cardiac arrhythmias, which would be
the focus of Rosenblueth’s own work back in Mexico) would soon reveal
a number of these parallels between physiological and technological pa-
thologies, which grounded the study of structural and topological norms
shared by cybernetic machines and complex organisms.
    This early interest in pathology at the very foundation of cybernetics
is hardly surprising, given the fact that so many of its original practition-
ers were medical professionals with interests in both physical and men-
tal illnesses. Warren McCulloch was a neurologist who worked in psychi-
atric clinics, Ross Ashby was trained as a psychiatrist and practiced while
developing his own private research projects in homeostatic stability, and
Rosenblueth was a physiological researcher and a cardiologist. In an im-
portant sense, cybernetics (especially its later incarnations) was always a
highly medicalized discipline, aimed at identifying the origins of instability
in large, complex systems and then diagnosing the sources of breakdown
so as to eliminate them and recover unity and stability. As Ashby put it, in
his textbook on cybernetics:

      Cybernetics offers the hope of providing effective methods for the study,
      and control, of systems that are intrinsically very complex. . . . In this way
      it offers the hope of providing the essential methods by which to attack the
      ills—psychological, social, economic—which at present are defeating us by
      their intrinsic complexity.23

                                        CY B E R N E T I C M AC H I N E S A N D O R GA N I S M S   241



Instability appears in this framework as a “self-generating catastrophe”
that leads to the collapse and death of the system if it is untreated.24

And yet . . . Despite this extensive interest in failure, pathology, and cata-
strophic breakdowns, cybernetics could still be accused of greatly simpli-
fying the problem of disorder and crisis, pathology and health. It was one
thing to explain some forms of adaptive response in terms of automatic
steering technologies. However, it was quite another to explain a more rad-
ical originality and inventiveness that was repeatedly encountered in the
living world. This capacity was not reducible to any specific mechanism or
logic, even a homeostatic one.
    As the noted British polymath Michael Polanyi observed, in his Gifford
lectures of 1951–52, the capacity of life as improvisation flowed from an “ac-
tive center operating unspecifiably in all animals.”25 Polanyi’s theory of evo-
lution was based on the idea that even simple organisms, in circumstances
that threatened survival, were capable of responding with novel solutions.
As he noted in his preface, the results of Gestalt psychology initiated his
own inquiry, which aimed to understand these creative reorganizations
in an evolutionary context. So, for Polanyi, a singular solution would be-
come part of the repertoire of behavior, one that would harden into routine
or habit and then eventually be inherited as a new automatism. Ever more
complex organisms would become capable of more and more sophisticated
improvisations in the face of challenging and threatening situations.
    The same process would be evident in cognitive activity, once organisms
acquired nervous systems and sensory systems. To know the world was, Po-
lanyi insisted, to actively engage with it. His famous idea of “tacit knowl-
edge” recognized that embodied knowledge was not the result of some
formal or logical mental framework but instead an event, a product of the
unpredictable interaction of mind and environment. And problem solving
was the impetus for this kind of interaction. With detailed references to
Köhler’s ape studies, as well as concepts of “inspiration” in creative think-
ing (e.g., Poincaré and Wallas), Polanyi argues, “The irreversible character
of discovery suggests that no solution of a problem can be accredited as a
discovery if it is achieved by a procedure following definite rules” (123).
    Polanyi, who was familiar with the newest electronic computing ma-
chines and related technologies, stressed that this singularity of discovery,
its status as an interruption into thought, demonstrated that it could never
be produced by some machinic process. “For such a procedure would be re-
versible in the sense that it could be traced back stepwise to its beginning
and repeated at will any number of times, like any arithmetical computa-

242      C H A PT E R 23



tion. Accordingly, any strictly formalized procedure would also be excluded
as a means of achieving discovery” (123). The figure of the genius, linked
with the inventive originality of the living body itself, reveals the essential
exception of genuine novelty.

      But genius makes contact with reality on an exceptionally wide range: see-
      ing problems and reaching out to hidden possibilities for solving them, far
      beyond the anticipatory powers of current conceptions. Moreover, by de-
      ploying such powers in an exceptional measure—far surpassing ours who
      are looking on—the work of a genius offers us a massive demonstration of
      a creativity which can neither be explained in other terms, nor unquestion-
      ably taken for granted. By paying respect to another person’s judgment as
      superior to our own, we emphatically acknowledge originality in the sense
      of a performance the procedure of which we cannot specify. Confrontation
      with genius thus forces us to acknowledge the originative power of life,
      which we may and commonly do neglect in its ubiquitous lesser manifes-
      tations. (124)


Hence the limitation of the machine: it cannot violate itself; it cannot “fail”
or reinterpret itself in the light of failure, error, damage. Therefore, we can-
not, he says, “replace the conception of the machine—as defined by its op-
erational principles—by a more comprehensive understanding which ac-
counts both for the correct functioning and the failures of a machine” (328).
The rules of organization (biological, psychological, epistemological) only
describe success; yet the heart of genuine creative action is the response
made in light of failure, the insufficiency of norms, the breakdown of order,
the threat of catastrophe (333).
   As Polanyi well knew, the essential claim of the new cybernetic disci-
pline was that machines could be made to imitate or instantiate this creative
function—to exemplify, that is, a kind of artificial plasticity. Referring to
the debates opened up at the Hixon Symposium of 1948, where cybernetic
ideas engaged with leading research on brain function, Polanyi will admits
that a pseudo-vitality can be manufactured.

      The machine-like conception of living beings can be extended to account in
      principle for their adaptive capacities. An automatically piloted aeroplane
      approximates the skills of an air pilot. Its mechanical self-regulation co-
      ordinates its activities in the service of a steady purpose, and it may even
      appear to show a measure of resourcefulness in responding to ever new, not
      exactly foreseeable situations. (336)

                                        CY B E R N E T I C M AC H I N E S A N D O R GA N I S M S   243



Were we, human beings, just “conscious automata” then? Polanyi offers an-
other perspective: every living thing has, at once, an automatic system of
behavior and what he calls an “inventive urge” that defies the normativity
of these automatisms. Only such an “unspecifiable” element can explain
the kind of plasticity (“equipotentiality”) exhibited by the brain, even as it
suffers extensive destruction—as Lashley’s work showed so clearly (336).
Equipotentiality implies multiple paths and therefore an element of deci-
sion, a break from the norms of regulative behavior.
   What thinkers such as Polanyi (and Bertalanffy, Goldstein, and Canguil-
hem) were trying to suggest was that organisms were not just able to re-
spond to changing conditions; they were also able to enter wholly new states
of being—with new forms of order and new potentials—when they were
confronted with extreme challenges, drastic injury, or internal failures of
communication. A pathological state was not simply the negative inverse
of a normal function, as cybernetic work at times seemed to imply, but
rather an opportunity for the appearance of invention, the creation of un-
precedented response.

The historical question raised here, then, is whether or not cybernetics did
in fact understand, and try to model, this productive relationship between
genuinely pathological conditions of distress and the radical novelty of re-
organization within the organism. The legacy of cybernetics has often been
figured as a move toward a form of invisible “technocracy” of rationaliza-
tion and systematization in the social, economic, and political spheres—
leaving the individual to be subjected to the teleological momentum of
these now autonomous systems of techno-power.26 This is why cybernet-
ics has reemerged today, in the twenty-first century, as a conceptual and
political orientation as we confront the rise and consolidation of a global
information society, the emergence of new and more intimate forms of
human-computer symbiosis, not to mention acute conflicts over auto-
mated surveillance, algorithmic justice, and automatic warfare involving
remote killing technologies.
    Peter Galison, for one, has forcefully argued that cybernetics, literally
born (with Norbert Weiner’s failed attempt to build an intelligent antiair-
craft weapon) in the midst of war and developed, with much state funding
in the United States, Europe, and the Soviet Union during the height of the
Cold War, was at its heart a “Manichaean” science, obsessed that is with
maintaining order against the constant active threat of disorder. Cybernet-
ics could hardly embrace a link between abnormality and creativity, Gali-
son claims, when it pathologized disorder as the ultimate enemy.27 Andrew

244   C H A PT E R 23



Pickering’s sophisticated and comprehensive analysis of British cybernetic
brain science highlights the crucial significance of pathological conditions
in the development of a new way of thinking about adaptive and creative
machinery. For Pickering, this is what distinguished the British alternative
from the more militarized American version of cybernetics. As Pickering
writes, pathology was, for the cyberneticists, another way of looking at the
normal, ordered state: “In medicine the normal and the pathological are
two sides of the same coin.” Cybernetic machines and organisms were de-
fined by their inherent structures, and both were kept “alive” by the pro-
cesses that maintained homeostatic equilibrium. Breakdown is crucial in
order to reveal the often occluded normative order. However, pathology
was it seems never conceptualized independently.28
    In practice, however, it is somewhat difficult to maintain a clear bound-
ary between order and disorder in cybernetic discourse. The cybernetic
analogy between machine and organism was being forged at a moment
when biological thought had, as we know, transcended the old opposition
between mechanists and vitalists. The key challenge in this period was to
explicate organismic unity. First, it was necessary to ascertain how an or-
ganism developed into a coherent formal structure from embryonic cells—
the problem of morphogenesis. And second, it was important to identify
how organisms could maintain those forms despite ever-changing condi-
tions and a dynamic metabolic process—the question of homeostasis. The
concept of the essential unity of a living being was so important because
it linked—at the level of a single system—transformation and destruction
with continuity and stability. Unity was, of course, predicated on an inher-
ent plasticity of organismic organizations, their capacity to take on new
forms at key turning points, even catastrophic ones.
    To understand the cybernetic effort to create a science that bridged or-
ganismic and machine beings we must therefore pay close attention to the
way unity and flexibility were conceptualized in cybernetics. As we will see,
illness, pathology, breakdown, all were vitally important questions for bio-
logical thinkers after the war. These states were not simply ascribed to “dis-
orderly” Manichaean forces attacking order, pace Galison, but instead were
understood to be potentially productive crisis conditions, contingent and
singular events that revealed essential transformative potentials that made
the ongoing life of an organism possible in the first place.
