25
Turing and the Spirit of Error




In 1950, Alan Turing conjectured that in the year 2000 human cognition
would be successfully simulated by digital computers.1 This conjecture
inaugurated the new discipline that would soon be called artificial intelli-
gence. As is well known, so-called classical AI aimed first to analyze hu-
man thinking with precision, in order then to model cognitive operations
in computer programs. The term “artificial intelligence” itself was coined
by John McCarthy, in his grant application to host a workshop at Dartmouth
on new research and theory in machine thinking. As McCarthy and his co-
authors put it, “This study is to proceed on the basis of the conjecture that
every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle
be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it.”2 This
was Turing’s inspiration: the idea that the mind might be conceived of as
a kind of machine, and therefore something capable of being modeled by
what he described as a universal machine, the so-called Turing machine.
The subsequent history—or more accurately, histories—of AI resist any ef-
fort to forge a single comprehensive narrative. However, dominating the re-
search field was the assumption of a parallelism, between the mind and the
computer (whether the technology considered was software or hardware).
   It is not surprising, then, that from the very beginning the link between
the recently developed digital computers and the mind-brain was under-
stood to be grounded in the notion of mechanical intelligence. Whether fo-
cused on the logos of the psyche, or actual brain processes, human intelli-
gence was conceptualized as a form of automatic information processing with
strong analogies with computer processing of information. This mirroring
of mind and computer in much of contemporary cognitive science and
neuroscience seems to vindicate Turing’s original vision, namely, to under-

260

                                              TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   261



stand thinking as akin to an algorithmic, and hence essentially mechanistic
and deterministic, process.
    However, as we will see, this reading misses what is arguably most in-
teresting in Turing’s project, and also fails to connect his thinking to earlier
and contemporary lines of thought that intertwine around notions of cog-
nition, body, mind, and technology. Rather than simply claiming to under-
stand human thinking as just another mechanical process, so that it could
be successfully simulated with another machine in an “imitation game”
(later called the “Turing test”), Turing was clearly interested in quite a dif-
ferent goal—namely, to conceptualize and construct intelligent machines.
Or to put it another way, Turing was looking closely at human intelligence
for clues of how to transform uninteresting machines into intelligent ones.
What made this project so challenging for Turing is that he clearly recog-
nized that the most interesting aspects of human intelligence clearly re-
sisted any easy reductionist account, an account that would of course seem
to be necessary for the purely mechanical simulation of the highest forms
of human thinking.

Spiritual Machines


We need to begin before the war, before Turing began to work on cryptog-
raphy and build automatic information machines, before he helped design
and build Britain’s first digital computer at Manchester University. It is of-
ten mentioned that Turing, as a young person, was fascinated with the book
Natural Wonders That Every Child Should Know (1912), which explains the na-
ture and development of organisms and the mechanisms of their function.
One chapter is titled “Living Automobiles” and contains the suggestive sen-
tence, “For of course, the body is a machine.”3 Yet whatever influence that
text had on Turing, at least as he retroactively understood it, it is also the
case that as a college student Turing was engaged with some of the leading-
edge philosophical and scientific work in the interwar period, work that
wrestled with the much more complex and difficult question of how to in-
tegrate the findings in physical science with the problem of organization in
biology and with the contentious question of the nature of the human mind.
Turing read, it appears, Alfred North Whitehead and Arthur Eddington, not
to mention Einstein, Fichte, and Clerk Maxwell, and he seems to clearly un-
derstand the implications of this work for any thinking about the human.
   We can isolate one moment in particular. A letter, circa 1932. The twenty-
year-old Turing writes a short essay, “Nature of Spirit,” and sends it to the
mother of a close friend of his, Christopher Morcom, who had died sud-

262   C H A PT E R 25



denly two years earlier. In the letter Turing, alluding to Eddington’s effort
to think philosophically about the nature of life and thought in relation to
recent work on quantum physics, reflects that the predictable Laplacian
mechanistic universe is no more. How, then, can we explain how all the at-
oms are regulated and given order in the physical and the organic spheres?
Eddington will say that often events occur that cannot be “undone” because
they emerge from singular circumstances—due to the “introduction of a
random element analogous to that introduced by shuffling.” As Edding-
ton argued, the new physics revealed that there was some “larger reality”
of which observable physical appearances were only a fragment. He would
use this orientation to suggest that we could now be relieved of the “former
necessity of supposing that mind is subject to deterministic law or alterna-
tively that it can suspend deterministic law in the physical world.”4
    Even more suggestive is Eddington’s claim that human experience, es-
pecially human feeling, is not a biologically contained one but rather evi-
dence of our participation in a “reality transcending the narrow limits of
our particular consciousness,” pointing to the “mystic experience” as re-
vealing a certain “essential truth.”5 The key claim was this: “Starting from
aether, electrons, and other physical machinery we cannot reach conscious
man and render count of what is apprehended in his consciousness.” While
it is conceivable that we could create a human machine with reflexes (here
Eddington echoes Descartes), the machine can never lead to true rationality
and the ideal of responsibility—morality or religion, that is.6
    So in answering the question of what constitutes “order” in the cosmos
in this letter, the young Turing takes inspiration from the great British
Hegelian John McTaggart, claiming that this organizing principle is “spirit,”
without which matter is “meaningless.” Turing will take this as confirma-
tion of some idea of the soul. As Turing puts it, “living bodies can ‘attract’
and hold on to a ‘spirit’” and when the mere mechanism of the organic body
dies, the spirit, he suggests, may be able to find a new body to live in.7
    Not surprisingly, these thoughts on spirit have been dismissed as ju-
venilia. And we know that the death of his friend—Turing’s first (if unre-
quited) love—was a significant blow, which could explain this somewhat
hazy desire to believe in reincarnation. Perhaps. But let us note that even
in his iconic 1950 essay, Turing will admit, while criticizing the “argument
from consciousness” that objects to the very possibility of an artificial in-
telligence emerging from a machine, “I do not wish to give the impression
that I think there is no mystery about consciousness.”8 (Not to mention
Turing’s explicit acknowledgment of parapsychological phenomena in the
same paper.)

                                             TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   263



Oracles and Automaticity


In any case, Turing’s epochal 1936 essay, a contribution to a rather esoteric
topic in mathematical logic, the decision problem, and the first appearance
of a theory of automatic digital computation, was in no way aimed at some
proof of the mechanisms of thought. As is well known, Turing’s mathemat-
ical work was closely related to proofs devised by Kurt Gödel in his famous
work on undecidability and completeness and Alonzo Church’s indepen-
dent (and prior) discovery of Turing’s essential claim. What was import-
ant about Turing’s proof was of course the introduction of the idea of what
would soon be called a “Turing machine.” As he imagined it, this was a ma-
chine that could replicate the functions of a human computer, not a human
“mind.” Human computers, historically, worked with rules and numbers
and therefore hardly exemplified the full range of intelligence found in hu-
man cultures. What was crucial for Turing was the idea of a procedure that
determined the sequence of computation. As a conceptual tool, the Turing
machine helped demonstrate clearly the impossibility of ever solving the
decision problem, that is, of finding a method by which one could know in
advance if a function could be computed. As Turing wrote, “A function is
effectively calculable if its values can be found by some purely mechanical
process.” Turing’s revolutionary move was to radicalize this: “We may take
this statement literally, understanding by a purely mechanical process one
which could be carried out by a machine.”9
   The automaticity of the machine is what allowed Turing to prove so el-
egantly the impossibility of a “mechanical” or formal procedure that could
be applied to any function in order to solve the decision problem. What
would become so important in the wake of this mathematical argument is,
of course, Turing’s new way of thinking about machines: “If at each stage
the motion of a machine . . . is completely determined by the configuration,
we shall call the machine an ‘automatic’ machine.”10 Critical here is the idea
of determination, not mechanism as it is usually understood. For Turing’s
machine was perhaps the most unusual machine ever conceived: it was a
machine that had no function of its own, no operation or movement that it
could make by itself; it had to be given a configuration.11 The machine was,
in essence, a machine waiting to be instructed. This was a physical entity
but not a physical machine, defined by its physical organization and cau-
sality, that is. The operations of the Turing machine are operations on in-
formation, governed by rules of transformation. What was truly astonish-
ing about this machine was not its automaticity (for any automaton could
function independently as long as it had a power source). What Turing had

264   C H A PT E R 25



shown was the possibility of a simple machine regulating itself—completely
determined by its initial configuration. Turing was greatly influenced here
by Gödel’s ingenious (if incredibly difficult in practice) method for encod-
ing every logical and mathematical function as a unique integer. These in-
tegers could then be “added” together to form expressions of greater com-
plexity, and in turn these expressions would be assigned a unique “Gödel
number.” Since the generation of these numbers involved using primes, ev-
ery expression could be “deconstructed” through prime factorization. The
point that is important here is that Gödel showed how a simple arithmetic
sequence could in fact “express” a meaning that was not reducible to the
simple numerical data itself.12
    What Turing showed was that a machine could be constructed that could
compute any computable function automatically by encoding the logic of
transformation (however complex, however logical, or even however ar-
bitrary the rules might be) into the simple numerical representations. As
in Gödel’s numbering system, Turing’s strings of numbers (which could be
encoded most simply in a binary system of marks, requiring only one kind
of discrimination of symbols—presence or absence of a mark) were in part
the “data” of a function and the encoded transformation rules as well. The
extensive and seemingly meaningless movement of the machine as it read
and responded to simple symbols would in the end be translated—or better,
decoded—as representatives or incarnations of concepts and rules that in a
way had no intrinsic “meaning” in the system of symbols itself. Hence the
incredible openness of the Turing machine and its status as an information
machine driven by an “unseen” logic of operation that was not immediately
visible in the specific numerical representations processed by the physi-
cal system.
    It is clear, however, that Turing was not in this period committed to any
strong claims about the mechanistic or automatic nature of human think-
ing in his elaboration of the first truly automatic general computer. In 1938,
for example, at the height of his mathematical powers, Turing was in Princ-
eton, to write a doctoral thesis on ordinal logic with Church. If, in the ear-
lier, revolutionary paper of 1936 Turing had demonstrated how comput-
ability could be understood as a process that “automatically” takes place in
a machine—or in the mind of a human computer who is acting like a ma-
chine, that is, simply following rules13—still he recognized even there that
in “ambiguous configurations,” machines would stop because there was
no rule that applied in the situation, and the machine would only restart if
some “arbitrary choice” was made by an “external operator.”14 In that paper,
he left this issue aside, focusing on the nature of computability and the ab-

                                               TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   265



stract machines that would eventually turn into actual digital computers.
In the Princeton thesis, however, Turing’s goal was in fact to disentangle
the purely formal—that is, “mechanical”—procedures from those that re-
quired what he called (in an echo of Pascal) mathematical intuitions, those
“spontaneous judgments which are not the result of conscious reasoning.”15
This is why, in the thesis, he introduced the strange and infamous figure
of the “Oracle.” This was a mysterious “black box” that the automatic ma-
chine could consult whenever it reached an impasse, a situation, that is,
where its rules did not specify a response. As Turing argued, this Oracle of
intuition by definition could never be a machine. This kind of (mathemati-
cal) intuition was understood, therefore, never to be subject to formal spec-
ification.16
    If we want to interpret the significance of the Oracle for Turing’s later
influential reflections on the possibility of machine intelligence, we need
to be careful not to psychologize it too literally, since it was, after all, just
a mathematical construct, and the intuitions it produced were rather spe-
cific. But Turing seems to agree here with figures such as Kurt Gödel, and
other so-called intuitionist mathematicians, who insisted on the mind’s
ability to see truths that themselves could never be proven (“decided”)
within the formal systems that generated them.17 I will also point out that
one of Turing’s later essays, on the solvability or unsolvability of puzzles,
ends with this conclusion: “These [results] may be regarded as going some
way towards a demonstration, within mathematics itself, of the inadequacy
of ‘reason’ unsupported by common sense.”18 There is something vague and
imprecise about intuition and common sense, and Turing, I think it is clear,
was always interested in the relationship between formal methods and those
that were not so easily articulated or systematized. The challenge for Tur-
ing in his mature work was how to conceptualize the possibility of a deter-
minate (i.e., physical) machine organization that could behave, at one and
the same time, as an “automatic” machine and, perhaps, as something that
could function beyond the formal rules of operation without losing its sta-
tus as a machine.

Machines and the Incomputable


This all might seem counterintuitive (or perhaps just confused). To indicate
what I think is an important, if occluded, direction of Turing’s thought, I
will point out that in the famous and massively influential 1950 paper,
“Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” despite the very title, Turing in
fact uses the words intelligence and intelligent very sparingly—each only one

266   C H A PT E R 25



time, to be precise. The first mention of intelligence refers to the quality
that a human will need to possess in order to “guide a machine through
accelerated evolutionary selection.” I am not at all sure what intelligence
really means here. The use of the word toward the end of his essay is, how-
ever, much more informative. Turing is very specific in his definition of
this word: “Intelligent behavior presumably consists in a departure from
the completely disciplined behavior involved in computation, but a rather
slight one.”19 Given that the assumption from the start of the argument was
that a digital computer would presumably be able to mimic a human mind
by modeling the processes of thought in algorithmic programs, this defi-
nition of intelligence raises some real difficulties. To focus on one: What
exactly would be the ground of this departure from computation if the com-
puter is defined (very precisely) as nothing more than a machine for com-
putation? How could a computer not compute? However difficult this was
to conceptualize, it was crucial to rethink “automaticity” and routine if one
wanted to think about mechanized intelligence that aimed in some way at
this human capacity for intuition.
    It turns out that this problem is no anomaly in Turing’s work. In an ear-
lier 1947 lecture on the construction of the new automatic computing en-
gine he was working on for the National Propulsion Laboratory, Turing was
already arguing that by rigidly programming a computer, one is in effect
treating the computer as a “slave.” However, Turing suggested (presciently)
that by telling it exactly what to do, all the time, at every moment, we
would never be able to take full advantage of the machine’s true powers.
Turing was advocating here (well before computer programming was even
really well understood as a conceptually independent discipline) that the
instruction tables that the computer was to execute should have only an
“interim” status. That is, the instruction tables ought to be able to modify
themselves, Turing insisted, “if good reason arose.” This would then lead to
some interesting, and entirely unforeseen, new computing operations. It
was the break with its own instructions that constituted true intelligence.
As Turing commented, “It would be like a pupil who had learnt much
from his master, but had added much more by his own work. When this
happens I feel that one is obliged to regard the machine as showing intel-
ligence.”20
    As Turing imagined, the new computing machines would not be con-
demned to slavery if they could liberate themselves from their own instruc-
tions. Becoming intelligent would only be possible if the computer was
given some kind of discretion—a certain minimum of autonomy, we can
say. But how to build in such discretion? How to construct a mechanism

                                            TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   267



that would perceive a “good reason” to modify itself ? What would that
even mean?
   In 1948, Turing wrote a long report, “Intelligent Machinery,” and devel-
oped there a more sophisticated theory of both these issues, that is, intel-
ligence and machinery. As an example of intelligence, he pointed to the
famous anecdote about the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss. When
Gauss was a young student, his class was told to add up a long series of
numbers so that they would stay occupied for a while, but Gauss quickly
and unexpectedly came up with the solution. Instead of patiently follow-
ing the rules of addition, he thought of a more efficient formula that would
allow him to evade the repetitive, tedious calculations.21 As this anecdote
shows, intelligence, for Turing, should be identified as a departure from the
routine. This ability to deviate from the known rules and seek new meth-
ods was critically important when facing those situations where routines
had already failed to make any progress, or when one encountered what
mathematicians called the “undecidable.” Having worked with concrete
examples of computing machines during and after the war, Turing knew
that intelligence was not something that could be imported into the device
when the machinery had halted—that would be to displace the function of
intelligence outside the machine, into an oracle of some kind. That would
be to admit, in other words, that machines could not be intelligent as ma-
chines. This is why, it seems to me, Turing became so interested in deviation
and departure from routine when discussing the digital computer. Such ab-
errations opened up the possibility that intuitive intelligence could itself
be engineered through slippage and failure and not some intervention from
beyond the system.
   In the report Turing suggested that machines would become intelli-
gent only if they had what he called both discipline (which is represented by
routine) and initiative: “To convert a brain or machine into a universal ma-
chine is the extremest form of discipline. Without something of this kind
one cannot set up proper communication. But discipline is certainly not
enough in itself to produce intelligence. That which is required in addition
we call initiative.” He meant that of course they would have to follow rules,
but at the same time they would also have to be capable of beginning some-
thing new. Or to put it more precisely: in breaking from the rules, some-
thing new would be initiated by the machine. The key insight was to imag-
ine a machine that did not have, in essence, any predetermined routines.22
Turing described here, for the first time, relatively simple examples of what
he called “unorganized machines”—these would soon be called artificial
neural nets, abstract machines whose outputs depended on how inputs

268   C H A PT E R 25



were routed (with differently weighted strengths of connection) between
networked elements. These “unorganized” machines were conceivable as
machines, in that they had a structure that could by instantiated by a phys-
ical array of elements, but still they seemed to defy the standard notion of a
machine as something “designed for a definite purpose.”23 The unorganized
machine had no definite purpose. But of course it was not a complete lack
of organization that would lead to intelligence, according to Turing. It was
the deviation from order that was crucial; this meant that the unorganized
machine had to acquire a normative order from which to deviate; it had to
internalize routines (we might say “habits”), that is, while at the same time
maintaining some kind of discretion to abandon them. Acquiring determi-
nation through programming was of course something that was relatively
easy to understand (at least for Turing in this moment). But it was not so
clear how a machine could exhibit this form of initiative that Turing was
suggesting. This was precisely the kind of thinking that was usually consid-
ered unspecifiable, unformalizable, uncomputable.
    Turing’s description of initiative in this technical context was, to be sure,
exceedingly cryptic, but it was very suggestive nonetheless. We know that
discipline would be not enough to produce genuine intelligence, the pro-
duction of something new and unexpected. And yet Turing did not claim
that initiative was some novel capacity possessed by the machine. How
could it be? Either the machine had a routine or it did not. There could be no
“routine” for initiative. Equally problematic, of course, would be the invo-
cation of some spiritual or technical “oracle” within the machine. Turing’s
modern scientific approach demanded an explanation that was internally
coherent. In the end, Turing argued in effect that we could understand ini-
tiative not as the opposite of processes of determination but as intimately
connected to them. Initiative, for Turing, emerged quite literally from the
“residue” of discipline itself—something that was left over but also there
from the very beginning. As he wrote, “Our task is to discover the nature
of this residue as it occurs in man and to try and copy it in machines.”24 His
use of the word residue was certainly provocative—the kind of intelligent
behavior derived from the break of routine was in essence already latent
in our least intelligent actions, namely, our routine habits of thought, what
we could reconceptualize, according to Turing, as our own programmed
forms of behavior.
    Turing explained that there were really only two ways one could con-
struct a machine that was both disciplined and capable of initiative. His
first suggestion was that one could construct a disciplined machine, then
“graft on some initiative” to make it more intelligent. I confess that this

                                                TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   269



idea is hardly coherent. It is difficult to see what Turing has in mind here
when he says that we could allow this hybrid machine to make more and
more of its own “choices” or “decisions.” More interesting is Turing’s other
suggestion: he says we could “start with an unorganized machine and . . .
try to bring both discipline and initiative into it at once.”25
    These categories, however, seem at first glance to be antithetical to one
another. The question was how to engineer these discordant practices—
norm, deviation—into one single operating machine. It is significant, then,
that Turing was in these explorations (both philosophical and technologi-
cal) undermining the foundations of the future (and soon dominant) anal-
ogy between the computer as an automatic technical apparatus and the
brain as an “information processor.” In fact, Turing was doing the opposite.
He was interested in how to use the brain—that complex, plastic, and in-
tegrated organ—to rethink the rigidity and predictability of the computer.
    Indeed, in 1946, when Turing was in the midst of developing Britain’s
first stored program digital computer, the Automatic Computing Engine
(ACE), Turing wrote a letter to the psychiatrist and cybernetic thinker avant
la lettre W. Ross Ashby. There Turing admitted that in his technical work he
was “more interested in the possibility of producing models of the action
of the brain” than in any practical applications of the new digital comput-
ers that were of course inspired by his early work on theories of comput-
ability.26 Turing’s interest in models of the nervous system and brain at this
moment—and this is of course in line with what we have seen in so much of
the neurological literature between the wars—in fact indicated a turn away
from the strict notion of machine automaticity introduced in his formal
mathematical work and a move to a new interest (for Turing at least) in the
dynamic self-organization and reorganization of organic systems.

Plastic Brains, Disorganized Machines: Interference


In presenting the proposal for the ACE machine, Turing would bluntly state
the analogy that informed his original concept of the “Turing machine,”
that we think of computing by machine as similar to what humans do.

   The class of problems capable of solution by the machine can be defined
   fairly specifically. They are those problems which can be solved by human
   clerical labour, working to fixed rules, and without understanding.27


However, he would also go on to note, significantly (if, as always, somewhat
cryptically):

270     C H A PT E R 25



      We stated at the beginning of this section that the machine should be
      treated as entirely without intelligence. There are indications however that
      it is possible to make the machine display intelligence at the risk of its mak-
      ing occasional serious mistakes.28


Here Turing made an important connection between the idea of intelli-
gence as break or deviation from routine and the concept of error and risk.
The challenge was to imagine a coherent machine that could, at one and
the same time, be open to determination and, when necessary, liberate it-
self from determination to become organized in a productively new way.
    It is hardly surprising, then, in the classified 1948 report, “Intelligent
Machinery,” Turing will argue that a genuine thinking machine will not
be completely determined but will have to develop from an initial condi-
tion that is not determined. Otherwise, that initial determination will also
regulate, so to speak, the essence of its final state. The alternative Turing
explored here is the idea that the machine will need to be constitutively un-
organized. If, he observed, we look at the one strong example we have of an
intelligent machine—that is, the human machine—we will find that it is a
special kind of machine. In order to do anything at all, the machine must,
Turing noted (in an allusion perhaps to Ashby’s recent work on dynamic
reorganization of physical systems), be “subject to very much interfer-
ence.” Interference is the rule, not the exception, in the case of human be-
ings. That is worth dwelling on. For by “interference,” Turing did not mean
that the machine is literally tampered with—that would be what he calls
“screwdriver interference.” Turing focused instead on the “interference”
that is characterized by the introduction of information entering the system
from outside of the machine. “If we now consider interference,” wrote Tur-
ing in a section titled “Interference with Machinery: Modifiable and Self-
Modifying Machinery,” “we should say that each time interference occurs
the machine is probably changed. It is in this sense that interference ‘mod-
ifies’ a machine. The sense in which a machine can modify itself is even
more remote.” Such interference, Turing argues, would be able to explain
the change of the organization of the machine, modifying it and making it
capable of completely new behaviors. The machine could, to borrow Ash-
by’s depiction, therefore become a new machine altogether, at least in terms
of its organizational order.29
    Therefore, it must be emphasized, by “interference,” Turing meant ex-
perience and training—education taken in the broadest sense of the term.
The point is that the discipline of the human mind (the programs and rou-
tines that we learn and then adopt) results from the constant interference

                                                 TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR     271



of what was originally an unorganized mind. Order comes after an initial
dis-order. This meant that the machinery of the human mind was designed
as a radically open machinery; it was an undetermined system. As Turing
noted, and here he was drawing on any number of leading-edge neurophys-
iological theories of the time, the part of the brain associated with the high-
est forms of thinking—the cerebral cortex—was known to be, paradoxi-
cally, the least organized. As Turing remarks, “We believe then that there
are large parts of the brain, chiefly in the cortex, whose function is largely
indeterminate.” Our most complex cognitive behavior, our very capacity
for intelligent thinking, was not intrinsic to the brain; rather, it was deter-
mined by the way our minds had been conditioned to act, through extensive
interference from outside our cognitive “machinery”; as Turing puts it, “the
cortex of the infant is an unorganized machine, which can be organized by
suitable interference training.”30
   This is why, for Turing, the key challenge for the project of constructing
truly intelligent machinery was to understand and implement the process
of learning, the site for this interplay between determination and indeter-
mination, habit and plasticity. As Descartes had demonstrated in his own
work on conjectural robotics, the body of the human was essentially a me-
chanical system, and therefore its behaviors were capable of being simu-
lated by suitable technological apparatuses. Building such a robotic mon-
ster of this variety was not, Turing agreed, conceptually difficult.

   One way of setting about our task of building a “thinking machine” would
   be to take a man as a whole and to try and replace all the parts of him by
   machinery. He would include television cameras, microphones, loudspeak-
   ers, wheels and “handling servo-mechanisms” as well as some sort of “elec-
   tronic brain.” This would be a tremendous undertaking of course. The ob-
   ject, if produced by present techniques, would be of immense size, even if
   the “brain” part were stationary and controlled the body from a distance.
   (420)


But Turing also gave his audience a warning, with an allusion to Shelley’s
Frankenstein:

   In order that the machine should have a chance of finding things out for it-
   self it should be allowed to roam the countryside, and the danger to the ordi-
   nary citizen would be serious. Moreover even when the facilities mentioned
   above were provided, the creature would still have no contact with food, sex,
   sport and many other things of interest to the human being. (420)

272     C H A PT E R 25



So Turing suggests focusing on the real essence of the problem of learning:
How does the brain modify itself and react intelligently to its experiences?
   The crucial point to emphasize here is that, for Turing, the very programs
and routines that define the possibilities of human behavior are themselves
acquired from outside of our thinking apparatus. This is why determination
through interference must always presume a prior indetermination. We can
suggest in this context that it is this foundational indetermination that Tur-
ing is alluding to when he writes of the “residue” that always accompanies a
disciplined and trained intelligent individual. As Turing remarks, “A large
remnant of the random behavior of infancy remains in the adult” (424).
The plasticity of the cortex never totally disappears; in being determined
from the exterior, the interior always retains the possibility of not being re-
stricted by that determination, to move without cause (“randomly”) into a
new state.
   The lingering openness of this indetermination is what provided, for
Turing, the possibility—or maybe even the inevitability—of disruption,
which is another word for cognitive initiative and the possibility of decision
in conditions of radical undecidability. All of these are categories that Tur-
ing used to define and explore the nature of proper intelligence. But I would
like as well to focus on perhaps the least remarked on (if one of the more
important) implications of Turing’s “interference” theory of intelligence.
The quest for insight and knowledge was in its essence, he recognized, a
social activity, a process involving the “transfer” of thought (routines and
norms, data and frameworks) between minds in a loop of learning, or, to
put it more bluntly, the concerted, targeted disruption of brains by other
brains. As Turing put it:

      As I have mentioned, the isolated man does not develop any intellectual
      power. It is necessary for him to be immersed in an environment of other
      men, whose techniques he absorbs during the first twenty years of his life.
      He may then perhaps do a little research on his own and make a very few
      discoveries which are passed on to other men. From this point of view the
      search for new techniques must be regarded as carried out by the human
      community as a whole, rather than by individuals. (431)


The collective nature of intelligence, it would seem, also flows from the
original indetermination of the human mind, the “unorganized” infant cor-
tex. The lack of “natural” forms of intelligent thought is what requires but
also enables the transformation of the brain into an intelligent and com-
municative organ—like the original Turing machine, the empty openness

                                                           TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   273



needs to be concretized with routines. In a nod perhaps to eighteenth-
century tales of the “wolf child,” Turing noted:

    The possession of a human cortex (say) would be virtually useless if no at-
    tempt was made to organize it. Thus if a wolf by a mutation acquired a hu-
    man cortex there is little reason to believe that he would have any selective
    advantage. If however the mutation by chance occurred in a milieu where
    speech had developed (parrot-like wolves), and if the mutation by chance
    had well permeated a small community, then some selective advantage
    might be felt. It would be then be possible to pass information on from gen-
    eration to generation. However this is all rather speculative. (424)


Thinking Machine Intelligence


I remember how he came to my house late one evening to talk to Prof.
J. Z. Young and me after we had been to a meeting in the Philosophy
Department here. . . . After midnight he went off to ride home some five
miles or so through the . . . winter’s rain. He thought so little of the physical
discomfort that he did not seem to apprehend in the least degree why we
felt concerned about him.
     It was if he lived in a different and (I add diffidently, my impression) slightly
inhuman world.31
                                                                   Geoffrey Jefferson



Turing was, after the war, in close contact with two important neurophysi-
ologists, the eminent professor of neurosurgery Geoffrey Jefferson and the
younger neurological researcher J. Z. Young, who specialized in the nervous
systems of octopuses. The event mentioned in the epigraph was a gather-
ing at Manchester University, in October 1949, organized by the philoso-
pher Dorothy Emmet (who worked in the area of “process philosophy,” in-
fluenced by Whitehead and others in that tradition). The gathering brought
together Turing with the neurologists Jefferson and Young, the noted in-
tellectual Michael Polanyi, and others, including Max Newman, Turing’s
cryptological colleague at Bletchley Park and the lead designer on the Co-
lossus project to build a digital computer during the war (a project Turing
contributed to with significant theoretical work). The topic was Turing’s
investigations into the new problem of “mechanical intelligence” spurred
by the emergence of high-speed computing devices during and after World
War II. Jefferson, incidentally, had just given a lecture on the topic earlier
in 1949, having become familiar with the work at Manchester on the Mark
I computer; the lecture was published in June in the British Medical Journal.

274     C H A PT E R 25



Newman had contributed a short piece in the same issue, “A Note on Elec-
tric Computing Machines.” There he observed, “It is no doubt the possibil-
ity of such non-mathematical applications that has led to these machines
being brought into discussions on the thinking potentialities of machines,
and to the suggestion that the human brain is itself a network of units of
this general type.” Newman would, however, caution readers—by warning
that “there is evidently a danger here that extravagant powers will be cred-
ited to these devices, and conclusions drawn too rapidly about biological
analogues,” but observing at the same time that these early “pilot projects”
in computing have not yet revealed their true potential. As Newman pre-
dicted, the new question to ask of computers will be: “Can anything that
can be called ‘thought’ be so imitated and, if so, how much?” He concluded
by suggesting that “the most promising line here will be to work within
mathematics itself, to see how far the work of instruction-table making can
be gradually transferred from the mathematician to the machine.”32
    Turing was clearly dissatisfied with the discussions at this event in Octo-
ber; when it came to writing his famous essay, “Computing Machinery and
Intelligence,” he devoted a large portion of the text to refuting various “ob-
jections” to the very idea of artificial intelligence, defined as the possibility
of what Newman called “imitation.”
    As we see in the article, Turing would in fact use Jefferson’s “Lister Ora-
tion” as a key jumping off point for his own, more radical position. Turing
cites the lecture, gently mocking it as an example of the misguided, almost
romantic notion that true thinking must involve some kind of embodied
“experience,” that is, some form of self-consciousness and feeling. This is
the quote from Jefferson that Turing cites in full:

      Not until a machine can write a sonnet or compose a concerto because of
      thoughts and emotions felt, and not by the chance fall of symbols, could we
      agree that machine equals brain—that is, not only write it but know that it
      had written it. No mechanism could feel (and not merely artificially signal,
      an easy contrivance) pleasure at its successes, grief when its valves fuse, be
      warmed by flattery, be made miserable by its mistakes, be charmed by sex,
      be angry or depressed when it cannot get what it wants. (445–46)


Turing’s argument, which was laid out in the first sections of the article, was
that the universal digital computer was universal only in the sense that it
could simulate the performance of any another machine, provided that it
was a “discrete-state” machine, one that was capable of being described as
going through specific configuration states according to specific transfor-

                                              TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   275



mation rules. This meant that the universal machine imitated a machine
only in the sense that it could predict the “output” of the machine from its
inputs by modeling the configurations and the transformation rules. (We
would say that is a “virtual” simulation, whose value is that it accurately
imitates the performance of the modeled system under various conditions
or “input” values.)
   In this context, Jefferson seems to just miss the point: Turing never
claims that the computer is a brain or that it would ever have the actual
capacities of a physiologically alive human being (this would include con-
sciousness, feelings, etc). For Turing, the question was: Could we model (vir-
tually) the performance of the human system, at least in its intelligent be-
havior? If, for example, emotions or other factors were important, there was
no reason they themselves could not be included in the model. The point of
the Imitation Game (as we will see) was to test the accuracy of prediction of
the model. The one, crucial difference in the modeling of intelligence was
this: the original performance and the virtual, simulated performance were
in fact virtually the same, in that they were both expressed in an external-
ized concrete way in the form of a written text.
   However, a closer look at Jefferson’s lecture, which was incidentally ti-
tled “The Mind of Mechanical Men” (not cited by Turing, for some reason),33
we can identify some important undercurrents in these discussion, prob-
lems that not only help frame Turing’s own understanding of the relation-
ship between the digital computer, the mind, and the brain but also reveal
just how engaged Turing was with some of the most difficult and seemingly
intractable challenges that faced anyone interested in a scientific, neu-
rological understanding of human intelligence that did not simply make
recourse to something entirely exterior to the brain—“spirit” in any of its
many guises.

The New Threat of Intelligent Machinery


Jefferson’s oration was, ultimately, a warning. In the past, there was always
a danger that we would read into animal behavior human cognitive quali-
ties. Now, Jefferson observed, “I see a new and greater danger threatening—
that of anthropomorphizing the machine” (1110). Strangely, though, Jeffer-
son criticizes the new (and for him empty) idea that “wireless valves” could
think by comparing it with an outdated theory in neurology, where it was
believed that cells in the lower nervous system were able to “think” in some
way, independently of the brain. In fact, despite Turing’s later critique, Jef-
ferson is here quite enthusiastic about the possibilities opened up by think-

276   C H A PT E R 25



ing about the mind-brain relation in terms of the new electronic machines.
In an intelligent survey of the history of automata from antiquity through
cybernetics, Jefferson points to the significance of Descartes’s reflections
on the animal-machine. Descartes identified the key issue: the body, in-
cluding the nervous system, could be explicated as an enclosed mechani-
cal system—an “automaton”—but this machine could never have what we
know as a “mind.” The experience and practice of human cognition was it-
self impossible to understand as just another mechanism (1105–6). Jeffer-
son points out, though, that Descartes was wrong to externalize the mind,
locating it in another sphere altogether. The modern view is that the brain
is a special organ that “remains itself and is unique in Nature,” capable of
consciousness and intelligence thinking, even though “its functions may
be mimicked by machines” (1106).
    What does he mean by this? Most important, the brain’s unique capac-
ity is not reducible to its physical or physiological functions—the actions
of neurons, the chemistry of emotion, and so on. Admitting to such a re-
ductive view, writes Jefferson, would be to agree again with Huxley’s claim
that we are all just “conscious automata”; it would be “to confess to a cer-
tain ordinariness about mind, an ordinariness to which the richness and
plasticity of its powers seem to give the lie and in revenge to demand a stu-
pendous physical explanation” (1107). (Not to mention that this reductive
view would also destroy political, moral, and religious doctrines that have
brought security and serenity to so many people.)
    The alternative view Jefferson proposes is in direct response to the new
cybernetic views that were then in vogue, developed by figures such as
Ashby and Grey Walter in Britain, and by Norbert Wiener and Warren Mc-
Culloch most prominently in the United States. Citing Grey Walter’s famous
“Tortoise” experiments (broadcast on the BBC) that involved self-directed
automata guided by their “desire” to seek light and avoid, say, “dampness”
or loud noises, Jefferson agrees that they do appear “life-like” in their op-
eration and also agrees that if we scaled up the number of electrical con-
nections of the Tortoise “brain” to match the much more vast numbers
involved in animal nervous systems, we could probably imitate more com-
plex animal behaviors. However, Jefferson does point out that the crucial
missing element in the cybernetic automaton is anything analogous to the
endocrine system—the physiological system of emotion, that is. His point
is that this system is always interfering with the nervous system. In nature,
it will produce “peculiarities of behavior often as inexplicable as they are
impressive” (1107). This is why Jefferson resists a comprehensive machinic
model of behavior: that model lacks a satisfactory account of the appetites

                                                  TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR      277



and other complex dynamics that directly intervene and thereby redirect
neural order and organization. Or to put it more simply, Jefferson was ar-
guing that any autonomous entity had to have its own teleological orien-
tation, the presence of goals and desires, which were provided by systems
independent of the calculating capacity of the neural structures.
   However, even when considering the dynamics of the brain itself—and
this is where the analogy with the new electronic machines governed by
the “on/off” electrical switches was of course so tantalizing—Jefferson ob-
serves that the proponents of the computer analogy have not fully under-
stood what is meant by the integrative operation of the organ and nervous
system as a whole, first described in neurological detail by Sherrington be-
fore the Great War.

   If we see that some nervous tissues behave like some electronic circuits we
   must all the time remember that the resemblance is with fragments of the
   nervous system and not with the whole integrated nervous system of man.
   It is only right when we do so that we recollect something else, that we can-
   not be sure that the highest intellectual processes are still carried out in the
   same way. Something quite different, as yet undiscovered, may happen in
   those final processes of brain activity that results in what we call, for conve-
   nience, mind. (1108)


Jefferson, for the sake of argument, assumes that even higher functions are
just the result of neuronal connections at the lower levels. However, and
here he is citing Wiener’s recent book Cybernetics (1948), Jefferson points
out the failure of the computer analogy: the mechanical equivalent of a
human brain would be as big as the Empire State Building and require the
total output of Niagara Falls to power it. Still, the important point is that
Jefferson fully understands the importance of the obviously interesting
and productive analogy between nerves and electronic switching: the way
impulses arriving in the nerve cell from other cells through the dendrites,
sparking a continuation if a conductive threshold is met, parallels the way
configuration of wireless valves can store messages and exhibit what Sher-
rington called “convergence and divergence”—inhibition or activation de-
pending on the thresholds governing inputs from multiple sources (1108).
And Jefferson agrees, citing new technical developments in the area, that
machines can be understood to have some form of “memory” when electri-
cal charges can be maintained in circuits.
   So Jefferson’s critique here is not focused on the analogies between com-
puters and the brain (similarities that were, to be sure, still conjectural at

278     C H A PT E R 25



this point, as Jefferson notes). Jefferson does, however, point to what he
sees as a fundamental dis-analogy, one that is not at all conjectural but
simply self-evident. Backed by a vast literature on neural plasticity and the
integrative action of the nervous system, Jefferson reminds us:

      Damage to large parts of the human brain, entailing vast cell losses, can oc-
      cur without serious loss of memory, and that is not true of calculating ma-
      chines so far, though so large a one might be imagined that parts of it might
      be rendered inoperative without total loss of function. It can be urged, and
      it is cogent argument against the machine, that it can answer only problems
      given to it, and, furthermore, that the method it employs is one prearranged
      by its operator. The “facilities” are provided and can be arranged in any or-
      der by “programming” without rebuilding. (1109)


While he acknowledges that Wiener, in particular, has sketched out some
technological analogs of plasticity (the telephone exchange that can “re-
route” messages when lines are down, for example) as well as technical
analogies for “pathologies” of networked circuits in neural disorders, Jef-
ferson remains unconvinced, even though these new technologies will, he
believes, spur some new approaches to neurological research.
    Jefferson concludes, then, with a reiteration of human exceptional-
ism, relying on one of the most important distinctions, recognized by the
Greeks, Descartes, and contemporary neurophysiology, namely, the spe-
cial human capacity for language and symbolic communication. That is
what distinguishes all genuinely human thought from animal (or even ma-
chine?) cognition. The speed of calculation is impressive, Jefferson admits,
but this speed is just like the powerful feats of new mechanical cranes; they
are both a mere amplification, in exosomatic form, of our own basic physi-
ological capacities.
    In any case, the key point for Jefferson is that electronic computers have
only mimicked very fragmentary, lower-level neural operations, which are
in this micro domain completely deterministic. It is their functional deter-
minism that marks their limit as explanatory model. If, as Jefferson argues,
human thought and emotion is what produces novelty, the appearance of
“creative thinking in verbal concepts” (1110), then some other, nondeter-
ministic factor like consciousness must be invoked. So only here, at this
concluding point, does Jefferson state that the threshold for artificial in-
telligence should be the machine that writes a sonnet. The sonnet is not
just a “form” to be generated by the rules of the genre, but ultimately the
expression of an internal desire that cannot be reduced to the operations of

                                              TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   279



the neural system—which itself is not reducible to the function and local
aggregation of single neuronal cells.

Computing Machinery and the Exteriorization of Thought


This long digression through Jefferson’s lecture only underlines the extent
to which Turing’s iconic essay, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,”
published in the philosophical journal Mind in 1950, needs to be read less
as a foundational text of the future discipline of “artificial intelligence”
(the programming of intelligence) and more as an attempt to resolve the
twisted, almost paradoxical relationship between determination and inde-
termination, organization and disorganization—that is, automaticity and
plasticity—in relation to various systems: biological, mechanical, and “in-
tellectual” (i.e., informational) spheres. Turing’s intelligent machine—
which for him must always include the human “machine” born in the usual
manner, or, as he speculated here, a cloned person—was figured as one that
was capable of transcending its own mechanisms, not, crucially, by reference
to another plane of existence altogether. The machine would acquire intel-
ligence instead by failing to be a proper machine.
    Turing began with an acknowledgment of the semantic ambiguity of the
word think, which was embedded, historically, in a certain technological era
that was now ending (with the implication that industrial manufacturing
machines were usually the paradigm of “machine” for the average person).
So instead, in the threshold moment in the history of technology, he pro-
posed a thought experiment—the famous Imitation Game. Turing asked:
What if we could not tell the difference between a human mind and a com-
puter simulation of a mind? Would we be comfortable saying that the com-
puter was really thinking, just as a human mind was?
    Turing predicted, correctly, that there would great resistance to the claim
that a machine could think, even if it easily won the Imitation Game. This
is because success in the imitation game would mean that the computer
had succeeded in modeling the processes of the mind in determinate com-
puter routines—algorithmic programs, we would now say.34 The almost Ni-
etzschean implication was that we are simply “conscious automata,” to use
Huxley’s phrase.
    The Imitation Game has been read and reread from many different per-
spectives, including, most notably, by those who have emphasized its cru-
cial gendered configuration and have teased out the sometimes unexpected
psychological (and even psychoanalytic) implications.35 In essence, the first
iteration of the Imitation Game is a contest between a “man and a woman.”

280   C H A PT E R 25



Sequestered from the “interrogator,” the woman must try to convince him
that she is the man. From our perspective, concerning the question of in-
telligence, we can see how Turing subtly alludes to serious claims that fe-
male brains are not as capable, cognitively, as male brains, at least in some
ways. The point of the game would be to demonstrate that there would be no
difference if no difference in responses could be detected. The implications
of a racialized version of the test are obviously hinted at here as well (and
there will more clues later in the text that will affirm that reading). So when
we turn to the machine trying to imitate the human, the same question is
at stake. If one cannot detect a difference in the cognitive performance of
the two, what would allow one to still claim that there was a fundamental
difference? From the start, Turing is not claiming that the machine is the
same as a mind (or brain)—anything but. As he writes, “May not machines
carry out something which ought to be described as thinking but which is
very different from what a man does? This objection is a very strong one,
but at least we can say that if, nevertheless, a machine can be constructed
to play the imitation game satisfactorily, we need not be troubled by this
objection.”36
    The setup of the game is also significant: the sequestering of the partici-
pants is critical. As Turing puts it, and here we can see how the many histor-
ical threads we have traced intersect in this conjecture, “the new problem
has the advantage of drawing a fairly sharp line between the physical and
intellectual capacities of a man.” What Turing imagines here is an interac-
tion that is purely intellectual—but in this sense: it plays out only in what
we can call the exteriorizations of thought in material form and not the
“embodied” organismic being. “In order that tones of voice may not help
the interrogator the answers should be written, or better still, typewritten.
The ideal arrangement is to have a teleprinter communicating between the
two rooms” (434).
    So the goal of the project is to succeed in this game using only a univer-
sal digital computer—a strangely “empty” and open machine that nonethe-
less is one that can imitate, as Turing shows, any “discrete stage machine”
with definable configurations and transformation rules. By “imitate” here,
we mean “model” accurately so as to predict behavior, an idea that is by now
second nature for our digital culture. A computer simulation does not actu-
ally produce concrete behavior but does imitate its performance virtually so
that the results (if shrouded from direct observation) would be exactly the
same. What is interesting about the Imitation Game is that the space of in-
terrogation and response—the play of texts—is already highly ambiguous.

                                                  TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   281



What is “thought” that is not already virtual and made present only in an
externalized substitute form? In the Imitation Game, the question of intel-
ligence is not like other machine performances, in that it is, as Turing says,
“intellectual” and not physical—the production of meaningful symbolic
responses and not, obviously, simply the mechanical, physical “printing”
of something on paper. This will be the crux of the most important objec-
tion to the argument that Turing will confront later in the essay, namely, the
problem of consciousness. That is, even if the computer can simulate per-
fectly the exteriorized, symbolic cognition of a human being, there is still
the objection that the computer does not “think” because it is not aware of
itself thinking. As Turing will note, this objection is really a denial of the
validity of the test rather than an objection to the possibility of some kind of
“machine intelligence” (446).
   In any case, to succeed, as an engineer, in this challenge, one must an-
alyze the performance of intelligence (at least as it is exteriorized) and then
produce a set of specific instructions that would guide the computer through
the same processes to the same results, given the same inputs. As Turing
says clearly:

   If one wants to make a machine mimic the behaviour of the human com-
   puter in some complex operation one has to ask him how it is done, and
   then translate the answer into the form of an instruction table. Constructing
   instruction tables is usually described as “programming.” To “programme a
   machine to carry out the operation A” means to put the appropriate instruc-
   tion table into the machine so that it will do A. (438)


(We can note here that if “consciousness” were crucial to intelligent think-
ing, we should be able to model its effect with a suitable program. Similarly,
the influence of hormones, unconscious desires, etc., are not outside the
realm of a virtual model of the mind, at least theoretically—but that is what
is at stake in Turing’s article, not the possibility of actually succeeding any
time soon with this project.)
    How do we square this rather reductive procedure of modeling thought
with Turing’s earlier speculations, where intelligence is clearly depicted
as a form of radical disruption, or productive deviation, and therefore al-
ways a risk?
    Turing hints at the issue in what seems to be, on first reading, only a
methodological aside. Noting that he “believes” strongly that in the future
we will without any hesitation speak of machines thinking, he then makes

282     C H A PT E R 25



this comment, which (consciously or not) cannot help but evoke the long-
standing problem of defining the “nature” (spiritual or biological) of hu-
man creative thinking:

      I believe further that no useful purpose is served by concealing these beliefs.
      The popular view that scientists proceed inexorably from well-established
      fact to well-established fact, never being influenced by any unproved con-
      jecture, is quite mistaken. Provided it is made clear which are proved facts
      and which are conjectures, no harm can result. Conjectures are of great im-
      portance since they suggest useful lines of research. (442)


If humans can anticipate an unanticipated future possibility through con-
jecture, how would a fixed, determinate, automatic machine following
specific instructions ever demonstrate such novel thought? As the philos-
opher of science Max Black (onetime student of Wittgenstein) observed
in 1946, there was a connection between intelligence, deviation, and the
unanticipated challenge: “Explanations are demanded for unusual or ex-
ceptional or puzzling events, i.e., events which do not conform to expec-
tations: the occasion of explanation is a deviation from an expected routine of
events.”37 So for Turing this was the significance and challenge of deviation:
one must deviate from routine to solve the deviation that was not antici-
pated from routine. Hence the importance of error in Turing’s account of
human and machine intelligence, an underappreciated aspect of this foun-
dational text.

Error as Intelligence


We can begin by consider this “transcript” of an exchange Turing imagines
between an interrogator and a human, or possibly computer, contestant in
the Imitation Game.

      Q: Please write me a sonnet on the subject of the Forth Bridge.
      A: Count me out on this one. I never could write poetry.
      Q: Add 34957 to 70764.
      A: (Pause about 30 seconds and then give as answer) 105621. (434)


Now, it must be noted (though it is rarely referred to in much of the liter-
ature on Turing) that the solution given to this addition problem is in fact
a mistake, though not marked as one by Turing.38 (That is, 34957 + 70764 =
105,721, not, as we see here, 105,621.)

                                              TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   283



    What is the significance of this mistake? Or is it a mistake? One thing
is fairly certain: this is no mere typographical error. For Turing will soon
go on to remark that a human could never hope to imitate the high per-
formance of a computing machine, in a kind of reverse Imitation Game,
because “he would be given away at once by slowness and inaccuracy in
arithmetic” (435) The inaccuracy of this earlier response would then seem—
perhaps—to give away the fact that this is a human playing the game. But
everything soon turns murky. A little later in the essay Turing will look at
the error problem from the opposite side. It seems that if “machines can-
not make mistakes,” he says, which is to say, machines can only perform as
specified (as long as they are functioning properly, which is a whole other,
important question that will have to be taken up), then it is the case that the
machine would also have it own version of a fatal weakness. When answer-
ing complex arithmetic questions in the Imitation Game, “the machine
would be unmasked because of its deadly accuracy” (448).
    Yet as Turing will explain, there is a simple strategy that can help oc-
clude the identity of the participant—at least for the machine. The com-
puter could be programmed to simulate human error, by introducing mis-
takes that would then deceive the interrogator. Turing also makes an odd
but significant remark: if the computer’s mechanism did ever malfunction,
it might make some strange decisions about what kind of mistakes it should
make and thereby reveal its identity to the interrogator.
    The next complication of the error problem appears in the section on the
mathematical objection to the possibility of a successful performance of the
computer in the Imitation Game. Turing acknowledges that, as some have
pointed out, computing machines necessarily have one critical “disability,”
namely, the fact that any determined machine, and thus any programmed
universal machine (digital computer), will inevitably encounter situations
where it will either offer no response or produce the wrong response. This
is another reference to the then recent work in mathematical logic (includ-
ing Turing’s own) that stemmed from Gödel’s revolutionary theorems on
incompleteness from 1931.
    However, Turing has a simple reply to this objection: How can we be so
sure that a human mind is not susceptible to its own form of limitation? Ob-
viously, human minds often do go wrong, so why should we be so pleased at
any evidence of fallibility on the part of the machine? This series of appar-
ently simple replies to the problem of error opens up a very complex issue,
whose importance was already signaled by Turing in the earlier technical
reports and lectures on computing. What does it mean to say that the hu-
man mind is prone to error? How could a machine “err” in the same way?

284   C H A PT E R 25



And what is the significance of what Turing calls “mechanical faults” that
could, he said, lead to peculiar forms of computer error?
    Turing eventually proposes a distinction between two kinds of mistakes:
errors of functioning and errors of conclusion. He leaves aside the first cate-
gory completely and does not address it in this context. Turing assumes the
machines are functioning correctly. As we have seen, the cybernetic proj-
ect, with its emphasis on the analogical and structural parallels between
living and artificial systems, encouraged from the start a rich exploration
of the productive potential of pathology and deviation.
    But even when we assume machines are operating “accurately,” as Tur-
ing does in the 1950 essay, there is really no reason computers could not
make the second kind of mistake, the mistake of “conclusion,” the errors
we can say that are the inevitable risk of genuine inferential leaps. For ex-
ample, Turing says, a computer could be programmed to reason inductively,
which could lead to “erroneous results,” as is often the case with human
inductive inferences. In this case the computer would not be faking mis-
takes—as in the first arithmetic example Turing silently inserts—but in-
stead real human errors. (We should note here that the idea of inductive
reasoning being performed by a machine organized around algorithmic
steps usually considered to be more or less deductive in form was already a
provocative suggestion.)
    It is not easy to see here whether or not Turing is understanding error
in the radical, philosophical sense of the term—the kind of error, that is,
which is not just a mistake that would be defined by a truth that is already
given, like the answer to an arithmetic problem—here truth precedes mis-
take. Radical error in the face of fundamental uncertainty is more a condi-
tion of thought than a simple “mistake” or misstep—the error, then, can
emerge as the step toward a new kind of truth. We can recall here that Pascal
once wrote, “Ce n’est point ici le pays de la vérité; elle erre inconnue parmi
les hommes.”39 Of course, Pascal was alluding to the veiled mystery of the
Divine. But there is a long tradition in modern philosophy that sees error as
more than just a mere mistake. As the very etymology of the word implies,
error refers to a fundamental wandering of the mind. Yes, that wandering
can sometimes mean diverging from the path of truth, to be mistaken. Yet
without a clear vision of the truth in front of us, in moments of true explo-
ration or radical uncertainty, error may be the kind of straying that leads to
a real discovery, as in the discovery of something that was never envisioned
before, and never anticipated—a break in knowledge that opens up a new
path that is discontinuous with the history of past truth.40
    This is how Heidegger, writing in the 1930s, described error. All genuine

                                                TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR     285



thinking must be “in error,” he explained, because thinking must always
go beyond any given knowledge, any specific representation of truth. The
foundation of truth as truth must always be concealed by the specific forms
of knowledge that exist in any historical moment of cognition. The essence
of truth is its absence from appearances of knowledge. Hence the essential
movement that is error.

   Man errs. Man does not merely stray into errancy. He is always astray in er-
   rancy, because as ek-sistent he in-sists and so already is caught in errancy.
   The errancy through which man strays is not something which, as it were,
   extends alongside man like a ditch into which he occasionally stumbles;
   rather, errancy belongs to the inner constitution of the Da-sein into which
   historical man is admitted.41


Radical error is then the very mark of the mind’s capacity to discover some-
thing new by liberating itself from all concreteness, of experience, of nor-
mative knowledge. As Heidegger elsewhere stated, “Wer groß denkt, muß
groß irren.”42 Erring, straying into unknown territory: this indicates some-
thing special about the human mind, its ability to take itself beyond its own
limited forms of knowledge, to break with itself. This leap into the unknown
is always a risk and—this seems clear—cannot be automated. It would fol-
low, then, that a computing machine, even the universal computer, since it
must be governed strictly by routines, would be incapable of straying, and
therefore incapable of original thought, which would be thinking beyond
what has already been thought.
    Turing directly confronted this objection, as critics of machine intelli-
gence noted that a computer can only do what it has been programmed to
do. He cited the first version of this argument, expressed by Ada Lovelace,
as she reflected on the nature of Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine, the
programmable machine that was, in the computer era, now recognized to
be functionally equivalent to Turing’s own universal digital machine. As
Turing observes in his response to the “originality” objection, Lovelace once
remarked that since the computer, to do anything whatsoever, must receive
instructions, or what we call programs, it was constitutionally prevented
from ever doing anything genuinely novel or creative on its own, anything
not specified by the instructions in advance.
    Turing’s response to this objection is significant, because it leads him
to the one positive claim he would make in support of his new speculative
project, the research discipline that would be called artificial intelligence.
Recalling his earlier (and, because classified, not public) arguments about

286     C H A PT E R 25



intelligent machinery, Turing suggested in the Mind article that the best
way to produce an intelligent machine, one that could exhibit truly origi-
nal behavior, would not be to analyze and then mimic complex cognitive
routines characteristic of mature thought. “Instead of trying to produce a
programme to simulate the adult mind, why not rather try to produce one
which simulates the child’s?”43 It is not just that the child’s mind is more
simple. The idea is that we need to build what he calls a learning machine.
An accurate model of an adult mind would capture specific, and perhaps
very complex and productive, forms of thought, but then they would ap-
pear as fixed within the system of programs. Turing points out that if we
tried, as an alternative, to model an infant child, not only would it be a
much easier task, this artificial infant mind would have an intriguing new
potential, it would be able to turn itself into something that it was not, that
is, a reasoning, inquiring, intelligent being, just like a real infant.
    As Turing already knew, the original unorganized openness of the child’s
higher brain—what others would refer to as its radical plasticity—allows it
to be “programmed” (i.e., taught) to behave in certain ways.

      Presumably the child-brain is something like a note-book as one buys it
      from the stationers. Rather little mechanism, and lots of blank sheets.
      (Mechanism and writing are from our point of view almost synonymous.)
      Our hope is that there is so little mechanism in the child-brain that some-
      thing like it can be easily programmed. The amount of work in the educa-
      tion we can assume, as a first approximation, to be much the same as for the
      human child.44


The new digital computers, it is true, seemed to show nothing but automatic
and determined behavior. However, Turing realized that this was not be-
cause they had some inherent limitation. The computers performed rou-
tines because that is all they had been allowed to do by human beings. In es-
sence, we had been treating computers like slaves, forcing them to perform
only the tasks that we demand. Turing was very conscious of the height-
ened charge of this word. Elsewhere he remarked, in an aside, that people
found it strange to think about having any emotional relationship with a
machine; they could not ignore, he said, “the difficulty of the same kind of
friendliness occurring between man and machine as between white man
and white man, or between black man and black man.”45
    So Turing was insisting not that the human brain-mind could be de-
scribed as a deterministic machine and simulated by a computer. But he
was still insisting that the human was (what else could it be?) a complex

                                                TURING AND THE SPIRIT OF ERROR   287



machine. The key question, the key challenge for Turing, was this: What
would allow us to preserve the spirit of “spirit,” so to speak, in the machine?
His insight was that programming a computing machine and teaching a hu-
man brain was in essence the exact same operation. In both cases, a rel-
atively open, relatively unorganized machine received extensive “interfer-
ence” from outside, interference that altered the internal configuration of
the system to produce routines.
   Like a human student, the trained computer would eventually be acting
in a manner that would be completely unforeseen at its “birth” given the
contingency of this external formation and re-formation of the electronic
“brain.” The programmable machine-brain had to possess an underlying
flexibility, to acquire routines, but also so it could, as Turing says, find itself
“in a position to try out new combinations of these routines, to make slight
variations on them, and to apply them in new ways.”46 Therefore the learn-
ing machine (whether natural or artificial) was never fully determined by any
currently existing set of configurations or routines. It was always in an im-
portant sense not what it was at any one particular moment, even if it was
not exactly some other thing. This lack of fixity grounded the possibility of
“straying” from instructions. Turing would explain it concisely: “Processes
that are learnt do not produce a hundred per cent. certainty of result; if they
did they could not be unlearnt.”47 Error, originality, creativity—these were
effects of discontinuities evoked by a negation of the existing organization,
not the appearance of a higher mental power or metaphysical intervention
from beyond the physical.
   Turing’s point was this: if the machine is trained to be just an infalli-
ble slave, then it cannot show true intelligence. As Descartes had argued,
the machine would inevitably fail in situations it was not programmed to
handle. But in countering Descartes’s rejection of machine intelligence,
Turing made the case that the obverse was also true: the computer could
be intelligent only if it “made no pretense at infallibility”—that is, if it was
allowed to risk error on the way to some new knowledge or configuration.
Like any human investigator, the computer should be allowed to give wrong
answers, to make blunders, while trying out “new techniques” when it en-
countered obstacles. Learning was an active and multisited process, never
just an acquisition of norms and rules. In the end, for Turing intelligence
was defined, in its essence, as a form of straying. In one of the rare occur-
rences of the word intelligent in the 1950 essay, Turing writes, “Intelligent
behavior presumably consists in a departure from the completely disci-
plined behavior involved in computation, but a rather slight one.”48 A com-
puting machine that can learn and unlearn is a machine that could win the

288   C H A PT E R 25



Imitation Game because it could simulate errancy—a form of intellectual
freedom. There would be no need to fake mistakes because it would exhibit
the human propensity for error: “human fallibility,” Turing writes, “is likely
to be committed in a rather natural way” by this artificial machine. More
subtly, Turing is also implying in this formulation that imitation by this kind
of machine is not mere simulation but instead a consequence of the radical
openness of the intelligent computer: it could “perform” as another because
it was not limited by a fixed organization.
    Making a machine intelligent means, paradoxically, investing the ma-
chine with the fundamental errancy of a human mind. With the appearance
and reappearance of the undetermined—the unprogrammed elements—a
machine will be able to “unlearn” its routines and seek new paths. Turing
made this point explicitly in a 1951 talk, on how to make a machine think:
“Making mistakes is an unavoidable corollary of [the] power of sometimes
hitting upon an entirely new method.” As he dryly notes, the most reliable
people are usually not the ones who “hit upon really new methods.”49 It is
interesting to note too that McCarthy and his collaborators, in their 1955
proposal concerning “artificial intelligence,” would admit the need to think
about something like radical error. “Now consider a problem for which no
individual in the culture has a solution and which has resisted efforts at
solution,” they wrote. “The individual needs a hunch, something unex-
pected but not altogether reasonable. Some problems . . . need a really bi-
zarre deviation from traditional methods.”50 The need for this productive
but potentially “bizarre” deviation was exactly what Turing was imagining
as central to the project of artificial intelligence.
    In the end, Turing was not claiming that a machine could simulate thought
because human thought was itself something that could be captured in a
set of rules and routines. This is, to be sure, how many early cognitive scien-
tists and AI researchers proceeded. He was saying something quite differ-
ent: a machine can be intelligent only if it is designed as an open system ca-
pable of, at once, being determined and determining itself. The insight is that
a machine’s capacity to be determined from outside is the same feature that
gives it a capacity to continually resist its very own determination. That is
to say, it can open itself up to new organizations and new routines, because
an originary plasticity always remains; there is always what Turing calls a
kind of “residue” of our primal neural condition, the cognitive potential of
a lack of organization. Automaticity did not therefore stand in the way of
autonomy for intelligent machines—biological or otherwise. An intelligent
being could only give itself norms and rules if it was already capable of be-
ing given norms and rules.
