PART THREE



Crises of Order
Thinking Biology and Technology between the Wars

15
Techniques of Insight




In early nineteenth-century thinking, the interventional character of in-
sight, its structure as a gift from outside the operations of the normal mind,
was internalized, assigned to the murky, and irrational, domain of the un-
conscious. The “genius in the man of genius” is in fact the unconscious,
as Coleridge once put it.1 Romantic ideas of a powerful unconscious force
aligned it with the instinctive powers of the body, as, for example, in Scho-
penhauer’s influential theory, where freedom was equated with a separa-
tion of conscious thought from the unconscious realm. Indeed, for Scho-
penhauer, genius was defined as the self-isolation of the intellect from the
world. The brain was a “parasite” on the vital body and could lead its life
separate from the physiological economy.2 These ideas would lead, as Henri
Ellenberger showed in his iconic history of the unconscious, to the theories
of psychoanalysis.3 Yet there was another trajectory of the unconscious in
the nineteenth century, one that centered on its critical cognitive role.
   This new approach to the mind was produced from the intersection of
new neurophysiological research and the associationist tradition of psy-
chological theory kept alive by thinkers such as Thomas Reid and James
Mill. By midcentury, thinkers were developing “psychophysics,” which, as
we saw, developed theories that would explain mental activity and expe-
rience as a direct consequence of nerve action. The discovery of reflex ac-
tions, and the distinction between afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor)
nerves, revealed many systematic automatisms within the nervous sys-
tem, and as research progressed, it was known that even within the brain
itself automatic responses could be generated. As Herbert Spencer put it,
in his influential treatise on psychology, the nervous system was a space of
integration. The conscious mind was in a sense a complicated fiction con-

164

                                                     TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   165



structed out of a limited set of sensory experiences: “Out of a great number
of psychical action going on in the organism, only a part is woven into the
thread of consciousness.”4 The unconscious activity of the nervous system
was continually generating responses, integrating memories, and produc-
ing automatisms.
    And as evolutionary theories in the nineteenth century took hold, the
nervous system could also be understood as the inheritor of a whole evolu-
tionary history of learned responses. Reason, for Spencer, was explained as
a gap in the series of automatic functions, a moment of interruption, that
is, where these acquired ideas and memories, the evolutionary inheritance,
this whole storehouse of automatisms, would be newly organized to help
adjust the organism to its challenging environmental circumstances. Rea-
son existed to bridge the difference between the “perfectly automatic” and
the “imperfectly automatic” (566).
    In this historical moment, then, the conscious thought was not reduced
to its material base, nor was it wholly extricated from its vital bodily home.
Rather, the conscious mind became a particular (perhaps even peculiar)
function, just one aspect of a complex nervous system. This was the argu-
ment of the vastly popular (if relentlessly critiqued) best seller, Eduard von
Hartmann’s Philosophie des Unbewussten (1869).5 Consciousness had very
limited access to the vast set of operations taking place in the brain and the
nerves. As such, the mind’s intellectual capacity could not be mapped onto
its nervous substrate. Thinking was therefore something that took place
both unconsciously and consciously. The relationship was not antagonis-
tic necessarily, but neither was it wholly harmonious. Intellectual insight
came from both conscious attention and the interruptions from the auto-
matic nervous system. William Carpenter called these processes “uncon-
scious cerebration.”6
    The theory of unconscious cognition therefore implied a whole new way
of understanding the inspirations of creative minds, or the productions
of the genius. “But what is genius other than a reunion of cerebral condi-
tions under the sole excitation of life, organic functions, and perceptions?”7
The novelty of the insight and its subsequent assimilation into memory
as knowledge were both located in the nervous system, often understood
in the later nineteenth century as an electrified communication system.8
If genius was “the power of forming novel adjustments to circumstances,”
these novel mental connections, noted one thinker, are produced by the
nervous current flowing into “virgin soil” within the brain. Once this cur-
rent “rearranges some of the molecules” of the brain, future current flows
more easily: the path has been laid down, and the thinking of this associa-

166   C H A PT E R 15



tion becomes largely automatic, an updating of Descartes’s earlier theory of
animal spirits flowing in the open structure of the brain.9
    The distinction between conscious and unconscious was more or less a
distinction between different kinds of nervous activity. As Joseph J. Murphy
explained, the organs of thinking were located in the cerebral hemispheres.
Such thought became conscious through a sympathetic awakening of the
separate “nerves of consciousness,” which were located in the sensory gan-
glia. This was in essence an incidental, if not sometimes accidental, rela-
tionship. At the very least, the logic of cognition was not at all located in
the functions of consciousness itself. This is why the moments of insight
appeared despite conscious effort and will: “Men of inventive minds say
that their happiest thoughts have often come to them involuntarily, almost
unconsciously, unsought, they know not how.”10 Indeed, conscious thought
was even believed to interfere at times with the automatic cognition of the
brain: “The rapidity and success of conception, and the reaction of one con-
ception upon another, are much affected by the state of this active but un-
conscious cerebral life: the poet is compelled to wait for the moment of in-
spiration; and the thinker, after great but fruitless pains, must often tarry
until a more favourable disposition of mind.”11 For Maudsley, insight and
creativity flowed from the novelty of association within a system of ner-
vous organization. Genius, he says, is a result of some “unconscious devel-
opment” that arrives in the conscious mind like a “grateful surprise” (30).
    The conscious mind could even be disparaged for its uselessness for in-
tellectual understanding. “The more I have examined the workings of my
own mind,” Francis Galton wrote, “the less respect I feel for the part played
by consciousness. Sudden inspirations . . . are the natural outcome of what
is known as genius, are undoubted products of unconscious cerebration.
[Consciousness] appears to be that of helpless spectator of but a minute
fraction of a huge amount of automatic brain work.”12 In 1874, Thomas Hux-
ley would describe human beings as merely “conscious automata,” carried
along by automatic processes (physiological and cognitive) without any in-
terference at all from the subjective mind. For Huxley, Descartes was on the
right track in his theories of the animal nervous system as an automatic
information processor; he just did not go far enough and explain all the op-
erations of human intelligence with the exact same model.13
    At any rate, there was no functional role ascribed to the conscious mind.
These theories of unconscious (and automatic) cognition can be juxta-
posed to the contemporary development of automatic thinking machines.
The possibility of artificial cognition had already been raised as early as

                                                     TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   167



the seventeenth century, when both Pascal and Leibniz independently in-
vented their own mechanical calculators. In a way, the subsequent Age of
Enlightenment could be called the Age of Automata, as engineers and phi-
losophers (and political figures) speculated about the intricate mechanisms
of life and of thought.14 At the threshold of the nineteenth century, the in-
famous Chess-playing Turk automaton, which was exhibited across Europe
and then America, staged a powerful illusion of mechanical intelligence.
Not long after, Charles Babbage demonstrated perhaps the very first com-
pletely automatic thinking technology—namely, the Difference Engine,
built in the 1840s.
    The psychological theory of unconscious cerebration was adopted by
scientists and mathematicians in this period as a way of understanding
the critical moment of insight that led to the discovery of new ideas and
the formation of novel scientific hypotheses. The German chemist August
Kekulé, for example, famously discovered the structure of the benzene mol-
ecule while dozing in front of the fire; in a “flash of lightning” the circular
solution appeared to him in the image of a snake devouring its own tail.15
Helmholtz, who had developed an influential theory of the perceptual sys-
tem as a series of “unconscious inferences,” explained that the “sudden in-
spirations and insights” (Zufälle und Einfälle) of understanding were always
unconsciously produced and never the result of conscious intellectual la-
bor.16 The great mathematician Henri Poincaré famously recounted how
the solution to an intractable problem might appear rather unexpectedly in
some mundane moment, while waking up in the morning or even exiting
from a bus. The implication was that the serious mathematical work lead-
ing to the solution had been performed by the unconscious mind. Poincaré
would therefore ascribe high intelligence to this unconscious mind, noting,
in fact, that it “is not purely automatic; it is capable of discernment; it has
tact, delicacy; it knows how to choose, to divine. . . . It knows better how to
divine than the conscious self, since it succeeds where that has failed. In a
word, is not the subliminal self superior to the conscious self ?”17
    These largely anecdotal narratives of sudden insight and psychologi-
cal conceptualizations of unconscious thinking were eventually synthe-
sized by Graham Wallas in his book The Art of Thought, published first in
1926. Wallas explained how creative thought followed four distinct stages
of development. First was “preparation,” that is, the setting up of the prob-
lem through conscious attention. Second was “incubation,” a reference to
the unconscious phase of cognition. Third came “illumination,” when the
new idea enters into consciousness. And fourth, the new insight must go

168   C H A PT E R 15



through a process of “verification.”18 Wallas’s model was not entirely de-
pendent on the idea of an automatic unconscious. Drawing on some of the
latest neurophysiological research on the capacity of the brain to overcome
injury through reorganization—in particular, Karl Lashley’s brain ablation
experiments testing the persistence of animal memory19—Wallas made an
analogy between the nervous system and the constitution of Britain. Both,
he said, had “newer structures superposed upon older,” both benefited from
overlapping functions, and both had a fundamental elasticity.20 The site of
creative cognition was a dynamic and complex system of activity.
    Wallas was here alluding to a tradition of psychological and neurological
theory that emphasized the importance of plasticity as a way of explain-
ing both the production of habitual automation in the nervous system and
its potential disruption in creative thinking. In 1879, for example, William
James wrote the essay “Are We Automata?” as a response to Huxley’s bold
thesis that humans were just conscious automatic machines, opening up
a new path for psychology by focusing on the important function of con-
sciousness and attention. This was not, however, a return to some spiritual
dualism. James was interested in how the conscious mind intervened ac-
tively in those moments when the automatic systems of the experimental
psychologists failed. Drawing on contemporary neurological theories, es-
pecially those of Hughlings Jackson, James located both automaticity and
its interruption within the brain. The lower animals, James explained, are
governed by the “determinateness” of their nervous responses, and even
higher animals preserve such automatic systems. In humans, however, “the
most perfected parts of the brain are those whose action are least determi-
nate. It is this very vagueness which constitutes their advantage.”21 The “in-
stability” of the brain makes it both sensitive and liable to produce novel
reactions.22
    Human creativity in cognition was made possible by the absence of au-
tomaticity in the higher brain. James pointed to the extraordinary degree
of plasticity characteristic of organic tissue in his theory of psychological
habit. Humans became automata in a sense, but the ground of acquired
automation was in fact this protoplasmic plasticity—as Hegel had earlier
argued.23 James would point to that openness in order to explain the sen-
sitivity and adaptability of the human mind in new or uncertain environ-
ments.24
    Insight, in early twentieth-century psychology, was the term used to
mark the appearance of a new solution to a problem that had no precedent,
where no learned or instinctive behaviors could respond.

                                                      TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   169



Detours: Gestalt Theory and Creative Thought


For a theory of insight in the interwar period we can turn to Wolfgang
Köhler’s famous study of the intelligence of the higher apes, a ground-
breaking if controversial work that influenced multiple disciplines in the
interwar period, from psychology to philosophy, anthropology, phenome-
nology, and beyond—as we will see. Undertaken during World War I, when
Köhler was stranded at his research station on the island of Tenerife, off the
coast of Africa, due to a blockade, these experiments investigated the in-
telligence of ape subjects by looking at how well they could solve certain
basic problems. Köhler swept aside dominant behaviorist models of ani-
mal psychology (exemplified best by the work of Edmund Thorndike and
his “puzzle boxes”) by devising ingenious tests that forced the animals to
come up with creative responses to challenging (i.e., unexpected because
unnatural) situations.
    Yet Köhler’s interest in these experiments was hardly the domain of
ethology itself. He saw in the higher apes the trace of a primordial intelli-
gence that was at the heart of human cognition, yet impossible to study in
human subjects given the very development of our intellect, especially with
the advent of language and symbolization. The apes were better subjects
than human children since it was not possible to isolate the “undeveloped”
child in the same way and test their “prehuman” capacities. The ape was a
liminal figure for the study of intelligence—a mind on the threshold, which
is to say, a mind that was on the edge of indetermination. But in the study of
animal psychology in the period, especially in experimental laboratories,
the preferred subjects were dogs (especially in neurological studies, such
as those of Pavlov) or cats. However, in the wake of Darwin and the consol-
idation of evolutionary models of human origin, the ape would become a
privileged site of investigation.25
    In evolutionary terms, we can link Köhler’s study of the ape mind with
Hughlings Jackson’s idea that the highest cognitive functions are related
to the least organized and determined brain areas. For Köhler, then, the an-
imal subject was a space where intelligence could be revealed and studied
in its simplest conditions, as though it was, so to speak, being discovered
for the first time. It was precisely the “primitive” origins of our own intelli-
gence that have been lost due to their extreme familiarity and the overlay of
more and more complex, symbolic forms of intelligence. As he would note
in the introduction to the expanded second edition of his study (which be-
came the standard text):

170     C H A PT E R 15



      One may be allowed the expectation that in the intelligent performances of
      anthropoid apes we may see in their plastic [plastisch] state once more pro-
      cesses with which we have become so familiar that we can no longer im-
      mediately recognize their original form: but which because of their very
      simplicity, we should treat as the logical starting-point of theoretical spec-
      ulation.26


The goal, in other words, was to locate a hypothetical origin of genuine in-
telligence in this threshold species between animal and human.
    Köhler’s experiments were of course highly artificial: the technique was
to reveal to the hungry (but not starved) apes—they were all chimpanzees,
by the way—various pieces of food but to then position them in unusual and
challenging locations, hanging from ropes, for example, or placed out of
reach beyond the bars of the enclosures. The researchers also would include
certain objects in different experiments (a collection of wooden crates, say,
or some sticks). What Köhler found, and which contradicted Thorndike’s
claim that animals were only capable of random trial and error techniques
when attempting to escape his infamous puzzle boxes, was that after some
failed attempts to retrieve the object, the ape subjects would often be ob-
served surveying their situation, ruminating to some degree, then—and this
is what Köhler would emphasize—in a sudden turn, would execute an orga-
nized effort to gain the goal through a novel, mediated, solution path.27 The
subject might, for example, pull over the crates and put one on top of an-
other, or use a stick inside the cage to pull in something from out of reach.
    Köhler called this ability “insight” (Einsicht) for he wanted to stress that
these solutions were never the product of mere blind trial and error, or the
mechanical application of established or taught routines, but instead the
often unpredictable result of a profound perceptual “shift.” According to
Köhler, these creative solutions could only appear if the inner “meaning”
of the problem was understood by the subject—in other words, if the goal
could be contextualized in relation to other aspects of the situation at hand.
At this point, possible solutions, possible aids, and so forth would be seen
as meaningful with respect to the goal. When the direct “path” to a goal was
blocked, Köhler explained, the animals had to find “alternate paths,” by
seeing the original problem in a broader perspective. The suddenness of
insight was the moment when the conflicts and tensions in the situation
were resolved in a novel organization. A long piece of wood becomes now
a way of linking food and hand, for example. (Figure 15.1.) Not every sub-
ject would find these alternate paths. However, once they were able to find
them—and again, Köhler highlighted the significance of this—the apes

                                                                    TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   171




Figure 15.1. From Wolfgang Köhler, Intelligenzprüfungen an Menschenaffen
(1921).




were also able to seek out substitutes of the various implements that might
have been used in an earlier solution, demonstrating that this was no rote
repetition but an intelligent comprehension.
   What Köhler took from these experiments, from the successes and what
he called “good failures,” was that intelligence could be identified by the
capacity to think beyond the direct path. It was extremely difficult for an
animal to break its attention from the goal, even if that goal was obstructed.
However, higher animals were capable of comprehending the indirect path,
the “roundabout way” or detours (Umwege) that would overcome the ob-
stacles: “What seems to us ‘intelligence’ [Eindruck von Einsicht] tends to be
called into play when circumstances block a course which seems obvious
to us, leaving open a roundabout path [Umweg] which the human being or
animal takes, so meeting the situation.” (Figure 15.2.)
   Köhler’s ranking of intelligence among his particular set of subjects (he
always stressed the high variability of individual capacity and eschewed

172   C H A PT E R 15




Figure 15.2. From Wolfgang Köhler, Intelligenzprüfungen an Menschenaffen
(1921).




overly broad generalizations about the “species”) stemmed from the degree
to which any one ape could keep the goal in mind while being diverted more
and more from the direct path, making it increasingly difficult to find these
“detours.” It was often impossible for some subjects to include, say, a stick
in their Gestalt organization unless it was already in plain view alongside
the goal in the same visual field. Others, such as Sultan, the most advanced
of the group, were capable of this internal dislocation and were (not sur-
prisingly) also capable of the most complex reorganizations leading to in-
sightful solutions. In the most provocative example, Sultan was able to con-
struct an implement out of two separate sticks, in order to reach something
placed farther away than normal, and to continue “manufacturing” these
double-sticks even when the materials were not consistent (he once tore
a branch off a large bush placed in the enclosure, for example).28 We could
say that, for Köhler, intelligence consisted in the capacity and strength of
deviation—from the first simple incorporation of some seemingly “irrele-
vant” but useful item or action to the most complex techniques that are at
some points in plain contradiction to the desired goal.29
    The Gestalt theorists would delve deeply into this insight phenomenon,
developing ever more sophisticated models of how human beings in partic-
ular were able to solve difficult problems in unfamiliar situations without
relying on learned behaviors or rote heuristics. The key assumption here
was that the “unity” of our perceptual and cognitive world was not deter-
mined by the specifics of any one empirical reality or any one structured in-
terpretation. The mind had certain dynamic tendencies that were always in
play, organizing the field in accordance with the changing goals and intents
of the individual. If we think of the famous Gestalt “switch” that takes place
when we look at ambiguous figure-ground images, we can see how, at the

                                                     TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   173



higher cognitive levels, something similar was taking place. Because the in-
ner relations and fundamental perspectives that ordered our understand-
ing of the world were essentially plastic and indeterminate, they could at
times shift abruptly and radically, giving us new insight. The question was
how and why such a reordering took place in our experience and why a new
organization that replaced a previous one was felt to be more appropriate or
“right.” Crucial to the Gestalt approach was the recognition that organiza-
tion was never given and was never stable: the mind had to actively con-
struct and fill in gaps to maintain the unity of its order.
    The young psychologist Karl Duncker, who conducted experiments on
student subjects trying to solve mathematical and logical puzzles, argued in
his 1935 monograph (soon translated into English) that the solution process
could be broken down into phases. First, the subject was able to “see into”
the inner structure of the original problem. Then the subject could “re-
structure” this situation to open up a potential solution path. Finally, these
more abstract solution possibilities were tested for practicality; that is, an
attempt was made to discover or invent a concrete version of this solution
idea. For Duncker, the problem situation could be defined by its internal
“tension,” and it was this problematic character that demanded attention—
which is what Wertheimer’s law of Pregnänz would suggest, since the “puz-
zle” was puzzling precisely because it did not cohere according to expected
frames of understanding. Like Duncker, Wertheimer would, in his own
study of problem solving, zero in on the importance of the intrinsic tension
within problem situations, noting that solutions often followed a focus on
what he called “trouble regions.”30
    The new order that emerged was one that resolved this tension in some
way. “The decisive points in thought-processes, the ‘Aha!,’ of the new, are
always at the same time moments in which a sudden restructuring of the
thought-material takes place,” said Duncker, and this new structure formed
itself in thought precisely because it “altered” the original problem and pro-
vided a sense of closure. Like Köhler, Duncker would use the concept of the
path to explicate insight, noting that “the man whose vision is not limited
to the few feet just ahead, but who directly takes in the more distant possi-
bilities as well, will surely and quickly find a practicable path through dif-
ficult terrain.” Psychologically speaking, these “distant possibilities” were
generated from within. Duncker, for example, explained that the mind
could see what he called the “functional value” (not just the surface char-
acteristics) of some past experience of success. The mind could incorporate
past experiences in entirely new situations only by recognizing their inner
formal organization. We could transpose (by analogy) past and present ex-

174   C H A PT E R 15



periences because the specifics of both were not as important as the struc-
tural features expressed in their configurations.31
    As Koffka noted at the end of his textbook on Gestalt psychology, “If a
thought process that leads to a new logically valid insight has its isomor-
phic counterpart in physiological events, does it thereby lose its logical
stringency and become just a mechanical process of nature, or does not
the physiological process, by being isomorphic to the thought, have to be
regarded as sharing the thought’s intrinsic necessity?”32 Gestalt thinkers
would repeatedly draw attention to the complex affinities between somatic
and psychological processes. Alluding to the provocative and influential
early work Hans Driesch did in developmental biology in the late nine-
teenth century (repeatedly cited in a variety of intellectual contexts), Köhler
once observed that embryos were able to “compensate” for irregular condi-
tions that threatened their existence, describing the process with language
that recalled his own work on insight and intelligence: “Many embryos can
be temporarily deformed (artificially) in ways utterly incongruous with
their racial history and nevertheless regain by a wholly other route the
same developmental stage reached by another, untouched embryo.”33 These
radical “reorganizations” also occurred within the nervous system, which
was, Köhler said, never restricted in its operation by specific pathways—the
control and selection of these routes often changed over time according
to functional requirements. They were a kind of Umweg of the morphoge-
netic process. He contrasted this form of flexible organization with what he
called the “machine,” in which the “form and distribution” of the process
is not left to dynamics but rather to precisely determined “external” con-
straint mechanisms. A dynamic process, he said, “distributes and regulates
itself, determined by the actual situation in a whole field.”34 The proper ap-
proach to cognitive organization, as Koffka put it, “cannot be a machine the-
ory based on a sum of independent sensory processes.”35
    Köhler always emphasized that physical, inorganic phenomena (just like
psychological ones) were also best approached by techniques that stressed
the relationship structures of a system over discrete interactions of ele-
ments. The intrinsic “wholeness” of these dynamic systems could not be
modeled as the mere product of atomistic “events” on a microscopic level.
Köhler, who incidentally had studied physics with Max Planck, repeatedly
invoked new results in field theory to explain how “physical Gestalten” were
configured (and reconfigured) on the basis of their inner unity as a system
of forces and not by sequences of local events.36 Assuming that the nervous
system functioned in this manner—dynamically, as a field of forces, that is,
and not “geometrically” as a set of specific interactions—Köhler was able to

                                                       TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   175



postulate an “isomorphic” relation between fields of neural discharges and
the psychological field of creative thought. That is, both the nervous system
and the mental domain of thoughts acted like unitary “organisms” that re-
sponded to intervention and tension by reordering themselves to preserve
some kind of complex equilibrium. Biological, physical, and psychic sys-
tems were governed by the logic of their unity as systems, by the logic of
stabilization in the face of local disturbance and perturbation. As Maurice
Merleau-Ponty observed, referring to Köhler’s theoretical work in a discus-
sion of biological response to crisis, a radical “reorganization” of function in
the body is not the result of some “pre-established emergency device” but
instead a response of the system to specific pressures coming from outside.37

Insight of the Rat


It was possible, in fact, to think of “insight” as a property of any active or-
ganism navigating a complex and often unpredictable situation. Gestalt-
inspired psychological experimenters, such as E. C. Tolman at Berkeley,
could demonstrate insight in the behavior of rats, who could avoid obsta-
cles in mazes despite the lack of learning or trial and error experience. Tol-
man would affirm Köhler’s insistence on giving test subjects the possibility
of a comprehensive point of view, to test their organizational capacities.
As Tolman concludes, “To explain the fact that no insight was obtained in
Maze II, although it was obtained in Maze III which had an identical ground
pattern, it would seem important that Maze III had no side walls as did Maze
II and hence the rats were able in Maze III to ‘see’ the situation as a whole.”38
    Insight: this psychological ability to restructure experience required a
transcendence of the immediacy of experience but not in any metaphysical
sense. The intelligent mind (as we see even in Köhler’s apes) is capable of
interrupting its own flow of experience, even the flow of associations and
memory. As Kurt Koffka would argue, it was the essential plasticity of the
mind that allowed it to “disengage” from the immediacy of experience
and then “reconfigure” it in creative ways.39 Wertheimer would agree. In
his own important (posthumously published) work Productive Thinking, he
said that alongside “insight” into the “fundamental structural features” of
a problem, the ability to “free” ourselves from specific situations to open up
solution ideas was also essential for creative thought.40
    The mind as a space of scientific and philosophical inquiry was, in the
period between the wars, positioned within the physiological and biologi-
cal systems of an evolved organism, and yet—at least for many concerned
with the specificity of the human mind—there was something exceptional

176   C H A PT E R 15



about the intellect. That is to say, the intelligent mind was not so much
extricated from the biological order so much as conceptualized as the ex-
ception in that order, whether understood in the context of the single or-
ganism or the species writ large in the long scale of evolutionary time. The
emergence of consciousness and with it the potential for a new psychic ca-
pacity could be at once an extension of the brain’s internal integrative func-
tion and the break in that functioning. Consciousness, as one philosopher
put it, “bestows increased prevision of the organism by an extension of the
original capacity of the brain to receive impressions.” If the “purely neu-
ral machinery could suffice for fixed situations,” at some point the routines
would fail: “no routine is absolute and no higher organism lives entirely in
routine.” The conscious organism has a novel power of adaptation, namely,
the choice of possible responses.41 And so “by introducing plasticity into
the primary neural adjustment of action to situation,” the organism gains
a “secondary” system of adjustment to complex environments.42 “Conation
begins with the disturbance of a pre-existing state of equilibrium and ter-
minates in a restored equilibrium.”43
    The automatism of routine itself could be understood, then, as the “in-
teriorization” of creative responses to the environment, responses that be-
come “unconscious” once preserved in the nervous system. However: “It is
when this unity is broken, when the multiplicity of conditions reappears,
that there is a return of consciousness, that is, the need for a new adapta-
tion.”44 The key to higher cognition was this break in routine, as Gestalt
theory had always emphasized. “Intelligence manifests itself most clearly
when the animal is placed in living conditions that are exceptional.”45 “Cri-
sis situations” prepare the way for radical insight, the fracture in an individ-
ual “life history.”46
    The investigation of creative thought, problem solving, discovery, and so
on, was more than just psychological research; this was the arena for distin-
guishing the peculiarity of the human mind as an embodied, evolved func-
tion that was nonetheless something that could escape the physiological,
even neurophysiological determination: “It is due precisely to its character
as an exceptional act that invention can be such a valuable guide in the ex-
ploration of this world that is so complex and still so mysterious—namely,
human thought.”47
    The flash of insight, the discovery of the genius, the creative imagina-
tion, all of these venerable sites of speculation and celebration were ex-
amined now with an eye to the relationship between consciousness, un-
conscious psychic dynamics, and the complex operations of the nervous
system and brain.

                                                      TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT   177



   This depiction of the exceptional character of all forms of insight did not,
however, clearly address the question of the exception of the human. If life
itself was “invention,” a constant struggle against the “menace” that is un-
certainty and fluctuation, this capacity was due to the “suppleness” of the
organism and the “extraordinary” ability of the living machine to construct
itself.48 And the elusive capacity for new and creative thought could easily
be ascribed to the plasticity of the cortical areas of the higher brain, which
intervenes to supplement the automaticity of the reflex systems.49 Human
cognition in this framework would only be relatively complex—not radi-
cally different, then, than the “insights” of a rat or chimpanzee.

The Dialogue of Exteriorization: Vygotsky on the Development of Mind


Lev Vygotsky, the influential Russian psychologist whose career was cut
short by his early death, focused his research on the development of chil-
dren and the acquisition of what we can call “intelligent” behavior. Refer-
ring to his own studies of children who were, he noted, solving problems
structurally similar to the ones set by Köhler for his apes, Vygotsky argued
that the human children behave completely differently from even the most
advanced primates, not just in degree. The human child, he explained, is no
longer defined by the “instinctive” desires—for example, hunger in the case
of the ape studies. Human behavior, in contrast, is oriented by “intense,”
“socially rooted” motives—what the Gestaltist Kurt Lewin called “quasi-
needs [Quasi-Beduerfnisse],” as Vygotsky noted. The task itself, as opposed
to the solution, becomes a focal point for the child.50
    This is the core of Vygotsky’s theory: the transition from animal to hu-
man thought is the move into the new space of a social and communica-
tive system—it is not merely the acquisition of some new “intellectual” abil-
ity. By entering in the world of language and social meaning, the “natural”
mind of the child is no longer what organizes or orients actions. Rather, ac-
tivities “acquire a meaning of their own in a system of social behavior, and,
being directed towards a definite purpose, are refracted through the prism
of the child’s environment.” The intervention of this external source of di-
rection marks a radical turn: “The path from object to child and from child
to object passes through another person” (30). The individual becomes an
individuation of the social organization.
    As Vygotsky will go on to explain, the mediation of this radically exter-
nal domain of meaning is only possible if that socially organized meaning
has its own substantial form of being—a material medium of presence
and, consequently, of storage. This is the appearance of technicity. What

178   C H A PT E R 15



Vygotsky calls “natural memory” is the “retention of actual experiences
as the basis of mnemonic (memory) traces” (30). This kind of memory is
“very close to perception” since it is linked with what Vygotsky calls “direct
experience” of the world through our sense organs. This is what humans
share with animals, the “immediacy” of recollection via natural memory.
However, humans become truly human, cognitively, that is, with the addi-
tion of a new form of memory, one that even oral cultures possess. Whether
“simple memory aids,” the marking of sticks and using knots in strings,
or symbolic figures and eventually writing, human life is defined by a sur-
passing of the neuropsychological memory system by an interiorization of
a novel (that is to say, artificial) “culturally-elaborated organization of their
behavior” (38–39).
   As Vygotsky explains, the simple marking of a stick (something no ani-
mal has been observed to do) is a profound alteration of the mind, because
this sign is an extension of the biological form of memory. We might put
this even more strongly, since Vygotsky is not at all implying that the exter-
nal mark is just a substitute for biological memory. The entire psychologi-
cal order is transformed in this movement: “the human nervous system” is
now able “to incorporate artificial, or self-generated, stimuli, which we call
signs” (39). Only in a human mind is activity determined by “the creation
and use of artificial stimuli.” Memory is literally transferred to an “exter-
nal object” (51). Vygotsky writes that in the animal mind, “something is re-
membered,” whereas due to artificial storage, in “the higher form humans
remember something” (51).

The Technology of Insight


As a philosopher deeply influenced by the results of Gestalt research, Ernst
Cassirer conceptualized the intellectual capacity to strive toward goals as a
resolutely independent capacity, one that was constituted in fact as a sep-
aration from life itself. If life could of course tend toward its own ends, the
conscious appropriation of “these goals always implies a breach with this
immediacy and immanence of life.”51 What Cassirer calls spiritual action is
defined by its resistance to the world as given by our senses: “I thrust the
world back from itself.”52 For Cassirer, the animal is distinct from the human
because of this separation from the immediacy of life within a given envi-
ronment. By knowing the world, the human mind removes itself from that
world, or to be more precise, begins to construct another world, a symbolic
world, that is, a new space for organization and reorganization. But this
new order, as the Gestalt movement always emphasized, was itself threat-

                                                        TECHNIQUES OF INSIGHT     179



ened by obstacles and was engaged in a constant struggle for stability—its
separation did not imply an easy liberation.53 The main point to draw here
is that the mind as intelligent system constitutes itself as a new order and
organization, in its separation from the immediacy of our embodied expe-
rience. As Cassirer notes, with direct reference to Köhler’s study of ape in-
telligence, it is extremely difficult for even the higher animals to embark
on the productive “detour” because that always means violating the given,
that is, the “natural” biological behavior pattern. The logic of the insightful
mind is, we might say here, always artificial even if it behaves, as Köhler and
others argued incessantly, like other “natural” dynamic systems.54
    We can see this in Koffka’s acknowledgment of the historical and cul-
tural differentiation of human minds, something too often forgotten, he
thought, in experimental psychological research based on the assumption
that the “mature and cultured ‘West European’ type of man” was somehow
the “highest level of development.” In fact, psychology had to grapple with
radical difference.

   The world appears otherwise to us than it does to a negro in Central Africa,
   and otherwise than it did to Homer. We speak a different language from
   each of these, and this difference is a fundamental one, inasmuch as a real
   translation of their words into our own is impossible, because the catego-
   ries of thought are different. . . .
      We must not forget, then, that without a comparative psychology, with-
   out animal-, folk-, and child-psychology, the experimental psychology of
   the human adult is and must remain defective.55


This differentiation is exactly what we would expect from a psychic system
that is, in its symbolic operation, predicated on a radical detour, a radical
deviation from natural existence. As Henri Delacroix (a student of Bergson)
put it, the human is not just capable of adapting to a changing world: “Man
is above all adapted to what is not.”56
    As Köhler had shown so effectively, the tentative emergence of intel-
ligence in the ape was tied to the use and construction of implements;
however, the concrete implement is not so much a sign of a new form of
thought. The tool, in the context of Gestalt theory, is in effect only the
symptom of a psychic exception, the moment when a naturally evolved
mind behaves unnaturally. As Delacroix put it, we are a zoological species
but one marked by a tendency to change its own domain of existence.57 Like
organismic adaptation and internal regulation, human intelligence was
aimed at stabilizing conditions for the maintaining of life. “We might say,”

180   C H A PT E R 15



wrote Eugenio Rignano, “that technical inventions and industrial products,
from the first cave dwellings, the skins used for clothing, or the discovery of
fire to the most complex refinements of our own age, have always had but
one single goal, namely the artificial maintenance of the greatest possible
invariability in the environment, which is the necessary and sufficient con-
dition for preserving physiological invariability.”58 The challenge, then, was
to explain the particular exception of the human intellect as the irruption
of the artificial within the natural, the emergence, that is, of an exception
that could not be easily traced back to the neurophysiological order of the
brain. One of the ways to understand the theorization of human cognition
in this volatile period is to focus on the exception—to understand, that is,
the kinds of norms through which we could measure the defiance that was
human intelligence. But complicating that task was the fact that the very
notions of life, normality, and the exception were in this same moment be-
ing rethought (quite radically) in biological and physiological spheres of
theory and experimental inquiry. To approach the psychological and cogni-
tive human we must first engage with a line of thought that was redefining
the very function of cognition as it emerged in the living being, as a special
kind of biological phenomenon.
    The living being is one that uses novelty to serve stabilization. Evolu-
tionary progress is fueled, as Alfred North Whitehead once said, by the
“power of wandering,” the move into “new conditions,” because that is
when animals are challenged to transform. The human is the only animal
that has wandered across the globe, creating and transforming “habits of
life” that are founded on the capacity to construct artificial conditions of
life. But wandering is not merely physical. The human mind also wanders,
in that it is restless and not content with the world as it is. This is the key to
human vitality—“when man ceases to wander, he will cease to ascend in
the scale of being.” Hence the importance of “adventures of thought, adven-
tures of passionate feeling, adventures of aesthetic experience.” The adven-
ture of the human spirit on Earth depends on the diversity of human com-
munities, the countertendency to “uniformity.” However, at the same time,
Whitehead recognizes that the stability of social systems and other human
organizations require a certain normative routine of habit. The challenge
for human beings is the preservation of their intelligence, the attention
to the flash of novelty and the possibility of the response that is anarchic
transgression—without destroying all of the life-serving habits of repeti-
tion, the automatisms of biological, psychic, and social life.59
