26
Epistemologies of the Exosomatic




The hand was freed by the assumption of bipedal locomotion. Then new
selection pressures coming with the use of tools changed the ape hand into
the human hand. Our hand is the result of at least half a million years of tool
use. The uniqueness of the human hand, those features which distinguish
it from the hands of apes, is the result of culture. According to this theory,
it is futile to look for an ape-like ancestor with a large, fully opposable
thumb, because the human thumb as it exists today evolved after bipedal
locomotion and with the use of tools.
                                S. L. Washburn, “Speculations on the Interrelations
                            of the History of Tools and Biological Evolution” (1959)1




On the Exosomatic Origins of Human Culture


The question of technology was prominent in postwar anthropological re-
search on the nature of the human, in particular, the question raised by sev-
eral important archaeological discoveries that forced a reframing of all un-
derstanding of the evolutionary development of hominids: namely, when
did the first “human” actually appear in (pre)historical time? Clearly, single,
arbitrary morphological features would not be enough to separate the first
“genuine” human from the multiple ancestor species being identified in
the middle of the twentieth century. Instead, evolutionary theorists fo-
cused on cognitive and cultural distinctions. As the evolutionary biologist
Julian Huxley explained, the key to human evolution was the emergence
of culture itself, which was more than a form of behavior or the sudden ap-
pearance of some “capacity” in the brain. For Huxley, humans at some point
became capable of the sharing (not just expression) of thought itself. He de-
fined culture as a “shared or shareable body of material, mental, and social

                                                                                        289

290   C H A PT E R 26



constructions,” which he called “artifacts, mentifacts, and socifacts,” none
of which were at all deducible from any individual psychological or physio-
logical dimension—hence the essential differentiation of any true human
cultural organization.2
    As Huxley observes, the fact that cultural forms are in a sense autono-
mous systems and systems that exist only through human communicative
operations demonstrates that the evolution of humans in societies cannot
be explained at all in biological terms. The turn from “hominid” to genuine
human lies in this transition. “The capacity for the cumulative transmis-
sion of experience marked a critical point in the evolutionary process: the
passage from a biological to a cultural mode of evolution” (22). For Hux-
ley, this indicated something more than just the origin of “language.” All
elements of culture are communicative, in that they express something
more than their materiality. But what made it possible to organize and pre-
serve, and maintain, the existence of a culture through time? Crucial for
Huxley is the function of what he calls “noetic” expressions, the “aware-
ness organs” that provide the foundation for the collective nature of the
system of culture itself—its unity and capacity for continued life. Examples
would be all the symbols, rituals, beliefs, knowledge systems, sciences, and
philosophy: these “express awareness or experience in various organized
ways—aesthetic and symbolic as well as intellectual—and communicate
and transmit these organizations of experience to others” (18). Culture is
thought transmission.
    In a similar vein, the British biologist (and organ transplant pioneer)
Peter Medawar questioned the extent to which biological, evolutionary
principles could ever explain the peculiar status of the human in the long
history of life on the planet. To identify “instincts” as the origin of behav-
iors (animal or otherwise) would mean demonstrating that these were
“unlearned”—for example, by rearing birds in isolation to see if they build
certain kinds of nests found in natural conditions.3 Medawar does not deny
the existence of human instincts, of course.4 However, he is interested in
the fact that humans, unlike other animals are capable of forming what
could be called artificial instincts. Drawing here on Alfred North Whitehead,
Medawar observes, “Civilization advances by extending the number of im-
portant operations which we can perform without thinking about them”
(137). However, that must be qualified; culture preserves itself through
the automatization of learned behaviors. “Paradoxically enough, learning
is learning not to think about operations that once needed to be thought
about; we do in a sense strive to make learning ‘instinctive,’ i.e. to give
learned behaviour the readiness and aptness and accomplishment which

                                           E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   291



are characteristic of instinctive behaviour” (138). So, like Huxley, Medawar
will identify the exception of the human as this capacity to acquire pseudo-
instinctive routines that are collectively shared and transmitted.
    This is all to prepare the way for a new definition of the human within
the frame of the biological sciences: “Man is unique among animals be-
cause of the tremendous weight that tradition has come to have in provid-
ing for the continuity, from generation to generation, of the properties to
which he owes his biological fitness. It is the merest truism that man is a
tool- or instrument-using animal” (138–39). The crucial fact is not the use
of an implement, since all animals in effect “use” their own bodies and, oc-
casionally material objects, to obtain food and so on. Medawar cites Alfred
Lotka’s 1945 essay on evolution to reveal the specifically human quality of
our technicity: “to distinguish between the organs that we are born with
and organs that are made: endosomatic instruments for eyes, claws, wings,
teeth and kidneys, exosomatic instruments for telescopes, toothpicks, scal-
pels, balances and clothes” (139). Humans, with their exosomatic prosthet-
ics (which can be physical or sensory) do not disappear from the domain of
biology; they just are capable of “deputizing” artifacts for biological purposes,
just as nature does in the development and evolution of endosomatic or-
gans driven by similarly goal-oriented instinctive behavioral patterns (139).
    Here Medawar insists on the fundamental connection between human
exosomatic technological substitutes and the organic system of the body—
sensory instruments “report back” to our endosomatic sensory apparatus,
for example. And yet the autonomy of technology also lurks in his account.
If it is true that all technologies can be characterized by their artificial and
therefore human teleological organization, his allusions to new military
technologies raises questions concerning the nature of that grounding con-
nection: “The relationship between instrument and user may be very re-
mote, as it is with guided missiles and with engines designed to work with-
out attention, but their conduct is built into them by human design and, in
principle, their functional integration with the user is just the same” (140).
Still, Medawar’s point is an important one, at least for his understanding
of human cognition. He “deplores” the current fashion of “describing the
brain as a calculating machine,” not because he has any illusions about the
physiological structure of the nervous system, but because technologies are
never mirrors of biological functions. Technologies are extensions of func-
tion beyond the body. The computer, then, is an exosomatic brain, Medawar
argues: “It performs brain-like functions, much as cameras have eye-like
and clothes have skin-like functions, and motor-cars the functions endoso-
matically performed by legs” (140). As the neurobiologist J. Z. Young, who

292   C H A PT E R 26



was a friend of Alan Turing’s, put it in his cybernetically oriented book on
the octopus brain: “In his writing and his art, his speech and his machines
man manages to transfer outside his head at least some of the features of
the information that is within it. The formation of such artefacts, available
for the use of many, is our unique feature.”5
   As Huxley and others had already noted, Medawar will emphasize that
the technical sphere has its own evolutionary trajectory. Functions trans-
form, improve, or become vestigial. He cautions us, however, to remember
that both endosomatic (genetic) and exosomatic (technical) evolution are
biological, in that both are “equally modes of the activity of living things,
and . . . both are agencies—to some extent alternative agencies—for in-
creasing biological fitness, i.e. for increasing those endowments which
enable organisms to sustain themselves in and prevail over their environ-
ments” (141). The risks and rewards of exosomatic evolution lie in its rapid
and somewhat unpredictable course. This is due to the radically different
form of transmission. In humans, evolution of technological culture de-
pends on tradition, which, as Medawar writes, “is in the narrowest technical
sense, a biological instrument by means of which human beings conserve,
propagate and enlarge upon those properties to which they owe their pres-
ent biological fitness and their hope of becoming fitter still” (142). However,
tradition is also susceptible to catastrophic loss, unlike genetic transmis-
sion. The stability of human societies is a function of the stability of these
“nongenetic” channels, the artificial instincts that are social norms, norms
that at the same time must always be open to transformation in the wake of
technical innovations or environmental pressures.

The World of Objective Knowledge and Exosomatic Memory: Popper


Karl Popper is renowned (but also often dismissed) in the philosophy of
science for his development of the “falsification” theory of scientific dis-
covery and progress.6 Popper argued that scientists make hypotheses based
on various assumptions, theories, and past observations and yet cannot
demonstrate the truth of these hypotheses in any foolproof way. Instead,
progress in our knowledge of nature comes from the experimental testing
of hypotheses and their ultimate falsification—the fact that the hypothesis
turned out to be incorrect. The refashioning of hypotheses and the Darwin-
ian struggle in the arena of confirmation and falsification allowed Popper
to claim (somewhat unfashionably) that it was possible to have objective
knowledge—the title he gave to a collection of his essays published in 1972.

                                          E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   293



In light of Thomas Kuhn’s massively influential theory of paradigm for-
mation and radical paradigm changes within scientific disciplines (along-
side important work by figures such as Imre Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend)
Popper’s seemingly one-dimensional and self-consciously intellectualized
notion of scientific investigation was tacking against the more relativistic
or constructionist turns in the study of science, which would only become
more intense and wide-ranging with the emergence of the whole new field
of science and technology studies, not to mention historical-critical works
on knowledge and power from thinkers such as Michel Foucault.
   Yet Popper’s interest in objective knowledge has an interesting place in the
line of thought we have been following here: the conceptualization of ma-
chine intelligence, not as defined in AI research as a form of imitation or
simulation, but instead as the philosophical and anthropological theoriza-
tion of the essential technicity of intelligence itself.7
   Popper was working with and against the Kantian tradition in thinking
about perception, knowledge, and scientific epistemology. In a lecture from
1953 on the relation between conjecture and refutation in science, Popper
used the famous problem of induction to introduce his theory. For Popper,
Kant’s critique of Hume was sound, and philosophically important; yet Kant
had, Popper thought, pushed his argument too far. Popper agreed that the
mind “imposes its own laws upon nature,” as Kant claimed. Yet Popper re-
sisted the argument that this meant these laws were necessarily true, at least
in the way that Kant interpreted that. Popper insisted that the “laws” that
our mind imposed on nature were often inadequate. “Nature very often re-
sists quite successfully, forcing us to discard our laws as refuted; but if we
live we may try again.”8 One could argue that even the seemingly invincible
categories (e.g., space and time itself) were being falsified by new theories
and experimental research emerging in the twentieth century.
   In any case, Popper’s use of a key example is I think noteworthy here: as
a way of concluding the logical critique of Hume’s “psychological” model of
inductive inference, Popper suggests that we “consider the idea of building
an induction machine.” Turing had already suggested building such a ma-
chine, in his 1950 essay “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Popper
describes a “simplified world” of basic counters appearing in sequence, with
very basic variable characteristics, for example, “color.” Popper writes, “Such
a machine may through repetition ‘learn,’ or even ‘formulate,’ laws of suc-
cession which hold in its ‘world.’” Does this prove Hume right, that human
minds formulate inductive inferences through repetition? Popper thinks
that this thought experiment might seem convincing, but it is mistaken.

294      C H A PT E R 26



      In constructing an induction machine we, the architects of the machine,
      must decide a priori what constitutes its “world”; what things are to be taken
      as similar or equal; and what kind of “laws” we wish the machine to be able
      to “discover” in its “world.” In other words we must build into the machine
      a framework determining what is relevant or interesting in its world: the
      machine will have its “inborn” selection principles. The problems of similar-
      ity will have been solved for it by its makers who thus have interpreted the
      “world” for the machine. (64)


The true issue to be investigated is how the mind can form such a world
(echoes of Heidegger here) and make inferences within it but not be trapped
inside a completely subjective construction. In other words, how can we
conceptualize non–a priori knowledge as objective (i.e., with a logical va-
lidity that does not emerge merely from psychological principles of asso-
ciation or the like) given the fundamental limits of the human mind and
sensory system?
   As the subtitle of Popper’s 1972 book indicates, the answer would lie in
taking an “evolutionary approach” to the problem of knowledge.9 For Pop-
per, this was not merely a metaphor. He was interested in how the mind had
evolved (and this would link him with the pragmatists) and how the mind
could thus participate in the evolution of knowledge itself, that is to say, its
progressive objectification.
   We can start with Popper’s quite radical invocation of a truly objective
form of knowledge in his 1967 essay “Epistemology without a Knowing
Subject.” As he observes, whether a book is ever read or a library ever con-
sulted, a book is still a container of knowledge of some kind. He goes further,
however, noting that a book would be a book even if it hadn’t been written
by anybody. Whether consciously or not, Popper looks back to Charles Bab-
bage here, and his dream of an automatic logarithmic calculating machine.
Popper’s own version of the dream is a computer-generated and printed
collection of logarithms, perhaps “the best series of books of logarithms”
ever produced.10 It may not be consulted for fifty years, yet still it contains
“objective” knowledge. What constitutes a book is not its materiality but its
potential to be understood. To be understood means that the “marks” are
symbolic, capable of being interpreted somewhere else other than enclosed
within the pages of the book—a mediation of thinking. This is what Popper
means by objective: meaning that is not merely subjective and hence un-
knowable by any other entity. Here Popper cites his well-known theory of
the three “worlds” in which we live, the first sphere being the physical real-

                                          E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   295



ity of the universe, the second the psychic experiences of sentient beings,
and the third the world of meaning, or symbolic thought.11
   In this third sphere, causality and determination are not deducible from
the materiality of the objects with meaning but by the meaning that is in-
vested in the material form. As he explained in another essay, even the
physical universe was hardly a deterministic system, a “vast automaton,” as
earlier thinkers had believed. And yet there was still a lingering suspicion
that humans are just “machines,” an eighteenth-century idea solidified by
subsequent advances in psychology, evolution, and biology, and, as Pop-
per notes, still popular in his day among scientists, reframed now as “the
thesis that man is a computer.” (Here Popper cites Turing’s key essay from
1950 and the idea that the computer’s behavior would be indistinguishable
from that of a genuine human.)12 Popper resists this formulation: if con-
temporary physicists were now working with models with fundamental
indeterminism, the idea that the human being could be a machine was
hardly plausible. And yet human action could not be explicated as entirely
random. Popper suggests a new framework to understand human action—
what he calls “plastic control.” This is a way of explaining how an individ-
ual body could be controlled (if that is the right word) by the often ephem-
eral or abstract meaning of something. A series of small pieces of paper can,
for example, control (via calendar entries, tickets, maps, etc.) “the physical
movements of a man in such a way as to steer him back from Italy to Con-
necticut.”13 This kind of “causality” is soft, because there are so many points
of possible alternative paths that one might encounter.
   While we cannot of course deny the importance of the physical-mental
system of the individual, Popper’s philosophical interest in the third world
of symbolic meaning focuses on what he believes is the autonomy of this
sphere. And by that, he does not at all mean the automaticity of the sphere.
Just the opposite. As he noted in the essay on epistemology, the interaction
of elements in the third sphere of reality is always unpredictable. Even if
one designs a system to be fully systematic, “it will as a rule turn out partly
in unexpected ways. But even if it turns out as planned, some unexpected
interrelationships between the planned objects may give rise to a whole
universe of possibilities, of possible new aims, and of new problems.”14
   The key point for Popper is that the world of hypotheses, conjectures, the-
ories, language, and so on, is an objective world in that context, capable of
producing its own effects and its own unexpected possibilities. We could
say that it is created by human minds but operates according to an inde-
pendent logic of organization. The stronger argument is this: in the auton-

296      C H A PT E R 26



omous sphere of knowledge, there is (as in the biological world) an evolu-
tionary process of competition. Or, to be more precise, Popper redefines
biological evolution as a process of problem solving enacted by living be-
ings, with “tentative solutions” (theories, so to speak) physically instanti-
ated in organisms, solutions that will be preserved in the genetic memory
of the species if they do not lead to fatal errors.15 Without citation, Popper
employs Lotka’s terms here—endosomatic and exosomatic—to refer to the
different kinds of “theoretical” tools organisms use to solve the challenge
that is survival. “Exosomatic” tools such as spider webs or honeycombs are
examples of this. In the end, Popper can rewrite Kant in evolutionary terms:
our sensory systems are organized by “theories” that have been tested in
the real-world conditions of evolutionary struggle.16 This is why we have
certain “expectations” of the world.17 But as he will go on to suggest, it is the
special nature of human exosomaticism that allows us to accelerate evolu-
tionary time, to test conjectures and theories in the virtual environments of
the symbolic sphere.
   In line with the thinking exemplified by Leroi-Gourhan and other pa-
leoanthropologists of the period, Popper will identify the exception of the
human as a consequence of technology. This is clearly stated, in “Of Clouds
and Clocks”:

      Animal evolution proceeds largely, though not exclusively, by the modifica-
      tions of organs (or behaviors) or the emergences of new organs (or behav-
      ior). Human evolution proceeds, largely, by developing new organs outside
      our bodies or persons: “exosomatically,” as biologists call it. . . . These new
      organs are tools, or weapons, or machines, or houses.18


No doubt Popper borrowed Lotka’s terminology from his good friend, the
biologist Peter Medawar, who based his own theory of cultural evolution
on this concept of the exosomatic, as we just saw. And here Popper is mak-
ing a similar claim, namely, that while some animals may occasionally use
implements or make things (such as birds’ nests), something different is
going on within human life. The human species has in essence chosen to
bypass biological evolution, refusing to wait for improvements and instead
constructing them. Peter Skagestad explains that for Popper “human cul-
tural evolution proceeds largely through the invention and improvement,
via selection, of exosomatic organs that embody ideas that are generated by
the human mind, but that could not play the role they do if they remained
within the mind.”19
   And as Popper would go on to note, “The kind of . . . exosomatic evolu-

                                          E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   297



tion which interests me here is this: instead of growing better memories
and brains, we grow paper, pens, pencils, typewriters, Dictaphones, the
printing press, and libraries.”20 These are all technologies of thought. And
Popper, like Whorf and others before him, knows that the way humans
think is conditioned and enabled by the vehicles of thought—including the
very material prosthetics of thinking and remembering. New technologies
of “exteriorization” (to use Leroi-Gourhan’s term) will (as Engelbart and
other engineers would claim) augment our language and give us literally
“new dimensions” of possibility for the description of things and the expla-
nation of functions.
   Popper will add an important comment: “The latest development (used
mainly in support of our argumentative abilities) is the growth of comput-
ers.”21 Intelligence and the production of objective knowledge cannot be
understood apart from the evolution of meaning and especially the evo-
lution of meaning as it is exteriorized in exosomatic technical forms. The
“thinking subject” of Descartes must give way, then, to the idea of the in-
dividual mind being formed by, and participating in the formation of, the
autonomous sphere of symbolic meaning, a collection of interacting sys-
tems and subsystems that is continually producing unexpected new ideas,
problems, and conjectures.22

An Ecology of Mind and Machine: Bateson


The same year that Popper’s collection appeared (1972), Gregory Bateson
published his own collection of essays and lectures, spanning decades of re-
search and reflection. It is interesting to note that Bateson’s famous cyber-
netic theory of alcoholism intersects with Popper’s thinking about the au-
tonomous sphere of collective thought. The twelve-step programs should
counsel addicted individuals to submit to a “higher power” that they can-
not control, Bateson argued; however, that power needs to be understood as
that inherent in the systems of cultural formation and not some God.23 How-
ever, the line of thinking we can engage with here is Bateson’s idea that the
human mind is not self-enclosed but instead formed on the edge of differ-
entiated systems, at once biological, social, and technical. Our conscious life
of the mind is just a fragmented perspective on the complex of processes
that make up intelligent thought. The privileging of consciousness violates
the network, cutting the “arcs” of circuits that interconnect various systems
and processes. This is the ground of Bateson’s critique of artificial intelli-
gence: the computer does not have “mental processes” but only because the
computer is never a self-isolated system. “The computer is only an arc of a

298   C H A PT E R 26



larger circuit which always includes a man and an environment from which
information is received and upon which efferent messages from the com-
puter have effect. This total system, or ensemble, may legitimately be said
to show mental characteristics” (317). This is to admit, then, that thinking
is a process that takes place at least in part outside the body itself, or exoso-
matically. Thinking, especially intelligent thought, is (as Popper asserted as
well) a process that “operates by trial and error and has creative character”
(317). The boundaries of thinking cannot be drawn easily. In a famous ex-
ample (which harkens back to seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philos-
ophy) Bateson poses this thought experiment: “Consider a blind man with
a stick. Where does the blind man’s self begin? At the tip of the stick? At the
handle of the stick? Or at some point halfway up the stick? These questions
are nonsense, because the stick is a pathway along which differences are
transmitted under transformation, so that to draw a delimiting line across
this pathway is to cut off a part of the systemic circuit which determines
the blind man’s locomotion” (465).
    The “cybernetic epistemology” of Bateson is what I call an epistemology
of the exosomatic, an epistemology of the prosthesis. “The individual mind
is immanent but not only in the body. It is immanent also in pathways and
messages outside the body; and there is a larger Mind of which the individ-
ual mind is only a sub-system” (467). Therefore, for Bateson, technology is
never a mere tool or implement. The emergence of new forms of thought in
the computer era are the result of new networks of information and trans-
formation. One did not need to fixate on the rivalry between a human brain
and the electronic version. As he put it, “The lines between man, computer,
and environment are purely artificial, fictitious lines. They are lines across
the pathways along which information or difference is transmitted. They
are not boundaries of the thinking system.” The crucial thesis that we can
take from this epistemology: “What thinks is the total system” (491). If there
was a challenge to live up to, Bateson believed, it was the challenge of sta-
bilizing these hybrid systems, which were never naturally “homeostatic”
given the independent functions and structures that made them up. Stabil-
ity was constantly threatened by the incommensurable evolutionary ten-
dencies of technologies, social organizations, and psychic experience.
    What I have called exosomatic evolution was perhaps always going to be
the site of potential pathology, for Bateson. The fear was not that automatic
machines would compete with human beings. Rather, the introduction of
the exosomatic extension of human thinking and acting raised the possi-
bility of human beings becoming more and more constrained, more and
more subject to the “plastic control” of the collective systems embedded in

                                            E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   299



technologies that were now operating at a scale and pace that exceeded our
biological capacities. As Bateson warned:

   Today the purposes of consciousness are implemented by more and more
   effective machinery, transportation systems, airplanes, weaponry, medi-
   cine, pesticides, and so forth. Conscious purpose is now empowered to up-
   set the balances of the body, of society, and of the biological world around
   us. A pathology—a loss of balance—is threatened.
      It appears that the man-environment system has certainly been pro-
   gressively unstable since the introduction of metals, the wheel, and script.
   (440)


With Bateson’s warning in mind, we can return to the starting point of this
discourse concerning the relationship of human and machine in what Si-
mondon referred to as technical ensembles—the development of human-
computer interaction and intelligence amplification.

The Future of Thinking: Brains, Artificial Memory, and the Memex Machine


The term “intelligence amplification” was first coined by the cyberneticist
W. Ross Ashby in the 1950s. If machines could magnify physical forms of
power, it should be possible to create amplifiers of intelligence, Ashby be-
lieved. He began with the idea that a regular amplifier uses an input to orga-
nize the surplus of energy that the amplifier maintains in an undirected
form. In other words, an amplifier converts undirected power into directed
power, guided by the nature of the input. By analogy, one could imagine an
intelligence amplifier that converted undirected “information” into usable
form by using the initial intelligence of a human mind as a guide for selec-
tion and organization.
   This idea of intelligence amplification was central to Vannevar Bush’s in-
fluential essay in information technology, “As We May Think,” published in
the Atlantic Monthly right at the end of the war, in 1945, and shortly there-
after in Life magazine, in a condensed version but with provocative illus-
trations of then radically new knowledge technologies. With his extensive
experience as czar of American military scientific research, which included
the funding of computers and other automatic information systems, Bush
believed that one of the key challenges in peacetime would be the prolif-
eration of information. The individual researcher would, he predicted, be
overwhelmed by the increasing store of “undirected” prior knowledge—
and by the demands of producing scientific records of research. In this

300   C H A PT E R 26



speculative essay, Bush drew from his own technical experiences (which
included the construction of a valuable analog computer, the Differential
Analyzer) to sketch out a possible future, where technological advances
would in effect liberate the scientific worker and increase productivity.
   First, Bush showed how a researcher could use automatic recording de-
vices—a forehead camera and an automatic voice “printer”—that would
enable a focus of attention on the inquiry itself and not its documentation.
“His hands are free, and he is not anchored,” as Bush described this liber-
ated individual.24
   Second, Bush believed that certain analytic processes usually performed
by the scientist could be automated. The goal, again, was liberation. The
mind needed to do the work it did best, which was think creatively. There-
fore, Bush imagined (based on the reality that was digital computing, still a
classified technology) what he called an automatic logic processor, a device
that would relieve knowledge workers from repetitive mental labor. This
was at once an effort to increase efficiency and a way to cultivate the human
intellect. As Bush explained, “the creative aspect of thinking” always relied
on “intuitive judgment.” As soon as thinking fell into “an accepted groove,”
there would a restriction of that freedom to move beyond the norm. Here,
Bush argued, there would be “an opportunity for the machine” to assist the
mind, opening up its space to explore. “We may some day click off argu-
ments on a machine with the same assurance that we now enter sales on a
cash register” (105).
   The centerpiece of Bush’s visionary essay, and what marks it as not only
a classic in information technology but also a precursor to later develop-
ments in databases and networked computing, is (along with Turing’s orig-
inal imaginary computer of 1936) one of the more famous “virtual” inven-
tions of the era: a machine he called the Memex. The aim of this fantastic
technology was to make all prior recorded knowledge available instantly to
any one individual intellect. True thinking, for Bush, involved navigating
and selecting information that was relevant to the questions being inves-
tigated.
   And so the Memex was much more than a mere mechanical form of
scientific memory. It was, most critically, a technology for storing creative
thought itself. According to Bush, the human mind only progresses as it
makes connections and forms relationships within data. What was so rev-
olutionary about the Memex was that it allowed one to mark and perma-
nently save the associative “trails” of thought that had led to important and
productive insights, “as though the physical items had been gathered to-

                                          E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   301



gether from widely separated sources and bound together to form a new
book” (103)—although a book that could always be rewritten and reorgan-
ized. Silently, in the background, the salient relations of a trail of thought
are being indexed and recorded along with the original records, so that trail
can be resurrected, manually or, more importantly, automatically when as-
sociative trails met within the machine, without the presence of a human
subject. The Memex association memory was a mechanized duplicate of
the brain’s own memory structure but expanded and organized with per-
manent indexical markers.
    Moreover, the associative trails could be easily augmented and also
transferred from one Memex system to another, creating the possibility of
even more sophisticated integrations of knowledge, in and between disci-
plines, between humans and machines. As Bush wrote, “Wholly new forms
of encyclopedias will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails
running through them, ready to be dropped into the Memex and there
amplified” (104). The key to the revolution was the emergence of analogi-
cal systems of information organization that would allow researchers and
practitioners, not to mention semiautonomous machines themselves, to
generate relationships relevant to the problem or task at hand.
    Of course, the mind had always stored its thinking inside and outside of
the brain, in various media forms—think of scientific notebooks, diagrams,
lecture transcripts, and so on. However, Bush explained, the machinic com-
plexity and comprehensive power of the Memex opened up a new possibil-
ity, the chance to integrate in one space all of these rather dispersed (and
often incomplete) personal forms of human external memory with the en-
tire collective memory of stored human experience—and the individual’s
own neural memory and intelligent mind. When the intellect was at work
“inside” the Memex’s technological sphere, the long-standing boundary
between the brain and the collected knowledge of humanity was in essence
entirely effaced. Meanwhile, the mind’s unique intellectual capacities of
selection and association were being permanently inscribed in the exter-
nalized memory—and not just the fallible nervous system or its inefficient
material substitutes.
    Bush would end his essay with an even more fantastic speculation: phys-
ical interfaces—the display screens and marking devices depicted in the
essay—would eventually give way to direct transfers of electrical informa-
tion, passed from the external memory straight into our brains. The brain
was, after all, just another electrical machine. Bush would have learned that
from his cybernetic colleagues at MIT.

302      C H A PT E R 26



      We know that when the eye sees, all the consequent information is transmit-
      ted to the brain by means of electrical vibrations in the channel of the optic
      nerve. This is an exact analogy with the electrical vibrations which occur
      in the cable of a television set: they convey the picture from the photocells
      which see it to the radio transmitter from which it is broadcast. We know
      further that if we can approach that cable with the proper instruments, we
      do not need to touch it; we can pick up those vibrations by electrical induc-
      tion and thus discover and reproduce the scene which is being transmitted,
      just as a telephone wire may be tapped for its message. (108)


Neural memory could then be replaced by its artificial twin, freeing the cre-
ative mind to attend only to intelligent and creative thinking—the privi-
lege, Bush says, of “forgetting” (108).
    Bush’s vision of intelligence amplification was predicated on the libera-
tion of a thinking mind too often delayed or led astray by the wealth of in-
formation and the routines of analysis. Yet Bush never asked an important
question: Could thinking itself be transformed with this new technology?
    With the postwar unveiling of the computer (often called the “digital
brain”) and its entrance into commercial life Bush’s vision would seem in-
creasingly plausible. But the new machine did of course raise the possibil-
ity that human thinking itself could be automated. Our supposedly unique
intellectual abilities—intuition, insight, judgment—might be taken over
by computers. Already in the 1950s, for example, Allen Newell and Herbert
Simon were constructing a program that mimicked the heuristic problem-
solving methods of actual human beings. Of course, genuine AI was still
just a project in its infancy at this time. But computers held out tremendous
promise for contributing to intellectual activity in the ways Bush outlines.

Augmenting Human Knowledge: Engelbart’s Human-Computer System


The prime condition for the incorporation of technical objects into culture
would thus be for man to be neither inferior nor superior to technical
objects but rather that he would be capable of approaching and getting to
know them through entertaining a relation of equality with them, that is, a
reciprocity of exchanges; a social relation of sorts.
    Gilbert Simondon, On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects (1958)25


In his landmark essay in human-computer interaction, “Man-Computer
Symbiosis” (1960), J. C. R. Licklider admitted that in some “distant future”
it might turn out that “electronic or chemical machines will outdo the hu-
man brain in most of the functions we now consider exclusively within our

                                         E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   303



domain.”26 However, for the present, Licklider was more interested in le-
veraging the power of the computer to amplify human intellectual capac-
ity. The term “symbiosis” came from biology, and Licklider pointed out that
it signified a relationship between two “organisms.” Each, he noted, would
die without the other’s presence. This made it clear that Licklider was not
interested in the computer as just another tool. He suggested instead that
human minds should cooperate with the computer, so that their respective
strengths would be multiplied, making a more intelligent whole. The fu-
ture of the human mind depended on the computer. As he wrote, “The hope
is that . . . human brains and computing machines will be coupled together
very tightly, and the resulting partnership will think as no human brain has
ever thought and process data in a way not approached by the information-
handling machines we know today” (4).
    The goal was to reduce or eliminate the “mechanical” work of the mind
by increasing the responsiveness of computers. “Computing machines will
do the routinizable work that must be done to prepare the way for insights
and decisions,” he explained. Insights and decisions (what we might, with
Turing, call the uncomputable)—that was the proper sphere of the human
mind. Inquiry was a process. One formed hypotheses, explored implica-
tions, performed tests, imagined alternatives (6). Here the speed and flex-
bility of the computer’s representation of data would free the mind to think.
This echoes Bush’s formulations. However, and this is even more import-
ant, according to Licklider, the computer had an ability to organize infor-
mation and data in ways that were in fact beyond human capacity. In other
words, the computer would be able to put the human mind into radically
new zones of thinking. It would raise unpredictable questions, and reveal
unexpected opportunities and challenges that would be unimaginable,
quite literally, without the kind of information processing carried out by
high-speed computers. The computer was like those physical prostheses
that allowed qualitatively different kinds of work to be accomplished by the
extensions of the body.
    This is why the computer could now be seen as essential (and not just
supplementary) to the progress of thought, not just a new tool. As Licklider
wrote, this “symbiotic partnership will perform intellectual operations
much more effectively than man alone can perform them” (4). Given the
intractable problems humanity faced in this moment of history (including
the threat of nuclear annihilation), intelligence amplification was consid-
ered necessary. So Licklider’s imagined world of interactive computing was
less a division of labor between man and machine and more a choreogra-
phy that would integrate the functions of both into a greater whole. The

304   C H A PT E R 26



power of the mind and the power of the computer would be amplified only
within this new hybrid entity. The implication was that intelligence would
now be a function of this symbiotic unity, not the mind alone, using a “tool.”
    Douglas C. Engelbart—revered as the developer of the computer mouse
and revolutionary user-oriented systems such as word processing in the
1960s—was deeply influenced by Bush’s essay “As We May Think.”27 En-
gelbart relates that he had read it while posted in the Philippines during
his service in the navy. So when Engelbart had the opportunity to work on
human-computer interactions at the Stanford Research Institute in the late
1950s, he would from the start emphasize that any new innovation had to
be understood as part of a larger network of technologies and practices that
supported the activity of the human mind. Having worked on building Cal-
ifornia’s first digital computer at the University of California, Berkeley, in
the 1950s, Engelbart understood well the revolutionary potential of this
new technology. As he wrote in 1960, “In our culture, there has recently ap-
peared a ‘symbol-manipulation’ artifact of such power that we feel certain
it will do much to ‘extend man’s intellect.’” However, Engelbart also knew
that this new artifact had to be integrated into a larger knowledge system in
order to work effectively: “The computer, as a demand-accessible artifact in
man’s local environment, must be viewed as but one component in the sys-
tem of techniques, procedures, and artifacts that our culture can provide to
augment the minds of its complex problem solvers.”28
    Clearly, Engelbart saw that the human mind was embedded in a larger,
and culturally mediated, system of technological activity. The locus of that
relationship was the nervous system. That nervous system had, according
to Engelbart, certain “basic capabilities” (including perception, memory,
abstraction, and, most notably, intuition and judgment). However, when we
interacted with the world, the nervous system used mediating elements to
“couple” itself to concrete problems. These elements Engelbart called “aug-
mentation means.”
    These were not merely tools in the usual sense of the term. Augmenta-
tion for Engelbart was always meant to include language, technologies, and
procedures. The obvious implication was that the basic human nervous
system, embedded in a culture and a field of artifacts, did not operate au-
tonomously. Our brains had to be trained to behave in certain ways in order
to use the tools in the first place. The nervous system had to learn, in other
words, a shared way of life. As Engelbart pointed out, somewhat provoc-
atively, “What really runs our society is the central nervous system of its
individuals.”29 Here he was acknowledging that social and cultural norms,
though independent and largely autonomous, can be instantiated only in

                                           E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   305



the behavior of an individual. But this meant that the individual nervous
system was being shaped from the very beginning. “These [augmentation]
means have for the most part been evolved within the culture in which he is
born, and he has been training in their use since childhood.” Engelbart’s fa-
mous report of 1962, Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework,
needs to be read as a philosophical manual for the retraining of the human
mind. It was no simple technical report, he said in a personal letter to none
other than Vannevar Bush, but instead “the public debut of a dream.”30
   The report opened with a thought experiment. Imagine, Engelbart says,
an “aborigine” brought for the first time to a modern Western city.31 De-
spite a physiology identical to ours, this being would be totally incapable
of navigating our world. He would be unable to accomplish the simplest
tasks (using the telephone, for example) because he would not possess the
knowledge or skills to do so. And of course the reverse would also be true.
As part of a culture, human individuals have what Michael Polanyi called
“tacit knowledge.” The crucial starting point of Engelbart’s study, then, is
the fact that a basic human nervous system never comprehends its world
directly; it perceives and acts only through and with external mediation. If
we wanted to harness “neural power” for the new challenges of the postwar
world, then we had to understand how thinking was conditioned and en-
abled by external forms of extension and supplementation.
   According to Engelbart, the mind was always “augmented” in three dif-
ferent ways:

   First, by artifacts. These are the material tools and implements that allow
      the mind to manipulate things—whether physical or symbolic.
   Second, by language. Heavily influenced by the work of the linguist Benja-
      min Lee Whorf, Engelbart believed that language formed the very struc-
      ture of comprehension for each culture. As we saw, Whorf thought that
      “every language is a vast pattern-system, different from others.” Each
      culture possesses a framework of categories that “channel reason.” En-
      gelbart believed that intellectual concepts were conditioned by the orga-
      nization of a language.
   Third, by methods. These were the procedures and strategies that organized
      activity. These methods were evolved within a culture and inherited by
      individuals through processes of education, both formal and informal.


Finally, Engelbart explains that these three means of augmentation—
artifacts, language, and method—are not operative until the individual
mind is trained in their use. An active mind is one already trained to work in

306    C H A PT E R 26




Figure 26.1. From Douglas C. Engelbart, Augmenting Human Intellect: A
Conceptual Framework (1962).




certain ways. That training has as its object the nervous system of the indi-
vidual, a nervous system capable of taking on habits. “The system we want
to improve can . . . be visualized as a trained human being together with his
artifacts, language, and methodology.”32 He called this the H-LAM/T sys-
tem: that is, a Human using the Language, Artifacts, and Methods in which
he is Trained. (Figure 26.1.) So what did this mean for the project of intel-
ligence amplification? To improve the human intellect meant transform-
ing this H-LAM/T system as a system—“a functional whole” (16). Engelbart
emphasized the importance of a holistic point of view; this system should
be studied “as an interacting whole from a synthesis oriented approach”
(15). However important the human element, Engelbart knew that what we
called intelligence was something expressed in the behavior of these com-
plex systems with multiple elements and points of integration. With respect
to the H-LAM/T assemblage, Engelbart insisted that if one asked “where”
its “intelligence was embodied,” one would be “forced to concede that it it
elusively distributed throughout a hierarchy of functional processes” (18).
Intelligence was derived from “organization” and not a simple capacity that
could be easily isolated.
    So like Licklider, Engelbart believed that intelligence would be im-
proved by the evolution of the active system. There was no independent
mind that would be the object of transformation. Engelbart used the (now
cliché) term synergy to explain how the combination of elements could cre-
ate something greater than the sum of the parts. It was also important to

                                             E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   307



recognize that the system was always in transition, as culture evolved and
technologies progressed. The mind was always the product of a new kind
of evolution, one that no longer was limited by biological developments.
As Engelbart put it, with a direct reference to Ashby’s notion: “In amplify-
ing our intelligence we are applying the principle of synergistic structuring
that was followed by natural evolution in developing the basic human capa-
bilities.” In other words, the idea was that humans could artificially evolve
their systems of intelligence by targeting the improvement of augmenta-
tions. The implication was in fact even more radical, however. Human cog-
nition itself, according to this framework, was no longer really dependent
on biological conditions at all; it was, so to speak, naturally prosthetic.

   What we have done in the development of our augmentation means is to
   construct superstructure that is a synthetic extension of the natural structure
   upon which it is built. In a very real sense as represented by the steady evo-
   lution of our augmentation means the development of artificial intelligence
   has been going on for centuries. (19; my emphasis)


Therefore, as Engelbart argued extensively in this text, an increase in our
problem-solving ability would come from the reorganization of our tech-
nical and cultural augmentations, which would in turn literally reorganize
the brain and provide new “mental structures” that would be the basis of
productive new mental behavior: “this process characterizes the sort of evo-
lution that our intellect-augmentation means have been undergoing since
the first human brain appeared” (14; my emphasis). The project was one to
“greatly accelerate this evolutionary process” whereby new technologies
and techniques were integrated into knowledge systems.
   Crucial to this analysis was the (by then) obvious fact that the digital com-
puter promised to thoroughly disrupt and transform the current H-LAM/T
systems. Indeed, Engelbart thought that it would prepare the way for a new
stage of evolution in intellectual power—but only if the computer was in-
tegrated correctly. With much more detail and theoretical exposition than
Licklider’s earlier analysis, Engelbart showed how the high-speed, auto-
mated manipulation of symbols would inevitably produce concepts and epis-
temological possibilities that the human mind had never before imagined.
   These new representations and organizations would not just be used by
the mind. These adventures in symbolic exploration would in fact trans-
form the mind. This was Engelbart’s “neo-Whorfian” (his term) hypothesis:
the technological means of symbol manipulation structured the intellect
through the transformation of our concepts. Engelbart’s report was essen-

308   C H A PT E R 26



tially a blueprint for the productive, beneficial integration of computers
into the H-LAM/T system. An essential part of this plan was the effort to
make computers easier to work with, so they would require less specialized
training. But the higher goal was to improve the performance of the hu-
man intellect. Like Licklider and Bush before him, Engelbart knew that this
meant isolating what was specifically human within the system, so that the
intellect could be liberated from functions that could be carried out by tech-
nological prostheses.
    In Engelbart’s vision, the mind was primarily used in the system as an
executive function. The executive in the system selected, organized, and
modified the many processes that were available for solving particular
problems. The human mind functioned as the “attention” mechanism for
the system (44). The intellect had a finite capacity determined by the struc-
ture of our brain. So it needed to be freed so that it could pay attention to
what was significant—the mind was responsible for making decisions. And
the mind had to be open to the revelation of insights that would point the
system in a productive direction. The computer, then, was not an instru-
ment of ruthless efficiency, according to Engelbart. Rather, it would give
the human mind the space to roam and experiment and give it concepts
and possibilities that went far beyond the usual forms of language. And so,
much like critics of AI in the 1960s, such as Hubert Dreyfus, Engelbart did
not think that the “human feel for a situation” would ever be automated.
Hunches, intangibles, trial and error, all of these unformalized thought
processes would be supported—not supplanted—by “sophisticated meth-
ods and high-powered electronic aids” (1).
    Now, if the computer only made more processes available to the mind,
the system would not be improved; in fact, the opposite might be true if
complexity overwhelmed the mind. What the computer offered to the in-
tellect was rapid and flexible representations of information so that new
relationships and possibilities would emerge. The goal was both to relieve
the mind of the burden of searching for information and to organize it flu-
idly in changing conditions so that the mind could move in new directions
when necessary. The computer, Engelbart noted, can “stretch, bend, fold,
extract, and cut” data, in rapid response to the moves of the human mind.
This responsiveness was critically important. Engelbart knew that problem
solving was never a linear and predictable process, and not one that could
be normatively prescribed.
    Contemporary processes of symbol manipulation “penalize” the kind
of productive error and anarchy of genuine exploration, so it was crucial

                                          E P I ST E M O LO G I E S O F T H E E XO S O M AT I C   309



to give the revolutionary system the liberty that was productive errancy.
“When the course of action must respond to new comprehensions, new
insights, and new intuitive flashes of possible explanations or solutions, it
will not be an orderly process.” And therefore, as Engelbart wrote, “it is part
of the real promise in the automated H-LAM/T systems of tomorrow that
the human can have the freedom and power of disorderly processes” (45).
   In Engelbart’s vision, the human is positioned as a crucial site of disrup-
tion within the technical ensemble. The mind is aligned with normative
procedures and automated systems but, most important perhaps, also with
breaking into routines and introducing new ones. Decision and insight are
not programmable even if the human mind is, as Engelbart argued, a prod-
uct of its cultural programming. At this point we can, without too much vi-
olence to the text, connect the human mind’s capacity to establish direction
and receive illumination, its intellectual “openness,” and its susceptibility
to “programming.” The human mind is formed as a way of life, in an “in-
tegrated domain.” But fundamentally, the mind is always something more
(or to be more precise, something less) than a way of life. That openness is
the space that defines the possibility of freedom and invention—autonomy
within automaticity.

The Question concerning Exosomatic Technology


Several years after he submitted his report on human augmentation, Engel-
bart would write of the coming threats to the institutions of our modern so-
ciety. The challenge was the incongruities within the process of exosomatic
evolution, or rather, the instabilities generated by the independent logics of
technology. Engelbart will use the same kind of organismic language, link-
ing the concept of biological evolution to the evolution of human technicity
and the institutions of our automatic age.

   Human organizations can be likened to biological organisms. . . . Orga-
   nizations evolve too; their mutations are continually emerging and being
   tested for survival value within their environment. I happen to feel that
   evolution of their environment is beginning to threaten today’s organiza-
   tions, large and small—finding them seriously deficient in their “nervous-
   system” design—and that the degree of coordination, perception, rational
   adaptation, etc. which will appear in the next generation of human orga-
   nizations will drive our present organizational forms, with their “clumsy
   nervous systems,” into extinction. It is these “nervous-system” functions,

310     C H A PT E R 26



      within human organizations, where I find the most significant intellectual
      complications stemming from the forthcoming multi-access computer
      networks.33


We can end with a similar warning, from the evolutionary biologist Gar-
rett Hardin, writing in a computer science journal of the special danger of
exosomatic evolution of what we normally think of as mere “tools” under
our control.34 Hardin wrote that normally the move to exteriorize functions
does not result in any “overall” loss to the system as a whole: “The invention
of the knife caused no over-all loss of function. The function was merely
moved (in part) from inside the man’s skin to the outside; from his jaw,
which is part of him, to his knife which is not. The knife is one of a large
class of devices to which a wise old evolutionist named A. J. Lotka gave the
name exosomatic adaptations—‘outside the body’ adaptations.”35 However,
the exosomatic technology will lead to a “degeneration” of the natural, en-
dosomatic capacity. Clearly, when we move into the realm of exosomatic
intelligence, new dangers are going to arise. We risk, that is, the “accidental
loss” of thinking itself in some form. Hence Hardin’s suggestion of “intel-
lectual” athletics that would maintain human intelligence in the wake of
advanced networked computer systems. It is ironic that Hardin’s article was
paired with an advertisement for just such a system.
