16
Brains in Crisis,
Psychic Emergencies



In 1917, the pioneering American neuropsychologist Shepherd Ivory Franz
introduced an article by recounting an earlier survey he had made of widely
used textbooks in psychology and physiology. He noted that the predomi-
nant view of the brain taught in American universities was “organological”;
that is, the textbooks portrayed “the cerebrum as a collection of spatially
related conglomerates of cells and fibers, each conglomerate having a cer-
tain function (perhaps mental).”1 This was a simple model, “easily appre-
hended by the instructor and easily taught to the student.”2 But it was, he
noted, as if Sherrington had never published his groundbreaking depiction
of the integrative action of the nervous system. The importance of neural
(and by extension, organismic) unity championed by many figures before
the war (including Franz himself) needed to be reconfirmed and made the
center of new research. The evidence was clearly unassailable, as neurolo-
gists had repeatedly demonstrated (as we have seen) that the brain could
recover functions despite the destruction of specific cerebral areas usually
associated with them. What Franz argued here was that functional capacity
was not strictly tied to a specific locale in the brain, since function could be
recovered after injury or damage.3
   Franz was drawing here on his own laboratory research in this area, con-
ducted with the collaboration of the young Karl Lashley, including experi-
ments on rats that revealed that “the removal of large parts of the frontal
portions of the brain does not greatly interfere with a learned reaction.”4
Understanding this would require conceiving the nervous system “as a
great connecting system” that transformatively organizes stimuli to pro-
duce “adjustments of the organism” and, importantly, as a system that can
create new and different pathways, as demonstrated in the “pathological

                                                                             181

182   C H A PT E R 16



phenomena.”5 As Constantin von Monakow had argued and other research-
ers confirmed, “the brain functions as a whole.”6
    Looking back to Hughlings Jackson, as many in this era did, Henry Head
observed that the “more perfect” and hence more flexible and wide-ranging
adaptive functions are connected “on a higher anatomical plane of the ner-
vous system.”7 Here the system gains more freedom of response; the ner-
vous system can more carefully regulate the “needs of the moment” in rela-
tion to the “reaction of the organism as a whole” (475). When the linkages
between centers of integration and correlation are breached in pathologi-
cal situations, they are not “repaired” and thus restored. The function is re-
covered through what Head will call a “fresh integration carried out by all
available portions of the central nervous system” (549). There is, in other
words, a response to an internal emergency that is somewhat parallel to the
shifting conditions of the external environment. Both, we could say, consti-
tute “a total reaction of the organism to the new situation” (549). A patho-
logical reaction, Head would write, “is a new condition, the consequence of
a fresh readjustment of the organism as a whole to the factors at work at the
particular functional level disturbed by the local lesion” (498).
    The turn to more holistic and adaptive models of the brain was not a
complete rejection of all localization of function. However, the extensive
number of cases of brain injury and recovery that neurologists had encoun-
tered in the Great War, as well as new phenomena such as shock, which
was not tied (in either its physiological or psychological forms) to any one
specific site or damage, challenged any simple organizational model of the
brain and nervous system.8
    Walter Cannon would study the problem of physiological “shock” via ex-
aminations of numerous soldier-patients suffering extreme injuries during
the Great War and also in controlled animal experiments that induced
shock artificially through massive bloodletting and the like.9 Cannon’s in-
terest in these organismic reactions to extreme emergency conditions led
him to the idea that shock, like the “fight or flight” mechanism, was not just
a particular local “correction” of a physiological parameter, but instead a
new state of being that the body entered under stress: “Every complex orga-
nization must have more or less effective self-righting adjustments in or-
der to prevent a check on its functions or a rapid disintegration of its parts
when it is subjected to stress.”10
    What J. B. S. Haldane called the “new” physiology was one that paid
attention not just to the processes and mechanisms of auto-regulation
but also their integration in terms of the unity of the organism.11 “What is
health?” As Haldane says, health is what is “normal” for an organism. How-

                                       B R A I N S I N C R I S I S, P SYC H I C E M E R G E N C I E S   183



ever, the biological sense of normal turned on the idea of “maintaining in
integrity all the interconnected normals which . . . manifest themselves in
both bodily structure and bodily activity” (77–78). The new physiology en-
tailed a new pathology, for health would be defined not in terms of static
norms but with respect to “varying conditions of environment” and the
need for an organism to “reassert itself under totally abnormal conditions.”
The normal, wrote Haldane, is an “elastic and active organization,” not a
rigid mechanism but rather a “manifestation or expression of the life of the
organism regarded as a whole which tends to persist” (149). A machine is
incapable of reproduction, since a machine would have no active “unity”
that would guide the organization of matter (142). The machine also could
not repair itself; it could not maintain its normality after accidents or in-
juries. Maintaining the norm, for Haldane, was perhaps better understood
as the “active maintenance of composition” (67). A critical question in this
context was, again, the identity of the human as an exceptional organism.
Haldane would note that the “conscious” organism could deploy a vast ar-
ray of responses to its environment, given that it could be determined not
only by the present sensory experiences but also by past experiences and,
maybe more important, possible future events.

The Catastrophic Reaction: Crisis and Order from Lashley to Goldstein


Clinical and experimental research on the brain in the early twentieth cen-
tury was systematically exploring the ability of the brain to reorganize in
the face of challenges—including the radical challenge of grave injury. The
shock of disorder opened up the possibility of a new form of order that was
not explicable in merely mechanical terms.
    Karl Lashley’s research in the 1920s, for example, while initially aimed
at finding the precise neural location of memory traces, in fact ended up
revealing the plasticity of the brain’s performance grounded in a structural
complexity that defied localization.12 After teaching animal subjects certain
tasks (maze running, for example), Lashley proceeded to surgically destroy
certain parts of the brain, increasing the mass excised in subsequent rep-
etitions of the task. Following these traumatic injuries, the animals were
still able to recover their earlier performances, revealing that a significant
reorganization of the brain’s activity had taken place.
    The unity of the brain’s systematic complexity must then flow from
some comprehensive frame for these emergency reorganizations, which
were, according to Lashley, themselves just an affirmation of the brain’s
normal capacity to integrate its activity across the many different areas of

184   C H A PT E R 16



the brain. “The whole implication of the data is that the ‘higher level’ inte-
grations are not dependent upon localized structural differentiations but
are a function of some general, dynamic organization of the entire cerebral
system.”13 Lashley called this capacity “equipotentiality,”14 alluding to how
the brain sought multiple paths for its activity, thereby giving it the capac-
ity to circumvent damage by relocating activity to some other part of the
brain. Lashley would cite here both Henry Head and Kurt Goldstein, among
others, to support his conclusions drawn from the research on the dynamic
and plastic aspects of cerebral organization after brain injury.15 Lashley
would suggest, basing his claim on both animal studies and contempo-
rary research in psychology and psychiatry, that there was a relationship
between the spontaneity and plasticity of what we call intelligence (how-
ever ill defined that might be in the context of human cognition) and the
structural openness of the brain and nervous system.16
    As Constantin von Monakow had put it in an earlier, massive book on
brain localization, the disruption of any one part of the brain led to a more
general “shock” of the whole system. He called this event diaschisis (from
the Greek διάσχισις, “shocked throughout”). In von Monakow’s words, “Any
injury suffered by the brain substance will lead (just as lesions in any other
organ) to a struggle [Kampf] for the preservation of the disrupted nervous
function, and the central nervous system is always (though not always to
the same degree) prepared for such a struggle.”17 The pathological turn
awakened a total response (as Sherrington’s theory would predict), aimed
not at a simple return to the original order, but rather to an order that rees-
tablished stable functioning but in a new form altogether. As von Monakow
(in a book cowritten by the French neurologist R. Mourgue) later argued, in-
jury or other shocks were an incitement to break norms and establish a new
order: “It is a question of combat, of an active struggle for the creation of a
new state of affairs, permitting a new adaption of the individual and the its
milieu. The whole organism intervenes in this struggle.”18
    Extensive clinical experience with brain-damaged patients (many of
them soldiers with bullet wounds and other war injuries) furnished the
data for Kurt Goldstein’s innovative work on the nature of unity and plas-
ticity in biological systems, which brought together in a grand synthesis
the concepts of order and reorganization as explored in physiological re-
search on regulation and neurological research on plasticity and recovery.
In his classic 1934 book, which was influenced by Gestalt theory and the
idea of brain “shock” championed by von Monakow, as well as broader ho-
listic forms of thought in the interwar period, Goldstein defined the organ-

                                       B R A I N S I N C R I S I S, P SYC H I C E M E R G E N C I E S   185



ism as a unity, arguing that in its continual struggle with the world, within
the essential “milieu” of its activity, the organism maintained its stability
by constantly reorganizing itself to accommodate new conditions.19 Gold-
stein’s focus on “pathological” data was, to be sure, aimed at illuminating
the normal functions of a dynamic organismic life (50). This approach did
not, however, involve an analysis of the “mere defects” (48) of the organ-
ism as a way of capturing, in an inverse image, the “normal” state. Instead,
Goldstein saw that the pathological state had its own particular character-
istics, its own symptomology, its own way of being.
    The difference between healthy and pathological states, for Goldstein,
was the difference between “ordered” and “disordered” behavior. In the first
case, the performances of the total organism were, he said, “constant, cor-
rect, adequate.” The disordered state is defined by shock; Goldstein refers
to the activity of the organism in this state as a catastrophic reaction. This
Katastrophenreaktion was “disordered, inconstant, inconsistent” and had a
“disturbing aftereffect” (48–49). In normal conditions, the organism is chal-
lenged by its milieu and meets this challenge with a reaction that will bring
the organism into equilibrium with its environment. In the pathological
state, the organism has no proper response at hand. And yet, as Goldstein
stressed, the organism is constantly seeking an ordered condition—and in-
jured, shocked, creatures do often return to some form of health. His inter-
est, then, was to show how the organism rediscovered stability and normal-
ity after a catastrophic reaction.
    The key was self-modification, an autonomous capacity to establish
norms. As Goldstein argued, with numerous examples drawn from a va-
riety of scientific disciplines and experiments, organisms have the capac-
ity to modify themselves and their performances so that they can reduce
or minimize any defect that had led to a catastrophic reaction (52). New
paths to a successful performance are found, or, alternatively, new milieus
are sought out that do not require the same kind of adaptation previously
required (105). This reorganization is explained, by Goldstein, as the ten-
dency of the unity of the organism to seek closure—what the Gestalt the-
orists called the law of Prägnanz (293). The catastrophic reaction, then, is
not a mere interlude between two different states of health but instead an
interruption that demands a new foundation of order for the organism as
a whole, because it must overcome the persistence of a defect in its being.
This rupture demands a form of decision. This is why the pathological state,
for Goldstein, can best reveal the essence of the organismic unity. Pathol-
ogy shows in sharp relief how a living being seeks out novel forms of order

186     C H A PT E R 16



to overcome a disordered state. In the healthy being there is an occlusion of
this capacity, due to the relative automaticity and predictability of the nor-
mal ordered responses.
    The successful response to a catastrophic reaction is clearly not a return
to the previous state. “The normal person, in his conquest of the world,
undergoes, over and again, such states of shock. If in spite of this, he does
not always experience anxiety, this is because his nature enables him to
bring forth creatively situations which insure his existence” (237). The cat-
astrophic reaction gives us insight, then, into the creative action that is the
organism’s essential nature, according to Goldstein. Unity is a tendency of
the organism as it appears in a temporal process of existence, as it continu-
ally seeks to find its order, although this order is, at every moment, always
put into question by the constantly changing conditions of the milieu.
“Therefore reactions scarcely ever occur that correspond to a perfectly ade-
quate configuration of the organism and the surroundings” (227). Gold-
stein proposes that the organism is never entirely “normal” because at each
moment it is being challenged by the environment and must continually
seek the proper adjustment: “Normal as well as abnormal reactions (‘symp-
toms’) are only expressions of the organism’s attempt to deal with certain
demands of the environment” (35).
    And so Goldstein writes that the life of the organism can be considered
a series of what he calls “slight catastrophes” (leichter Katastrophenreak-
tionen), where inadequacies are first confronted and then “new adjust-
ments” or a “new adequate milieu” is sought to respond to this lack (227).
The serious catastrophe is in effect continuous with this normal, constantly
repeated weaker form of catastrophe; what is different is only the scale and
intensity of the reaction. The key point is that catastrophic shocks of some
form are essential to the organismic being.
    In the end, Goldstein will admit that perhaps we should not even oppose
“Being-in-order” and “Being-in-disorder” because the catastrophic states
of disordered behavior are foundational opportunities for achieving some
degree of order—and that order is always in question. “If the organism is
‘to be,’ it always has to pass again from moments of catastrophe to states of
ordered behavior” (388). The catastrophic reaction manifests the essence
of life itself:

      All the minor catastrophic reactions to which the organism is continually
      exposed thus appear as inevitable way stations in the process of its actual-
      ization, so to speak, as the expression of its inescapable participation in the
      general imperfections of the living world. (392)

                                         B R A I N S I N C R I S I S, P SYC H I C E M E R G E N C I E S   187



Thus, for Goldstein, normative behavior is never really the norm. Nor-
mal ordered existence is a product of the essential—if pathological—
disequilibrium of the organism and between the organism and its surround-
ing condition, its milieu: “These shocks are essential to human nature
and . . . life must, of necessity, take its course via uncertainty and shock.”20
Unity is the very presupposition of the organism as a dynamic flux of opera-
tions and adjustments, yet unity was never fully present in any one place—
there was no organ of unity, no topological order representing it. Unity was
the condition of an organism individualizing life, which would never be
given in advance.
