17
Bio-Technicity in Von Uexküll




Whoever wants to hold on to the conviction that all living things are only
machines should abandon all hope of glimpsing their environments.
 Jakob Von Uexküll, A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans (1934)1



The important question of neural and biological unity was, as we have seen,
framed by the many different theoretical explorations of organization be-
tween the wars. Scientific work on biological organization in this moment
had left behind any belief in active vital “forces” that were ad hoc inven-
tions, yet at the same time, there was also widespread resistance to any
strict “mechanistic” account of the kind of active interventions that main-
tained unity in moments of extreme crisis and emergency. How could orga-
nization and spontaneous reorganization be comprehended scientifically?
This question was at the heart of experimental and theoretical work in em-
bryology (morphogenesis), biology, and physiology. An understanding of
the specific nature of human existence, the presence of intelligence and
cultural order for example, depended on new conceptualizations of order
that would be up to the task of comprehending its ontological status.
   From the beginning, Jakob Von Uexküll’s central concern in his biologi-
cal research (focused on simple ocean-dwelling organisms) and more philo-
sophical thinking was precisely the nature of organization. Inspired by Kant
but also his friend and neo-vitalist Hans Driesch, whom he met at the ocean
research station in Naples in 1901, Von Uexküll emphasized that every liv-
ing being was distinguished by what he called a Bauplan, or blueprint.2 He
also believed that the essence of the mental life of organisms, even rather
lowly ones, must also be studied biologically. This meant paying attention
not simply to structure, the mere arrangement of things, but to the “frame-

188

                                               B I O - T E C H N I C I TY I N VO N U E X K Ü L L   189



work” of order, which denotes the way that functional parts work together
in a unified system. No matter how close we get to the “minimum” of ma-
terial substance, the unified framework could never be explained as the
consequence of mere material causality. This Von Uexküll took as given, in
light of so many demonstrations in the scientific literature, most notably
Driesch’s famous studies involving the manipulation and interference of
embryonic development.
    To clarify this problem of organization, central to the argument of his
synthetic work on theoretical biology, Von Uexküll uses the analogy of
tools.3 An implement is not merely an arrangement of material substances;
it is organized according to a plan (103–4). The proper use of an implement
is only possible if this plan is recognized; that is, there is understanding
of how the parts of the implement work to achieve its defining goal (106).
Crucial for Von Uexküll is the fact that in an organized system certain ele-
ments can be “inessential” to function and thus interchangeable with other
materials that could equally serve the function of the whole. Human tools,
he explains, always have this “residue” characteristic of the inessential
property.
    Moving to the biological sphere, Von Uexküll argues that the differentia-
tion of higher and lower orders of animals depends on the richness of their
function and the plurality of their organs. Functional richness is, clearly,
only understandable from the perspective of the framework that provides
organization. The organism is not analogous to a human technical object
because it possesses an inner unity and comprehensive integrity of organ
and function. Human implements are only ever imperfect approximations
of their functions (which are ultimately derived from original human ac-
tions), whereas biological functions do not show any ambiguity. Even when
organs (such as our limbs) can serve more than one function, they always
execute that function perfectly—considered in relation to the organizing
framework that specifies its function. The tool, by contrast, is always exte-
rior to itself, in that its framework is measured in relation to the organism—
the human being—that deploys it (115–16). This is why the machine is not
a good model at all for the living being: the machinic framework is not in-
ternal to its own function, because it is dependent on the framework of the
human (120–21).
    Despite the natural integrity of the organism, Von Uexküll will explain
that it is no static entity. The living being, as we have seen in different con-
texts, has the super-mechanical power of self-creation, repair, and repro-
duction, due to the plastic “protoplasmic net” that connects the functional
organization of the body as a whole. As Von Uexküll observes, the perfect

190   C H A PT E R 17



machine is necessarily dead. To live means to transform and alter one-
self—to exercise autonomy—in response to change. The Bauplan guides
the construction of these new states in the organism. The tool has the
framework, but it lacks any power to instantiate it, nor is there any medium
for self-transformation, given the material solidity of its parts.
    This is where Von Uexküll turns his attention to the nervous system. In
biological terms, it functions as an organ of operation. Some simple ani-
mals have fixed, “inborn impulse-sequences” whereas others learn and
develop novel responses. The emergence of the mind in nature is the ap-
pearance of a new control mechanism, one that brings biological function
into consciousness. As Von Uexküll phrases it, “We are informed of every
deviation from the normal function” (119). With Kant as his guide, he di-
vided the problem of mind into two separate areas: first the sense qualities
and then the “arrangement” of these sensory experiences in the mind. The
latter constitutes “the form of knowledge” (xvi). All experience of the world
is, according to Von Uexküll, not just “mediated” by mental schemata, but
constituted by them—a Kantian approach to even the simplest organism.
These schemata exist only by being conscious, and are the essential control
system for active responses to the environment. This operation he calls, fa-
mously, a “function circle” (127). (Figure 17.1.)
    For Von Uexküll, the organism is always in a state of struggle, always
threatened by damage or dissolution. The functional circle was the mode
through which organisms could take stock of their situation in relation to
their own functional needs, and respond appropriately, either with inborn
sequences or learned ones (129). The function circles of the higher animals
include a new element, namely, the reflective sense of itself as a body. The
world as it is sensed and experienced and interpreted, then, allows an ani-
mal to be guided by a whole series of particular and relevant “indications,”
enabling action in each situation that accords with its framework of its
functions (143). The Umwelt is an experience of an organized world, specific
to the species and the individual being. One could “build” an artificial ani-
mal consisting of sense organs and effectors, but one would be missing the
critical experience that is organized sentience.4
    Without this element we cannot explain how an organism exemplifies
an automatic but also active and responsive form of behavior. As he ob-
serves, using the nautical (but also Platonic, and later cybernetic) example of
“steering” to elucidate the concept, “in order to meet all the contingencies
of the voyage, we place the helmsman between the compass and the rud-
der,” taking “bearings” from the compass but not being locked in mechani-
cally to the instrument, instead independently guiding the “whole ship” in

                                                               B I O - T E C H N I C I TY I N VO N U E X K Ü L L   191




Figure 17.1. From Jakob von Uexküll, Theoretical Biology (1926).




the contingent circumstances of the moment. The point he wants to make
is that “every living organism” has this “super-mechanical directing” capac-
ity, but it is not located in some body (like the steersman) external to the
organization of the being. This directing power lies within the order of the
organism. However, it must also have a certain structural independence
from the “framework,” otherwise it would not be able to apply this frame-
work in moments of repair or creative work (291).
    As nervous systems become more advanced, Von Uexküll argues, they
provide an increasing “degree of independence in the steering mechanism”
(150). Wolfgang Köhler’s apes, who demonstrated the ability to pursue in-
direct Umwege, display this exact kind of independence, says Von Uexküll:
the “indications” of both body and environment initiate chains of nervous
association that open up these “indirect” paths, which is to say, the animal
follows indications framed in reference to the schemata of perception and is
not just repeating instinctual operations or learned behaviors, explaining
the appearance of genuine “insight” in novel conditions (145, 149–50).
    The distinction between these higher animals and the human is not

192   C H A PT E R 17



an extension of the range of indication but a change in the kind of orga-
nization produced by certain novel intellectual arrangements. The animal,
however complex its function circle might be, always effects action through
its own organs. The human tool is a form of effective action that demands a
wholly new use of our own effector systems. Only humans must create new
gestures, new uses of our own natural “implements.” Human artifacts are
never stable and perfectly formed entities because of this essential artifice
of mediation, not defined in terms of the natural Bauplan of human action.
In addition, no artificial tool is ever really fully independent even as a tool,
in that it must function within a technical system (the hammer needs the
nails, and wood, for example) that is always being adjusted, but not, accord-
ing to Von Uexküll, in light of any unified plan or framework. For animals,
the natural effectors have no such residue; they act fully in conformity with
the organism’s framework (159–61).
    So the limitation of the machine, as compared to the organism, is that it
has no independent and active organizational plan, since it is introduced
by the human from outside of nature. The organism’s framework is the ex-
pression of its own internal “function-rules” and therefore these internal
rules can guide the regeneration of the organism, using the plastic mate-
rial of protoplasm. The instantiation of the “rule” in what was then called
a gene explains, for Von Uexküll, the development of a complex organism
from an initial undifferentiated state in the embryonic cells. In contrast, the
machine is constructed with an external plan and therefore cannot produce
anything new; it “can only be altered from without” (179).
    What exactly is the tool for Von Uexküll, in the context of theoretical
biology? The implement, he says, is anything that is used by an organism
as a “counteraction” of the organism’s own action performance; that is, it is
an external support for the completion of a function circle. Insects, for ex-
ample, use leaves, birds build nests, and so on. But the animal implement
(at least as far as we know) is always, Von Uexküll observes, integrated into
an action that is instinctive. The bird will always make the same kind of nest
even if it grows up in altered conditions. With animal implements, there is
no relation to experience as a form of knowledge (232–33). The implement,
then, does not itself even need to appear as implement within the mark or-
gans (sensation) since there is, so to speak, no reason for the automatic use
of an implement by an effector to enter into the mind of the animal (234).
    This constitutes the essential difference, or rather chasm, between
human and animal. The human forms an implement according to a use-
function (and not according to an already inborn activity-rule). This is why
the human alone can recognize the foreign object, this artificial being that

                                              B I O - T E C H N I C I TY I N VO N U E X K Ü L L   193



is the tool. It necessarily enters into our sensory system where we can ar-
ticulate the functional relationships that make up its order. As he writes,
unlike the majority of animals, our “sensed world” includes our effector
organs and their activity. Becoming conscious of the function rules of our
own organs allows the possibility of forming “real implements,” based on
a human function-rule. The internal representation of the functions in the
mental schemata is at the same time the opening up of an exteriorization
of that form into artificial “organs” (332–33). These artificial, independent
function organs then provide new indications for the world as experienced
by a human. In fact, humans can only recognize (scientifically and infor-
mally) organization in nature because we first have the exteriorization of
organization visible in the artificial prosthetic that is technology.
    We might say this is where we enter the precarious world of significa-
tion: for humans are no longer able to share a common, because natural,
system of indications. Every implement, every tool, every cultural artifact,
embodies in its material form its own Umwelt, the artificial environment
that is constituted by tradition and memory and practice.
    And worse, as Von Uexküll will go on to explain, is that the domain of
artificial indications and their current industrialized monotony can begin
to destroy the “world-as-sensed” that is given to us in our original state. In
any case, the human is no longer what it was. Social organization is depen-
dent on an artificial infrastructure that mimics the organism, or systems
like the animal colony, but the order represents only a “pseudo-harmony”
of machine and human, “effected through the ceaseless labor of a thou-
sand tools and machines, which are worked by human beings” (338). The
artificial system of political and socioeconomic organization then spawns
its own “action-organs” of control, of intelligence, and of military defense.
There is, Von Uexküll insists, a demand in this techno-political condition
for the kind of “steering mechanism” inherent in all biological beings.
However, in the human context this mechanism must of course be artificial,
since the infrastructural order is itself a technical one. The nature of this
technical steering is unclear, but any artificial organization—like its natu-
ral counterpart—must instill a form of discipline on its basic material form.
The organism makes use of the open protoplasm to form and re-form its
organs and tissues according to the framework. For industrialized techni-
cal and social ensembles, the individual human now functions as its “pro-
toplasm,” open and undetermined, at least in the context of technical life:
“The super-mechanical principle of the community is expressed in those
plastic actions of its members endowed with protoplasm, which form the
community and maintain it” (350).
