19
Thinking Machines




Well before the advent of the digital computer or cybernetic theory, the
question of the “thinking machine” was being raised in the context of de-
bates concerning the nature of organization and the distinction between
machinic and vital processes. In his article “Men or Robots?” (1926) William
McDougall noted—as others before him—that an artificial machine is orga-
nized only because “it embodies a human purpose,” built, that is, to achieve
some goal. To be “in” or “out” of order refers to whether the parts of the
machine are working to attain the goal of its plan or design. Physical, inor-
ganic systems cannot be understood teleologically in this way.1
   However, living systems—“the movements of men or of animals”—must
be described with reference to their purpose, whether in a specific context
or more generally (81). McDougall’s point is that the goal-seeking organ-
ism is not simply a tendency to “persist” through automatic (and essentially
random, with respect to the environment at least) activity, but rather a ca-
pacity to interpret their position and select between alternative paths to the
desired goal. Citing Tolman’s work on “insight” in rats, as well as Köhler’s
work on ape intelligence, McDougall argues that organismic action is
“guided and terminated, not merely by some new sense-stimulus, but by
the animals’ appreciation of the nature of the new situation brought about
by its activity” (85). This is the major distinction between the machine and
the organism, for McDougall—the capacity to select between alternatives
due to the presence of some psychic “appreciation” of the situation, Von
Uexküll’s Umwelt.
   C. Judson Herrick’s The Thinking Machine (1929) pursues this same ques-
tion of the artificial, bringing the author’s immense expertise in physiology
(he was an expert on amphibian brains) to the study of intelligence and bio-

                                                                           201

202   C H A PT E R 19



logical mechanisms.2 Well before the discourse of “intelligent machinery”
and “electronic brains” became popular cultural tropes in the postwar era
of computing and cybernetics, Herrick was asking the same question Alan
Turing will pose in 1950, namely: “Can a machine think?” (This is the title
of chapter 3.) In the context of interwar biology and psychology, this was a
delicate question—given that the body of the living organism was still be-
ing conceptualized in material terms, even if the understanding of material
processes was being pushed in new and unexpected directions. What is in-
teresting is that Herrick, a proponent of what we can call the new “organ-
icism” (to disentangle it from any metaphysical legacy of vitalism), intelli-
gence could be linked to the question of the “machinery” of living beings,
but more important, to their relationship to artificial ones. In other words,
he is (unlike Lillie, or Von Uexküll, say) willing to look at the issue from the
other side, the perspective of technology itself.
    As Herrick makes clear in his introductory remarks, he does not think
that machines are uninteresting at all: “All machines make things, and
they make them actively. They are creative agents.” And, notably, not all
machines are artificial in the usual sense; some are “self-made,” and his
examples—“river systems and living bodies”—reveal how broadly he is
thinking (8).
    Herrick’s working definition of machine is an organized system that be-
haves in a certain way due to its organization. On earth, many natural sys-
tems are machines, but more broadly, Herrick argues that we can say that
the “whole natural universe is a machine” (13). The key is the idea of order.
So when Herrick, addressing the current prophecy that laborious human
tasks will soon be automated, cites Karel Capek’s extraordinary play RUR
(1921), which was performed in Chicago in 1922, he isolates the core issue:
to what extent can we say the human is already a robot of sorts—that is,
just a series of “clever mechanisms” (13). If we ask whether a machine can
think, most would object because, Herrick notes, it seems to be a contra-
diction in terms. The robot is a “fabulous monster” (16). Yet, in what seems
in retrospect an anticipation of Turing’s famous article that launched the
very discipline of artificial intelligence, Herrick points out that the first step
in clarifying the question is to define the terms appropriately. Or, better, at
least to evade strict definitions and reject certain “taboos” in order to look
more objectively at the perennial problem of the mind-body relationship
raised in the context of automata (24).
    As he admits, the progress of biology and more specifically physiology
has been driven by the search for the mechanisms of animal and human
behavior. However, the engineering perspective does not, according to Her-

                                                        T H I N K I N G M AC H I N E S   203



rick, give us any insight into the “higher human activities”; this mechanis-
tic method “seems to break down at the finish” because it is challenged by
what is so important about human cognition, namely, our “spiritual life,”
succinctly defined as “consciously directed behavior in general” (41). What
is odd about human thinking, it seems, is not that it is “outside” of the natu-
ral order but that it is an exception within it, since human minds learn to
“control” natural forces by introducing what Herrick calls “new patterns of
performance of energy” (41).
    The question of order, then, is redefined here, as it was by Lotka, as a
question of sustaining organizations against entropic forces of disorder
(49). This helps identify a crucial physiological challenge, one common to
humans and all other organisms: “Living things are reversing entropy all
the time; that is their chief industry” (47). But what distinguishes humans
in this thermodynamic system is our ability to create technologies that
themselves help in this general biological “reversal” of the tendency for
energy to run down to lower orders of organization. Machines that control
nature are machines that reorganize it for a purpose and thereby artificially
produce and maintain a higher level of organization for the energy cycle
that is the system of life on earth.
    This is the crux of Herrick’s investigation: all organisms and even inor-
ganic systems are “creative” in that they transform energy and produce and
reproduce new orders. They do not produce new energy, which of course is
impossible, but they do creatively redirect it into new patterns—the beaver
makes a house, the bee a honeycomb, the river a delta. So the exception
of the human—the source of artificial as opposed to natural invention—
would lie in a special kind of mechanism of transformation. The key is a
mechanism of what Herrick calls control.
    Complex organisms demonstrate the most sophisticated control sys-
tems of internal regulation; that has been one of the great advances of the
new physiology of Cannon, Haldane, Herrick, and others in this period.
These systems not only regulate; they can also repair and adapt to injury
and loss. Vital processes are, in essence, these processes of control, the ca-
pacity to introduce and maintain “patterns” in the continual metabolic flux
of energy and material transformation. As Herrick shows, it is not impos-
sible to mimic a vital process with an artificial technology, and here he re-
fers to Lotka’s mechanical beetle (and reproduces the illustration), noting
its prosthetic sensor that gives the being an indication of a possible future
that can be avoided or confirmed.
    Why is the human brain, the product of natural forces of evolution, ca-
pable of something so exceptional and so resistant to the method of “re-

204   C H A PT E R 19



verse engineering”? We can zero in, with Herrick, on a central thread in
neuroscience from this moment, the openness and plasticity of the human
brain, in particular, the cortex. What is strange about the human brain,
Herrick observes, is its lack of proper organization in the early phases of
development, in both embryonic and infantile stages. “The baby’s cerebral
cortex is immature at birth and for several weeks after birth it is too busy
growing in size and complexity of internal texture to take any active part
in learning” (108). Unlike any other organism, the human infant has few
reflexes and therefore a wholly imperfect “working pattern of behavior”
(108). If the brain or nervous system of any organism (from worm to hu-
man) is considered to be the key control system, it is possible to identify
more and more complex repertoires of behavior made possible by more and
more complex associations of experience and memory. The cortex in par-
ticular is a special kind of neural organ in that it is (as James also put it) a
triggering device, highly sensitive and capable of releasing motion with the
slightest of impulses. What we call spontaneity is that feeling of sudden-
ness and disruption that comes with this triggering of a complex apparatus
of cortical organization (122).
    For Herrick, this is where the creative intelligence of the human mind
will be found—in the cortical assemblies that are “as complicated as the
wiring chart of the telephone system” of a major metropolis (253). The con-
scious mind is capable of radical novelty, what Köhler called “insight” (224).
We “see through” a problem situation through an internal reorganization of
our cortical pattern (which might take place unconsciously). The implica-
tion is clear: this cortical mechanism of self-reorganization is linked with
the unusual plasticity of the human cortex, and the novel, constructive
reorganizations of the material and social world. Technology is the exter-
nalized manifestation of this neural capacity. In the end, Herrick’s proposed
“natural history of human nature”3 will turn on these unnatural creations
of the human brain, the artificial “vital processes” that make possible the
negentropic constellation that is technological civilization.
