20
A Typology of Machines




The mutual interplay of the psychic, social, and technical spheres raised
new kinds of questions for interwar thought. As the French philosopher of
technology Jacques Lafitte observed in 1933, while it is true to say that hu-
mans make use of tools to satisfy needs, “the integration of any new ma-
chine into the social order modifies the totality of needs.”1 For Lafitte, the
machine is not a pure invention; technology is an extension of the human,
a kind of projection, to borrow Kapp’s term from the nineteenth century. As
Lafitte puts it, “At every stage of development, the machine exteriorizes and
marks a step in the progress of our own organization. Machines extend us”
(156). Human activity is distinguished by the construction of “artificial or-
ganisms formed from an ensemble of physical solids.” The machine there-
fore is first of all virtual, an idea of organization that determines the spatial
relations of the material elements, that forms them into a “organic whole.”
The order that is the “idea” supervenes on the laws of the physical world—
the human act “introduces into nature a new order” (154).
   Lafitte’s analysis of technology begins with the idea that the human is
not an animal confined within the circuit of its natural functions and needs.
Lafitte writes that technology “is a functional differentiation and is formed,
as we form ourselves, through interference—that we ourselves effectuate—
between our received needs or those that we give ourselves, and the possi-
bilities that we bring to the past of our species” (156). And yet, constituted
as an extension of our own organization, an organization open to change,
technical objects themselves, we must recognize, are not unlike “living be-
ings.” With their integration of “general organization” and structure with
material elements and “exterior forms,” machines mimic the kind of evo-
lutionary perfection of the organism. And, perhaps more important, in

                                                                              205

206   C H A PT E R 20



the “ensemble of machines we discover a series that is closely comparable
to what we see in living beings,” posing the genuine question of a techni-
cal analogue of the “origin of species” (154–55). What Lafitte understands is
that all human activity is undertaken according to plans, whether it is the
construction of machines or buildings or the making of instruments and
tools of all kinds. This can all be defined as the creation of “organisms” be-
cause they constitute conceptual configurations of unorganized matter—
or, at least, matter organized according to some “other plan” (154).
    Lafitte’s analysis of machines therefore proceeds with the key concepts
organization and inheritance. The mechanisms of generation are, to be sure,
externalized ones, namely, the actions of human beings. Nonetheless,
Lafitte argues that the process of development mimics the biological, in
that the progression of technology depends on what he calls the “interfer-
ence” introduced into existing forms of (artificial) organization. This leads
not so much to improved individual objects but rather new forms of techni-
cal organization writ large. The “interferential mechanism” (mécanisme in-
terférentiel) allows for functions that were once “exterior” to the individual
machine to be internalized in more complex “organic” ensembles. Technical
evolution is, according to Lafitte, a rhythm between interiorization and ex-
teriorization that produces greater integration and order. Successful use or
failure determines the path of this development, as in biological evolution:
machines appear and disappear, are adaptive or not (154).
    The point to stress here is not that the artificial machines are equivalent
to organic ones. Lafitte repeats the common critique of the machine as an
organization incapable of self-repair or reorganization in times of crisis.
What is important is to recognize that technical organization is to a certain
extent independent of other forms of order; it has its own demands, and
this organization evolves according to its own logic, in relation to the envi-
ronment (human, social, and technical) that it operates within.
    Lafitte goes on, then, to offer a typology of machines, one that is anal-
ogous to certain biological orders but is not meant to collapse the distinc-
tion. The main classes of machinery are, according to Lafitte, passive, ac-
tive, and reactive (réflexes). First, a passive machine is like the plant or other
simple organisms, while the active and reactive machines are analogous
to animal beings. The differentiation is along the axis of intelligence, un-
derstood here in its biological sense, in terms of sensibility and organiza-
tion, instantiated in increasingly complex nervous systems. Second, active
machines are like the animals that respond in fixed ways to the conditions
of life—by reflex, by instinct we might say. Finally, the reactive machines
are like higher mammals. They have the “remarkable property” that allows

                                                       A TY P O LO GY O F M AC H I N E S   207



them to modify their own functions in response to information (indications)
received according to their relationship to their milieu (149). As Lafitte
writes:

   These machines include, in very general terms: an essential transformative
   system acting according to the impulse of external fluctuations; organs of
   regulation and distribution for the essential system; and an organized sen-
   sory system able to detect variations in the relation of the machine to its mi-
   lieu. (149)


The crucial concept for Lafitte here is modifiability. The reactive machine
is capable of routine but also irregularity and can be modified by humans
but also modify themselves. These kinds of machines in fact “possess a kind
liberty, more or less pronounced, of function.” The crucial example offered
here is that of the automatic torpedo, a machine that can, on its own, “mod-
ify its regimen and consumption according to the perceptions of its regu-
lator” (149). The reactive machine is one that depends, then, on organized
sensibility, what can be called, in this moment, an artificial mind.2
    It is important to emphasize again that the analogy between machine
and organism is an analogy, which entails both differences and identities.
The key issue arising in this period is not distinguishing the artificial mind
from a natural mind, since it was becoming increasingly clear that complex
reactive machines can function like organic beings in many ways. Rather,
the challenge is specifying the difference between an artificial mind and
a human mind, given the acknowledged capacity of the human mind to
create artificial organizations in the first place.
    Like Lafitte, the Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset reminds us,
in his own reflections on technology, that the human, unlike the animal, is
not defined by its “necessities.” The animal lives wholly within the circle of
“vital urgencies,” the variety of “elemental necessities” and the actions that
can satisfy them.3 Yet as Ortega y Gasset observes, there is really no “ne-
cessity” with the animal since there can be no distinction drawn between
necessity and what is not necessary. The animal cannot recognize necessity.
For humans, the situation is different because we ourselves impose condi-
tions for living. There is a fundamental gap in our experience, in that we
recognize the necessity as something real; however, our lives do not at all
coincide with the vital. This reveals the “strange constitution” of the human:
the only being who “is different from, and alien to, his circumstances.”4 The
human is embedded in circumstances (biological, environmental) but not
circumscribed by them.

208   C H A PT E R 20



    That gap is what enables the human mind to externalize itself; it is free to
act upon its environment, to attend to needs through technology—lighting
fires, building houses, cultivating fields, designing automobiles. The satis-
faction of needs through artificial implements introduces into nature ob-
jects which had not existed before; technology is in reality “the construc-
tion of a new nature, a super-nature interposed between man and original
nature.” This is why the tool is not merely an artificial substitute for the
animal action: human technology “reforms” nature itself and disrupts it,
and the relation between humans and their “two natures” can never fully
stabilize thereafter. Human life is a constant improvisation because it is
“continually challenged, disturbed, imperiled.”5 Ortega y Gasset declares
that humans are the only beings for whom existence is a problem, as Heide-
gger first argued in Being and Time (1929). To be human is to not be what
we are. Because we make our own existence, we can never coincide with it.
For Ortega y Gasset, to be human is to be an engineer, the engineer of one’s
own existence—this is what he means when he says life is a “self-creative
process” that relies on a technical capacity. “The history of human think-
ing may be regarded as a long series of observations made to discover what
latent possibilities the world offers for the construction of machines.”6 The
world, for human beings, is always a potential machine for existence. So
he does not want to rest with the easy definition of the human as the “tool-
making animal,” especially since Köhler, invoked here again, as in so many
works on intelligence and technology between the wars, had demonstrated
the genuine if rudimentary technical capacity of the ape. What interests
Ortega y Gasset is the way in which technical capacity arises when “intelli-
gence functions in the service of an imagination pregnant not with techni-
cal, but with vital projects.”7
