21
Philosophical Anthropology
The Human as Technical Exteriorization




In the context of interwar thinking about intelligence, in particular, think-
ing about the nature of the exception that is human cognition, its power
of both creating and understanding order and understanding, manifested
most clearly in cultural and technological expressions, it was not possible
to define “the human” in any way that was easily reconcilable with inher-
ited theological or metaphysical understandings of the human exception.
As we have seen, new physiological and evolutionary approaches, along
with the transformation of traditional philosophical questions via emerg-
ing experimental psychological findings, made that extremely difficult, and
the rapid industrialization and development of technical innovation put a
special emphasis on human artifice as a key symptom of the exception.
   Technology was critical to interwar reflection on human cognition and
intelligence for two main reasons. The first was because the “invention” of
the tool marked a certain demonstrable threshold between animal and hu-
man intellectual capacity. And second, the emergence of the human as a
technical being revealed a new form of evolution, unlike any natural phys-
ical process of inheritance. As Charles Judd (professor at the University
of Chicago from 1900 to 1938) explained it, the intelligent use of an artifi-
cial tool constitutes a break from nature. The human capacity to organize
complex ideas prepares the way for the organization of the material world
itself—the psychic laws of association become instantiated in artificially
constructed objects, and the human mind will then dominate the world of
things.1 As important, for Judd, this “tool consciousness” was also always
an expression of social intelligence, dependent, as he says (in agreement
with Lotka here) on the “accumulation of experience from generation to


                                                                          209

210   C H A PT E R 21



generation through social institutions,” institutions that themselves create
a “new order of reality” (17).
    Quite literally, for Judd observes in a remarkable phrase, “the individual
nervous system is in this way taken over by society” (328). Humans truly
communicate, unlike animals, which is to say, the accumulated wisdom
of multiple experiences is “taken into one’s inner life” via the brain (327).
“The commerce of mind with mind through the medium of external real-
ities is the great achievement which has raised man absolutely above the
level of the lower animals” (17). This development is linked to the primor-
dial discovery of the tool. “Man, the artisan . . . is no longer nature-man”
because experience, ideas, are “detached” from individual minds and there-
fore become “capable of affecting other minds” across time and space, gen-
erating new social and political orders (22). The plastic brain is thereby
transformed into a vehicle of a collective experience, through the material
medium of technology: “The tool becomes the external embodiment of a
human thought” (16). As Judd explains, in a concise summary of this pro-
cess, “Too much emphasis cannot be laid on the fact that within the hu-
man cerebrum a new world is created. Objects are put together in this world
in a new way; they are united as ideas in the brains of men and afterwards
through human efforts the outer world is correspondingly rearranged” (12).
    Thomas Morgan, an American evolutionary biologist who won the
Nobel Prize in 1933 for his work on the role of chromosomes in heredity,
agreed that humans, unlike all other organisms, whose transformation
is limited to the physical, genetic processes of inheritance, can addition-
ally transmit experiences to one another, via their social and linguistic net-
works. This form of inheritance allows for a dramatic alteration of behavior
in relatively short periods of time, leading to the diverse differentiation of
cultural forms of life. As he put it, “In man the power to alter the behav-
ior of the race is possible because each individual begins his life with rel-
atively few instincts and even these may be rapidly altered by the training
he undergoes from birth to maturity.” The openness of human evolution
is predicated on the unique plasticity of the human brain.2 The evolution
of humanity is dependent on the evolution in the means of transmitting
the stored experience of generations, from oral tradition to contemporary
printing. Intelligence, then, could hardly be an objectively defined feature
of any one brain. Given the fact that “modern life is extremely complex and
artificial,” intelligent behavior will be conditional on navigating that artifi-
cial environment.3 One question, for Morgan, is whether the technical and
social forms of development will supplant physical inheritance altogether.
In any case, human progress will continue, Morgan assumes, and therefore

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   211



human existence will require intelligent control: the “plasticity” of human
physical and psychic life will “make endless additions” to human intelli-
gence inevitable.4
    The future of the human was poised on a knife edge pointing either to
an acceleration of intelligence or to a degeneration of the human mind
through the mindless automatisms of modern institutions and machines.
The philosophical challenge was theorizing the very nature of this excep-
tional being, inside and outside of evolutionary time, a being constituted
by its seemingly essential technicity. In Germany in particular, philoso-
phers confronted this fundamental question. Here I will read this tradition
of thought (Cassirer, Scheler, Heidegger, Plessner) highlighting the under-
lying theorizations of technology. The texts are dense, the ideas often diffi-
cult; however, in this period just prior to the emergence of the cybernetic
and digital age, they offer critical resources for understanding the position
of the human in an increasingly technologized civilization.

Cassirer and the Technicity of Symbolic Life


We have been tracing the links between mechanisms, technologies, and
organisms—both individual and collective organisms. These spheres can-
not be understood in terms of opposition. The evolution of the human as a
biological and cultural being is not merely dependent on technology; it is
a function of its technical capacity. To study technology—the discipline of
“Technology” as Leroi-Gourhan defines it5—is to give insight into the evo-
lution of the cultural and historical beings that we now are.
   Ernst Cassirer’s masterwork, the three-volume Philosophy of Symbolic
Forms (1923–29),6 famously identifies the human in terms of a symbolic ca-
pacity, one that can lead to certain forms of objective moral truths (in op-
position to Heidegger, as their celebrated debate at Davos demonstrated).7
Less noted is Cassirer’s insistence on the fact that symbolic thought is res-
olutely tied to the organon. In fact, Cassirer looked back to Ernst Kapp’s id-
iosyncratic study of “organ projection” to underline the fact that the tool is
a novel sensory prosthetic, an object that first extends and then magnifies
our biological, organismic existence. For Cassirer, only an analysis of tech-
nical organs would allow us gain insight into what he pointedly calls our
“natural organization” (2:216).
   Kapp’s great contribution, as Cassirer sees it, was not just the articulation
of the relation between tool and organism, however. The “most profound
significance of organ projection,” Cassirer writes, is rather that the spiritual
process of self-knowledge depends on this projection as an exteriorization of

212   C H A PT E R 21



ourselves into technology, where we can literally see ourselves objectively.
Technology is not simply “mastery of nature” (2:215). Material culture has
“a purely spiritual function.” For Cassirer, of course, that is the capacity to
create an “ideal form” in the world, to project (to use Kapp’s term) our sym-
bolic forms into objective realities.
    This is why Cassirer, despite his deep respect for Von Uexküll’s work on
biological Umwelten, denies that we can understand the human through
any analysis of our physiological “organization,” most notably, the brain
and nervous system. For Cassirer, the human is identified with its achieve-
ments. Von Uexküll’s animals, with their receptor and effector systems,
live within a “functional circle” where the environment provides specific
“cues” and “carriers of effect” that reveal just how the individual animal
is adapted to its specific “world” of life (4:43). But, as Cassirer points out,
what distinguishes the human is the fact that we step outside of the circle,
no longer just “noticing” and then initiating action in response. We enter a
new sphere, that of observation, which is different from the receptor world
that comes “prefigured” in the animal’s organization of sense and neural
processing. Humans tear apart the intimate organizational coherence of
“organism” and “environment” and thereby liberate themselves from the
purely organismic determination of their existence (4:44).
    Of course, Von Uexküll also located the human exception in such an
exteriorization, as we saw. Still, Cassirer deepens the philosophical im-
plications of this insight: to observe the world is to be separated from it,
and this very cut is what opens up meaning. No matter how useful an im-
plement might first be, and however minimal the consciousness of its ar-
tificial form, the emergence of tools in human evolution is the originary
mark of this separation; it is the first expression of meaning and therefore
a vehicle for an individual to learn how to see the world in radically new
ways, namely, as systems of formal organization: “‘noticing’ becomes de-
tached from dependence on his actions and sufferings; he becomes ‘free of
all interests’” (4:45). With the tool, the immediacy of the encounter between
organism and environment is transformed; it is no longer a “mediated re-
lation” (4:41).
    The creation of the tool is not some practical exercise in problem solv-
ing, as it might be for Köhler’s apes, because with the tool the human mind
can confront nature, a nature that for the animal is always an “overwhelm-
ing power.” Tools, in their earliest forms, “are not only created and made
use of, but they are also worshipped” (4:41). The tool itself is understood
to be “an intelligent force.” This is what lies at the core of the developed
human mind—a recognition of meaning beyond our own experience, re-

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   213



vealed in and through our radical break with natural function, the break
that is constituted by the artificial object that is a counter to nature itself.
The emergence of the “ideal” in the tool is the “seed” of a “new total view”
that includes the human in nature but only through that radical line of di-
vision that liberates the human organism from its particular “effector sys-
tem” (4:42). As he put it in a later generalization of his philosophy, between
the “receptors” and “effectors” the human imposes a new system: the sym-
bolic. This is not an expansion of the sensible: it constitutes a radically
new “dimension of reality” (4:43). Human responses are not automatic but
“delayed”—“interrupted and retarded by a slow and complicated process of
thought” (4:43). Again, contrasting his views with Von Uexküll’s, Cassirer
writes that humans no longer live in their environments (as given by their
physiological and neurophysiological organization) but instead live in the
world of thought, which of course always includes the thought of the other.8
    The tool is an intervention, it is independent of both the human and
nature, and constitutes a new “foreign” order, a foreign “norm,” as Cassirer
noted in a 1930 essay on technology and form.9 Inevitably, any unity in hu-
man life will be fractured by the independent life of technicity. Cassirer, in
this particular essay, underlines the importance of technology for contem-
porary philosophy: it is the crucial clue to understanding, conceptually, the
origin and evolution of culture, the very origin of what Heidegger called
historicality. For the human mind, the tool is not just a material object: “It
is also an idea. It is part of that timeless inner world in which man lives.”10
    As Hans Freyer similarly claimed, the human life world is literally the
“objectification” of spirit.11 This world is by definition not natural. The hu-
man environment—our cultural and symbolic life—is a “dense confusion”
of the natural Umwelt of sensory perception and the historical layering of
objectifications of spirit, which is to say, in thinking that is exteriorized in
the material forms of culture. We live in what Freyer calls a “palimpsest,”
writing ourselves into this dense layering of meaning and nature.12 The
“forms” that we can identify in material culture are “not like a gramophone
record” as “played” in individual psyches, with absolute equality “due to au-
tomatic implementation processes.” Instead, cultural organization is akin
to a “sheet of music,” where signs and functions are fixed in material in-
stantiations of organization, but only as a “template” that must be fulfilled
in each individual performance.13
    The implication of Freyer’s argument is that once humans leave the im-
mediacy of their natural Umwelt due to the interposition of a new symbolic
order, there is no simple transition to an “idealistic” form of social life that
would mirror the natural order of the organism. Rather, the human world

214   C H A PT E R 21



is constituted by the externalization and materialization of the inner world
of the idea, which is to say, humans confront a new reality with just the
same immediacy of the natural “cues” of the Umwelt since it is experienced
through its material instantiations—in technology most notably but also in
the social forms and institutions that organize all of human life. The point
is that this new environment is by definition not an organized and coherent
world. The psychic system still harbors a logic of neurophysiological sense
and response. The social and cultural systems are not governed by shared
norms and operations. And most important, perhaps, is that the technical
sphere is a zone with its own alien norms, alien, that is, to human existence
in itself, whether understood in organismic or cultural terms.
    The human life, according to Freyer, is always therefore a fractured
existence—internally fractured but also separated from other human be-
ings by the “systems” that run through individuals. “Thus man is never at
the center of a reliable world, but always at the intersection of lines which
affect him—among others. It is difficult to think of a more effective method
of isolating people.”14

The Human as Detachment: Scheler


The secular cultural and intellectual tradition of defining the human
through “reason”—first articulated by the Greeks in the concept of logos—
was grounded in a now-questionable assumption of some connection
between human minds and the order of the cosmos itself, its own logos. So
explained Max Scheler in his 1928 work, The Human Place in the Cosmos.15
However, as he observed, the new sciences of the human, especially evo-
lutionary theory, could never in fact distinguish the human from any other
living being, except as an example of the “late stage in the evolution of our
planet.” The theological, intellectual-philosophical, and natural scientific
views were, therefore, each entirely inadequate to the task of defining the
exception of the human; there was behind these perspectives no “under-
lying unity” (5). Furthermore, the human had, since the nineteenth century,
become subjected to an increasing number of new disciplines, further frac-
turing our conception of ourselves. For Scheler, these developments were
generating a crisis: “In no historical era has the human being become so
much of a problem to himself as in ours” (5). In response, Scheler attempts
what he calls a “philosophical anthropology” to found a proper definition
of the human as human.
    Scheler isolates the key cognitive power of the human mind: creative
and novel thought. Scheler biologizes Whitehead’s concept of reason to a

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   215



certain extent, noting that the higher forms of animal life, those with “psy-
chic complexes established by association,” function according to orga-
nized thinking, producing behaviors with meaning, that is to say, with some
kind of unified organization, even if these behaviors are essentially habit-
ual. The importance of the unified meaning of a complex is that it can pre-
serve itself even in the event of “pathological losses,” whereas more linear
paths are simply broken. But, as Scheler observes, the associative processes
of the brain are determined subcortically. The cortical processes, the func-
tions expressed in the higher brain, do not simply produce more complex
associations. In fact, the cerebral cortex is, Scheler explains, “the organ
of dissociation,” not acting in concert with “biologically more unified and
more deeply localized types of behavior” (15). The cortex is an organ, as we
have seen many times before, of self-interruption, of auto-disruption.
    Intelligence is therefore not to be found in the perfection of the in-
stincts—a more thorough automatism, that is—because intelligence is de-
fined by flexibility. The question is the essence of human thinking, because
associative memory and the emergence of habit is the first step toward the
liberation from the fixity of the instinct. If the human is, as Scheler says, “a
flexible mammal in whom intelligence and associative memory developed
to the highest degree” (16) and in whom instinct is the least powerful, what
distinguishes human cognition or experience from other higher organisms
capable of a certain degree of intelligence?
    The principle of “association” that lies behind intelligence appears most
clearly, according to Scheler, in the act of imitation. Copying other organ-
isms can produce even more complexity of behavior, because the psychic
process of repetition and drive satisfaction is now applied to the “behavior
and experiences of others,” and there exists now what we can call “tradition,”
this “new dimension” that supplements mere biological inheritance and in-
dividual trials (19). But tradition is not, to be sure, a purely human develop-
ment. As Scheler points out, various herd animals learn from each other,
and this “knowledge,” if that is the right word, gets handed down to new
generations.
    What “sharply” distinguishes human tradition is what Scheler calls the
capacity for a “free ‘recollection’ (anamnesis) of the past,” and, crucially,
a dependence on historical knowledge, passed through a series of “signs,
sources, and documents,” that is, through what we have been calling the exo-
somatic expressions of thought, to use Lotka’s term, and not just the imita-
tion of immediately observable behaviors.
    Only the material articulation and objectification of tradition, a process
that literally dis-integrates tradition from our current experience (even if it

216   C H A PT E R 21



does not disappear), only this fracture can prepare the ground for an open-
ing: “new discoveries and inventions” are now possible (20). This is why
humans are not just “more flexible” than other creatures. Humans are, so
to speak, radically adjustable to new circumstances because they are never
completely bound by their biological or, for that matter, their cultural in-
heritances (21).
    Humans, for Scheler, are therefore not exceptional because they are
more intelligent. Rather, human intelligence is no longer a natural intelli-
gence. The human emerges from a principle beyond and therefore before
life. “If reducible to anything at all, this new principle leads us back to the
one ultimate Ground of all entities of which life happens to be one particu-
lar manifestation” (26).
    As Scheler writes, this principle is not to be understood mystically but
quite concretely as the “existential detachment from organic being,” which is
to say, spirit is not another realm intervening into the organic but rather is
“freedom and detachability” in and of itself. In the animal world, all action,
reaction, all intelligence and creativity, “proceed from a physiological state
of their nervous system” (27). This highlights an important connection
between Von Uexküll’s theory and that of Scheler: “Everything which the
animal notices and grasps in its environment also fits the firm function of
its unity of drive and sense structures.” Its experience and reactions are “se-
curely embedded in the frame and boundary of its environment” (27–28). The
higher levels of animal behavior are marked by new relations between the
animal and its environment, as we see, for example, in the way that some
animals modify their environments and, finally, become capable of a cer-
tain elasticity of response due to the changes within the physiological and
psychic states—the dynamism inherent in the homeostatic organism or
the Gestalt mind (28). But none of these animal states corresponds to what
Scheler calls the spiritual.
    The human is defined now by the “shedding of the spell of the environ-
ment” (28). This is why human will, human spirit, will never be a mere
“steering” (Lenkung) or “directing” (Leitung) of the organismic unity of psy-
che and body, as it is in the animal world. The human, because it can “ob-
jectify” itself, its own physiological and psychic function, can now free itself
from its objectification. It can act against life itself—in the extreme, the hu-
man is free to commit suicide (29).
    So, for Scheler, the human is the mark of a radical separation within life.
“This ability to separate essence from existence constitutes the fundamental
character of the human spirit, because it is the foundation of all other char-
acters” (37). Scheler leaves us with the question of how the human becomes

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   217



human—that is, how nature itself intervenes into the existence of organic
life on earth and makes possible the separation of the human mind from its
physiological servitude.

The Event of Technical Being: Heidegger


In his introduction to Being and Time (1927), Heidegger, like Scheler before
him, refers to the major scientific developments we have traced in interwar
thought: “In biology there is an awakening tendency to inquire beyond the
definitions which mechanism and vitalism have given for ‘life’ and ‘organ-
ism,’ and to define anew the kind of Being which belongs to the living as
such.”16 The question of the organism as a new form of order linked to the
notion of “life” was taken up by Heidegger at great length in his seminar on
metaphysics held in 1929–30.17 Clearly immersed in leading-edge thought
in the field (and again, most notably the work of Von Uexküll), Heidegger
faced the challenge of defining the living being with and against the array
of concepts associated with machines and technology more generally un-
derstood, with the goal of pinpointing the specific character of human life.
   Like Scheler, Heidegger will not so much evade as set aside the question
of metaphysical reductionism or transcendence in favor of an approach
that emphasizes the varying possibilities of experience in living beings—
and, like Scheler, Heidegger will locate the human exception in the concept
“world.” However Heidegger’s account of the radical human separation
that marks the distinction between “essence” and “existence” will dismiss
the cosmic mystifications implied in Scheler’s account. For Heidegger,
the human will be defined by the rift, but that fracturing of the existential
from concrete “existence” (in Scheler’s terms, essence and existence) will be
staged by Heidegger as the very space for an interrogation of the human.
   The starting point is the living being—for the human will be defined in
and against life itself. If, as Heidegger notes, the “organism is something
which possesses organs,” the philosophical problem will be displaced into
the realm of the organ, the “instrument” or tool as we know from the Greek
origin of the word. This idea has been productive in certain spheres of bio-
logical thought, in that it has supported an essentially mechanistic under-
standing of the living being. Citing Wilhelm Roux, the idea that the organ-
ism uses “instruments” can lead to the conceptualization of the organism
itself as a complex of instruments, or, to put it another way, as a complicated
instrument. Heidegger’s question echoes the thinking of many biologists
and physiologists in the interwar period—what would distinguish the or-
ganism from the machine in this context? What distinguishes the kind of

218   C H A PT E R 21



unity that organizes the machine from the interweaving of parts we see in
the organism? And, Heidegger adds, should we not distinguish the ma-
chine from the instrument, or what he calls “equipment” (Zeug) from in-
strument (Werkzeug)? Heidegger lists all the difficult, related concepts
that are implicated in the attempt to know the organism with technical
analogies—“purely material things, equipment, instrument, apparatus, de-
vice, machine, organ, organisms, animality”—and poses the challenge of
clearly defining these different entities.18
   It is important to see that Heidegger is from the start avoiding the trap of
comparing “organism” and “machine” that so often leads to either a reduc-
tion of life to the mechanical, or the imposition of some “supra-mechanical”
force of life into the mechanisms of the biological being. As we have seen,
interwar thought emphasizes the crucial function of organization and unity
as an independent structure in order to transcend the simplistic framework
that poses vitalism against mechanism. How to study life as a phenomenon
scientifically meant penetrating the essence of natural organization and,
often, its distinction from artificially organized entities. That is also Heide-
gger’s philosophical question here: “grasping the original and essential
character proper to the living being.”19
   The procedure is to begin with the technical, not as basis of comparison,
but as an exercise in clarifying the essence of the machinic, and only then
will he isolate how those technical concepts will fail to grasp the essence
of the living. Drawing on the earlier discussion in the seminar, Heide-
gger points to the obvious fact that the “new kinds of beings”—human
technologies—have no world; that is to say, nothing is “present-at-hand”
for a piece of equipment, a tool, a machine, no matter how complex they
might be. In this way they are just like stones or other inorganic bodies.
But as we know, certain kinds of machines—what Lafitte called reactive
machines—are certainly capable of “sensing” the world in some way, open-
ing up the possibility, at least, of some similarity with simple animals. An-
imals, Heidegger explained, are not worldless (like stones), but they are
“poor” in world, deprived of that which will define the essential character
of human experience. So the question is not whether a machine can “sense”
the external world, “experience” it, so to speak, but rather how it is that the
animal experience is deprived of world while the machine simply lacks it.
   This is no easy question, and I will not try to explicate all of the compli-
cations. But given Heidegger’s knowledge of Von Uexküll’s work on the Um-
welten of animals, which were often very simple organisms such as starfish
and the like, it was clear that animals “created” a reality from their sensory
systems, however limited in scope, and that they lived in very different spa-

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   219



tial and temporal realities (as could be shown experimentally). I think this is
a clue as to how Heidegger might have understood poverty (as deprivation
and not merely “less” of something), because he refused to admit that an-
imals had temporality even if their lived experience had different temporal
sequences. They were deprived, essentially, of any distinction between past,
present, and future anticipation: what appeared to be memory or anticipa-
tion was in fact the mere presence of a stored experience or the presence of
a prediction generated in the nervous system from its stored experiences
and associations. If human experience has of course traces of this animal
form of cognition, Heidegger argues that humans have what he calls a
world, which is to say, not a mere Umwelt (an organized experience built
from natural indications) but more what Von Uexküll called an organiza-
tion of artificial indications, that is, the difference between biosemiotics and
what we could call biosymbolism.
    Heidegger approaches this problem precisely through the question of
technology, as did Von Uexküll. What is singular about artificial technolo-
gies is not that they are worldless, or even that they are “deprived” of world,
but that they are understandable only as indications of a world. They “be-
long to world,” which is to say that they appear to us, humans, who have a
world. Equipment is what it is only because it emerges from human activity,
the activity of world-formation.20 The construction of machinery and other
equipment, for Heidegger, as for so many others in this period, depends on
the plan of organization that exists prior to the construction and guides its
organizational form.21 This is why Von Uexküll (Heidegger cites him here)
would call the machine an “imperfect organism,” because its Bauplan was
exterior to its own being.
    But Heidegger demands a more thorough distinction. The plan of the
machine is determined by the “serviceability of the equipment”; that is, the
plan is “regulated” in advance by the purpose, and that purpose is therefore
identified with the user for whom the equipment is fundamentally a “medi-
ate” device (215). Organisms do not construct pieces of equipment for them-
selves to “use” in this way—that is, the difference between machine and or-
ganism is not for Heidegger the fact that the plan is exterior to one being
and internal to the other. The organism has organs that belong to it, which
is to say, the organism has capacities that are expressed and instantiated in
the development of its organs. The organ does not “have” a capacity that is
used, mediately, by “the” organism. Organisms themselves have capacities.
Here Heidegger agrees with Von Uexküll: the sensory systems of organisms
are not mere technical devices that allow certain information to be utilized.
As Heidegger puts it, organs (such as eyes or ears) do not “see or hear,” the

220   C H A PT E R 21



organism does; the organ is developed out of the need to extend the experi-
ence of the organism of a whole (222).
    The crux of the argument hinges on the liminal case of what Lotka calls
the exosomatic. Heidegger resolutely denies that the pen, for example, is an
organ like the eye. The implication is that there is no natural “capacity” that
develops the organ in this case: the equipment is just “serviceable” (226).
There cannot be, according to Heidegger, the same kind of intimate “be-
longing” that characterizes organismic unity, since the technology can be
separated from the individual human organism and used by another. But
it is precisely this separation that is the essence of the technical here, and
which points to what Heidegger marks as expressly human (as opposed
to animal) existence—our worldliness. We experience the world as some-
thing that appears to us, which means we are at once immersed in the world
(its meanings and indications) and yet radically separated from it; it comes
before us (351).

Heidegger’s strategy at this point is to investigate more intensely what
exactly “appearance” means for us. Unlike the animal, who lives wholly
within its experience, humans experience their world and also the fact that
this world appears. What Heidegger argues is that we are able to “see” be-
yond what appears to us in experience (the various beings and their rela-
tionships) and recognize that there is a unity of Being that is, as he puts it,
“more originary that all those beings that press themselves upon us” (351).
The unity that lies before the prevailing multiplicity of experience cannot
of course appear to us as itself. (As Kant showed, this unity can only be de-
duced from the facts of experience as concretely appearing.) The opening
up of this originary zone occurs, then, not in experience but rather in the sep-
aration of human experience of the world from experience itself.
   That separation is the emergence of temporality for Heidegger, because
only in that distancing can the recognition of the relation between history,
presence, and the future be encountered. As in Being and Time, this situa-
tion of Dasein is somewhat paradoxical, or at least puzzling—to be at once
what we are and at the same time to not be what we are. In anticipating a
future that is not yet, humans understand the past, which determines what
they are; they are, as Heidegger famously expresses it, “thrown” into this
transitional state as essentially transitional, constituted as never in place.
“Man is that inability to remain and is yet unable to leave his place.” The
constant projection from a past defines us: “man is a transition, transition
as the fundamental essence of occurrence” (365).
   The question of our “historicality” is not linked to memory. It is funda-

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   221



mentally a givenness that is not necessary; it does not “belong” to us as the
determinations of the organism and its activity belong to it. It is crucial for
us to note here at this juncture just how important technology is for Heide-
gger, since it is the apparent naturalness of things “ready-to-hand” that will
define our possibilities and our projective futures.22 Yet the breakdown of
this pseudo-natural belonging reveals the fact that the human world is
world formed artificially, through actual concrete implements but also
ways of thinking and conceiving that come from elsewhere. To be in the
world is to live in a matrix of meaning and relations, incarnated in artificial
objects and artificial organizations, and to recognize that this world could
be otherwise. As Heidegger wrote in the Beitrage, the primal disposition of
the human is wonder (Er-staunen): “wonder that beings are and that humans
themselves are and are in the midst of that which they are not,” and this in-
cludes, of course, the world that is the world of cultural and technological
meaning, which is what structures the perception of our presence and our
anticipations of the future.23 Missing from Heidegger’s account, then, is a
recognition that to be in the world (to have an existence) is not just to use
things, but more fundamentally to know how to live in the world. Given the
essential artifice of the human world, it is this knowledge of how to live that
forms the existence, the “what” of Dasein. World, in Heidegger’s sense, rad-
ically depends on the technical mediation of information and knowledge,
on the possibility of exteriorized (or “exosomatic”) thought.24
    If the instruments of human technical existence are the model for world-
liness for Heidegger, and authenticity is to be gained by passing beyond ex-
istence to the existential condition of throwness itself, what is lost in this
movement is the originary technicity of that worldliness. Can we identify the
essence of the human without acknowledging this unexplained capacity
to participate in the transference of thought itself? Heidegger noted in the
Beitrage that besides wonder, there is another “basic disposition,” namely,
shock, the shock, that is, of our abandonment by Being.25 We can say that,
for Heidegger, human creative potential is opened up in this abyss, the sep-
aration from being and the anxiety and fear associated with this separa-
tion. Genuine decision is linked with this opening of a fracture in Dasein.
Decision is no mere “choice,” Heidegger observes, because choice between
alternatives assumes the preexistence of some world as given. Decision is
“de-cision,” the experience of being in this space of separation, to antici-
pate something that does not emerge from a prior world, to invent a possi-
bility that was not possible.26 The question that can be posed here is how to
think about the origin of this rift without introducing a new metaphysical
principle.

222   C H A PT E R 21



    For Heidegger, we discover, so to speak, the separation within ourselves,
as an essential aspect of our experience, but only in moments of crisis—
failure, disruption, interruption—and in the organized and technologized
world of civilization, especially modern industrial civilization, these mo-
ments of disruption are increasingly stifled through the engineering of
stability, as noted as well by Whitehead and Dewey, among others. How-
ever, if the possibility of our being-in-the-world might be essentially con-
nected to the technology of a specific human form of “tradition,” namely,
the exosomatic transmission of thought itself, the recognition of a radical sep-
aration from our “being” becomes then a radical separation from a prior
separation—the separation, that is, of the human psyche from its own
physiological isolation. This is just to suggest that Heidegger’s positioning
of the human as the being capable of stepping into that abyss that is the
separation of ourselves from our “world” and the separation of our histo-
ricity from any possible future, this being is already, as a being constituted
by its social and cultural comportment, made possible by a technical trans-
mission of thought, grounded in a separation from organismic, animal life.
This separation is the primal moment of invention—namely, the invention
of technology itself.

Human Exteriorization and the Plasticity of Being: Plessner


Helmuth Plessner’s contribution to philosophical anthropology, published
in 1928, also begins with the organism, the starting point of any consider-
ation of the human as living being.27 However, Plessner begins with what
in fact lies beyond the organism as organization, or Gestalt—the concept
of “wholeness” or unity in itself. As we saw in Goldstein’s key work on the
organism (and this will soon become an important question again with the
emergence of cybernetics and the idea of the artificial organism with an ar-
tificial teleological orientation), the fact that the organismic unity can trans-
form in response to constant threats and challenges to its survival means
that its organization is not completely fixed. But what then is the ground
of its self-transformation? As Plessner comments, “wholeness” can never
be realized—it cannot even be realized “abstractly” because to be realized
means to become concrete. When wholeness becomes concrete, however,
it is never immediately present; it takes a form that is, according to Pless-
ner, only to be found in the realm of “organic nature.” That is to say, organic
forms are the only genuine instantiations of “wholeness” (113). The unity of
a being is what allows us to perceive “the organic,” and yet the wholeness
of the being can itself never be measured, or observed directly—it cannot

                                               P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   223



enter into the scientific, empirical knowledge of “bio-logy” as a discipline
(112). Drawing from the Gestalt theorists, Plessner explains how the unity
of wholeness can “appear” in any number of ways; that is, we can “sense” it
visually, or in a tactile way, but what appears is the given Gestalt of the spe-
cific organic system. And it is that Gestalt that can be changed; while given,
there is also in the organic form a wholeness that “does not itself appear”
(112). There is, for Plessner, a critical difference between the forms that are
“indifferent” to givenness (i.e., capable of transformation) and a form that
is in its essence alien to appearance itself, wholeness.
    With this conceptual clarification, which aligns with much interwar
thinking on organismic order, Plessner can state: “Everything living exhibits
plasticity: it can be pulled, stretched, and bent in a way that brings together
the distinctiveness of the whole’s boundedness with an extreme shiftabil-
ity of its boundary contours” (116). The living being does not merely have a
“surface,” as, say, an inorganic body has; the living being is “enclosed” by its
exterior surface and “shifts” within that bounding topology. The more plas-
ticity something displays, “the more the thing appears to be alive” (116).28
Plasticity is here not mere flexibility—again, as Goldstein will demonstrate
in such great detail, the organism is actually in a constant state of “catastro-
phe,” on the threshold of dissolution and challenged to invent new and un-
precedented responses, that is, with novel reorganizations. As Plessner puts
it, the living being “exhibits discontinuity in its continuity, regular irregu-
larity, both statically and dynamically” (116). The philosophical question is
this: how to understand the mutual action of regularity and irregularity,
the norm and the deviation—the givenness of the rules are violated in the
plasticity of life, yet there is no such thing as irregular life. The disruptions
of discontinuity—what Catherine Malabou names destructive plasticity29—
must themselves be “governed” but governed by what Plessner describes as
a non-isolatable rule, a rule that cannot be normalized. And yet such a rule
must govern the living, otherwise the deformations so essential to the oper-
ations of a plastic being would disrupt and destroy the overall unity, instead
of actually strengthening its effect, as is in fact the case (116).
    The rule of the living is strangely undetermined; it reveals itself in the
spontaneity of response, in the possibility of threshold transitions. The or-
ganism is always potentially something other than what it is: its life history
is, we can say with Plessner, radically contingent (117). There is no rational-
ity to be isolated in this spontaneity of movement and transition. And yet,
at the same time, the body is capable of self-regulation. There is here, for
Plessner (echoing Lashley’s terminology in his own theorization of neural
plasticity), a kind of harmony in the “equipotentiality” of the physicochem-

224   C H A PT E R 21



ical parts of the living system.30 And what drives regulation is, to a great
extent, the fact that the organism is integrated into a specific environment:
“regulation is mediated by the outer world” (154). Plessner will agree with
Von Uexküll, then, that the organism proceeds in its development and self-
regulatory existence according to the Bauplan. But as Plessner makes ex-
ceptionally clear, the “plan” is not an ideal external to the system, or some
“hidden” organizing force. The unitary plan and the actual organization ex-
ist simultaneously. “Like life, organization explains itself” (157).
    This is all to say that for Plessner, we must define the living body in terms
of its “positionality,” or its capacity to become “positable.” The mode of be-
ing specific to the living is this essential character of going beyond itself, to
posit itself as something new. Phrased somewhat paradoxically, “the body
is outside of and within the body” (121), which is not the case in the inor-
ganic world—an object is just what it is. The distinction rests on the con-
cept of the boundary: the marking of the limit of the body is what consti-
tutes the inner, and yet that given order inside the body is always governed
by something that is outside of that order and that can found a new orga-
nization. The living is then a genuine system; that is, the “border” of the
system belongs to the existent being and that allows the physical body of
the organism to transcend itself through its own self-reference to the thresh-
old of its possibilities. The being is posited (literally, positioned) in the point
of unity that, as unity, is “detached” from the concrete unity that is the entire,
dynamically organized, living system (148). To live is to be always in a state
of anticipation. Not an anticipation of a determination to come, but the an-
ticipation of itself as something to be determined in the future.
    What distinguishes the human from other organic beings is the fact that
not only does our life proceed from the “central point” of unity that is the
non-present mediation of all passage and transition, but unlike all other
animals, the human is aware of itself as that central point—this introduces
a fundamental gap between its “lived experiences” (in the sense that Von
Uexküll gives that term) and itself as an experiencing being. The animal is
completely self-enclosed, it lives and experiences “itself” only in the here
and now (270). The human—and here there is more than an echo of Heide-
gger’s contemporaneous Being and Time—is always “behind” the presence
of the here and now, existing “without place,” in nothingness. This is what
allows the human to be both what it is (a lived system) and to stand outside
of what it is. The human lives outside of the body while still being “inside.”
    Plessner’s term for this condition is “excentricity.” The human has no
ground of existence: existence is constituted on these thresholds mark-
ing the inside and the outside of a plastic being. The “excentricity” of the

                                                 P H I LO S O P H I CA L A N T H R O P O LO GY   225



human is also what grounds our recognition and relationship to the other
(279). The human world is shared precisely because the individual human
lives to a large degree outside of itself—and it is that exteriorized perspec-
tive that can be taken up by another human being. Even more profoundly,
it is precisely the recognition of another psyche that makes us aware of our
own excentric nature. The “world” of other minds is not at all like the en-
vironment of an animal. We are both within it and producing it (282). The
spiritual life of human beings occupies this space of the “we”—as a com-
mon positionality that by definition is not grounded in any lived experi-
ence; it is, rather, not grounded and hence radically liberated from the par-
ticularity of the living system. But it does not exist somewhere else (285).
    In the case of the human, Plessner says, life is defined by a radical devia-
tion, an essential errancy, and it is this essential lack of a direct path that will
explain not so much the origin of technology but rather its necessity: “The
human with his knowledge has lost that directness. He sees his nakedness,
is ashamed of it, and must therefore live in a roundabout manner [auf Um-
wegen] via artificial things” (288). This insight into the origin of technology
is exactly what was missing from Heidegger’s account. Technology is the
necessary detour of a being that lacks determination.
    The human requires the “complement” of the non-natural, nonorganic
tool because there is no automatic center that is the orientation for self-
regulation, for equilibrium. Humans are, Plessner states clearly, “by nature
artificial.” They must create their own equilibrium, and that means sup-
plementing their natural organic activity with actions that proceed from
their excentric (not internal) orientation (288). The tool is the expression of
human existence, but we need to remember that the excentric position is
predicated on the sharing of minds (or rather, of minds constituted by their
openness to sharing); the tool is not just a supplement to the individual
human organism, then, but instead, as Plessner states, the foundation for
what we call culture.
    The gap between nature and human is the origin of human technical
existence. “Given with excentricity, artificiality is the detour [Umweg] to a
second native country where the human finds a home and absolute rooted-
ness. Positioned out of place and time in nothingness, the excentric form of
life creates its own ground” (294). The human is defined as what emerges
from the “forced disruption” of the organic way of life. “Only because the
human is naturally partial and thus stands above himself is artificiality the
means to find a balance with himself and the world” (298). The artificial de-
tour that is expressed by technology and culture is a new ground, created
out of necessity. But of course the old ground does not at all disappear. The

226   C H A PT E R 21



radically new norms of cultural existence are therefore not always in har-
mony with the natural drives of the body (294)—something Freud would
explore in his Civilization and Its Discontents (1929).
    Philosophical anthropology articulated the crises of interwar European
civilization and sought some kind of redemption, if not stability, in new
concepts of culture that relied on the inevitable ex-centricity of the human.
Here, on the threshold of a global war that would destroy so many humans
and so many traditions and cultures, a new form of machinic life was yet
unseen. The emergence of computational technology posed a new chal-
lenge to definitions of rationality and the question of “habit” and culture in
an automated society. However, as we will see, the key insights of interwar
thought, the theorizations of human existence that linked openness and
plasticity with technology and innovation, and repositioned rationality as
the breaking of routine, were never wholly absent from the new discourses
of the cybernetic age.
