24
Automatic Plasticity and
the Pathological Machine



Between the plasticity of the brain and the machinistic structure of a
computer there is an unbridgeable gap that is even wider than that between
syllogizing and reasoning.
                               Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, The Entropy Law
                                             and the Economic Process (1971)1




Prominent figures in the early days of cybernetics, information science,
computing, and even artificial intelligence research all looked back to Des-
cartes as a forerunner in the conceptualization of cognition as essential
technological. Norbert Weiner cited Descartes as an early important the-
orist of automata, noting only that he failed to develop a comprehensive
understanding of how the automaton was coupled to its environment.2
Claude Shannon (the massively influential information theorist) and John
McCarthy (who coined the very term “artificial intelligence”) praised Des-
cartes’s argument that the body with its nervous system was an automa-
ton while acknowledging that any effort to understand the brain’s function
“usually reflects in any period the characteristics of machines then in use.”
Before the development of “large-scale computers” and the subsequent
theorizations of information processing devices, thinkers such as Descartes
were limited to hydraulic and other machinery in their modeling of the ner-
vous system.3
   What the cyberneticians introduced was the idea of an organized being
that responded actively to the environment, not through complex “me-
chanical” interactions, but rather through the introduction of information
into that being, which was then reorganized to effect certain actions that
would maintain the inherent “purpose” of this being.4 The finite set of in-

                                                                                245

246   C H A PT E R 24



formation states was defined by the material organization of the cybernetic
entity. Yet the actions were effected by the logic of information itself, not
mere physical action and reaction. Whether the information system was an
analog computer, a physical instrument, or a digital computational device,
what was important for cybernetic theory was the fact that an intelligent
being (whether artificial or natural) constructed a model of its environ-
ment through the coded information received from sensory organs, reor-
ganized that information to preserve its ideal goal state, and then initiated
actions that would produce that desired state. In this way, the cyberneti-
cians erased the conceptual distinctions between animal and human, hu-
man and feedback machine, animal and machine, since all were in essence
information systems, beings that acted on the basis of virtual realities, not
physical ones.5 The measure of human or other forms of intelligence was
the degree of complexity of information processing, hence the interest, in
the 1940s and 1950s, in the new large-scale computing devices then being
developed. The brain, it was thought, may very well be a digital computer,
a logic system that was materially instantiated in neural cells but governed
by the pure logic of binary operations.6
    As we saw, Descartes was one of the first theorists of the nervous sys-
tem as an information machine, a steering system that was organized by sen-
sory inputs and their organization and reorganization, all in feedback loops
with other sensory information and, importantly, the activation organs,
what Lotka and others called “effectors.” From one point of view, we can un-
derstand cybernetics as an attempt to redefine the organism as a new form
of machine, one governed, literally, by information—and one that need not
involve, even at the level of the human being, any new element, any inter-
ventional “spirit” of mind.

Feedback Is Error


One of the central claims of cybernetics was that only a process of “negative
feedback” drove the homeostatic life of adaptive beings. The cybernetic en-
tity (whether living or machinic) first sensed its environment, alongside its
own “state” of being in that environment, then compared that information
with its own “goal” states embedded somewhere in this being, before effect-
ing certain actions that would bring the entity’s state in line with this ideal
goal.7 To be sure, from one perspective, this cybernetic concept of negative
feedback could be read as privileging a predetermined, precisely defined
“order” that is imposed on these active beings. Yet from another angle, one
might emphasize the importance of deviation in the functioning of any

                           AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   247



cybernetic being: this being has an existential relationship with error. It is
not disorder or even error itself that threatens the cybernetics being but in-
stead an inability to respond appropriately to an ongoing state of disorder.
Any dynamic adaptive being is in a condition of ceaselessly deviating from
its own formal ends.
    The cognitive psychologist George A. Miller, famous for the experimen-
tal demonstration of the limits of working memory,8 perfectly expressed
this cybernetic principle in his theoretical work on memory, bringing to-
gether machinic, evolutionary, and organismic concepts.9

   One of the few truly general ideas that we have in neurophysiology is that
   organisms try to reduce deviations from their normal states. This idea,
   which has a long and interesting history, is now widely known as the “cy-
   bernetic principle,” or, more descriptively perhaps, the “negative feedback
   principle.” It holds that an adaptive system can maintain a stable state in a
   fluctuating environment if it can sense deviations from that state and initi-
   ate actions to reduce them. (361)


For Miller, the organism did not merely register events and experiences in
a memory storage system. Instead, memory functioned within the homeo-
static economy as a whole. He agreed with Kenneth Craik’s position that
the nervous system produced models of an exterior reality but emphasized
the importance of failure in this task, because failure opened the opportu-
nity to transform the model and gain new insights into our environment.
We remembered, in other words, the unexpected (the “improbable devia-
tion” [368]), and this needed to be “encoded” in natural or artificially adap-
tive systems (361). The implications of this failure model are significant. As
Miller wrote:

   The suggestion that we encode the unexpected would seem to imply that the
   system is symbolic, rather than iconic. We can easily conceive of an iconic
   representation of an object or event in consciousness, but it is much more
   difficult to conceive of an iconic representation for a mismatch between two
   such images. (362)


From this perspective, radical failure (even death) is not so opposed to nor-
mal homeostatic operation because the catastrophic turn is in fact contin-
uous with normal efforts to maintain the health of the being in its essential
errancy. That is, the boundary between normality (health) and catastrophic
failure (illness, death) is defined by the limits of the being’s own errancy

248   C H A PT E R 24



and not at all by the mere presence of deviation or error in the face of the
improbable or unexpected occurrence. The great achievement of cybernet-
ics was the demonstration that these limits to error were not at all arbitrary.
As Wiener remarked, “The conditions under which life, especially healthy
life, can continue in the higher animals, are quite narrow.”10 As Ashby ex-
plained, in an essay on homeostasis, “If the organism is to stay alive, a com-
paratively small number of essential variables must be kept within phys-
iologic limits,” and this applied to the “life” of technological entities as
well. Their survival as unified systems depended on keeping error within
proper limits.11
    The crucial arbiter of the limit of error was therefore the survival of the
being as a whole. As Ashby would make clear, the relationship between ca-
tastrophe and normal error or deviation is governed by the threat to the
fundamental unity of the being in question. He gives the example of a
mouse trying to evade a cat. The mouse can be in various “states” or pos-
tures, and certain values may even change drastically (it may lose an ear, for
example), yet still, the mouse will survive. “On the other hand, if the mouse
changes to the state in which it is in four separated pieces, or has lost its
head, or has become a solution of amino-acids circulating in the cat’s blood
then we do not consider its arrival at one of these states as corresponding
to ‘survival.’”12 The unity of the being is the ultimate mark of survival. Unity
amounts to the capacity to maintain some stable form even while experi-
encing drastic—perhaps even violent—transitional states.
    There is no fundamental distinction between order and disorder here.
The definition of a formal unity determined the parameters of survival
within the unified system. Both in biology and cybernetics, the unity of the
being is what identifies the structural relations and variables that had to be
maintained against the threat of extinction. To rethink cybernetics from
the perspective of the organism, we must zero in on the nature of this unity
and its status. How could a breakdown, even a catastrophic failure, become
the opportunity for an unprecedented reorganization? How could a func-
tionally determinate machine ever acquire this organismic capacity?

Ashby on the “Break” within the System


It was exactly this problem of reorganization in crisis that Ashby faced
head-on in creating his cybernetic model of the adaptive organism, the Ho-
meostat machine. Ashby knew that by definition a machine was fixed, and
its operations wholly determined. A machine, in its ideal operating state,
had only one form of behavior and therefore could not change its funda-

                          AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   249



mental design. Although it is possible to have a machine that enters new
states depending on changing environmental variables (a thermostat is a
simple example), the design of the structure will still govern its operation
at all times.
    In this respect Ashby would have agreed with Canguilhem’s critical per-
spective on the limits of the machine. In a notebook fragment from 1943,
we find Ashby reading William James, who, as we have seen, placed the re-
lationship between plasticity and automaticity at the center of his biopsy-
chological explanations of human thinking. James, as Ashby noted in his
citations of the pragmatist psychologist, compared the rigid machine to the
complex nervous system, an entity that paradoxically exhibits both fixity of
structure and open-ended adaptive plasticity.13 The early notebooks show
that Ashby was also reading Claude Sherrington’s revolutionary work on
neural integration at this time. Ashby in fact wrote out several passages by
hand from Sherrington’s seminal book, where the neurologist described
the organism as a “moving structure, a dynamic equilibrium,” something
constantly adjusting itself to ever-changing conditions. The living system
was “labile”—and indeed, its greatest strength, for Sherrington, was its very
fragility, because that fragility made it more sensitive to its surroundings.14
If his own Homeostat machine was going to be an adequate representation
of this kind of organismic self-organization, Ashby had to figure out a way
to model the behavior of a genuinely open system, one that could assume
a determinate structural organization, like any machine, but at the same
time not be eternally bound to any one particular order. Remember that the
influential systems theorist and biologist Bertalanffy had already criticized
cybernetics precisely for their misguided use of closed systems to model the
fundamentally open structures of natural organisms.
    Ashby himself was hardly unaware of this issue, and he thought deeply
about how to create mechanical systems that could not only respond to en-
vironmental changes, but in fact actually change its very organization as a
way of finding new paths to stability and equilibrium. Ashby’s insight was
that if a machine, defined by a specific form and purpose, was ever to re-
organize, then logically it must in fact be capable of becoming a wholly dif-
ferent and new machine. In 1941, he had admitted that man-made machines
that change their organizations were “rare” (he failed to give any concrete
example, though he did point out elsewhere that the inclusion of memory
in a system would amount to such reorganization).15
    Yet Ashby would push much further, seeking to conceptualize a ma-
chine that had, like the nervous system, what James had called an “incalcu-
lable element” that could interrupt, productively, the machine’s own fatal-

250   C H A PT E R 24



istic operation. Ashby made a conceptual breakthrough by thinking about
the potential value of failure, something that was, after all, inevitable in any
working machine. Ashby realized that when a machine broke, it became in
essence a brand-new machine with a new “design,” so to speak: “A break is
a change in organization.”16 Ashby’s goal was to engineer a machine that
could take advantage of its own breaks as a way of entering into a state.
Genuine breaks of this kind were exceedingly rare in artificial machines.
According to Ashby, a break was “1) a change of organization, 2) sudden,
3) due to some function of the variable passing a critical value.”17 If a homeo-
static machine were constructed in such a way as to “break” when pushed
to the limit of its ability to maintain equilibrium, this machine could ac-
quire a new organization, another possible path to equilibrium. “After a
break, the organization is changed, and therefore so are the equilibria. This
gives the machine fresh chances of moving to a new equilibrium, or, if not,
of breaking again.”18 The breakdown was in essence a temporary shock to a
system that was not succeeding in its quest to find equilibrium. Ashby in-
vented a form of cybernetic plasticity by taking advantage of the very weak-
ness of all machines—their ultimate fragility. As W. Grey Walter put it, in
his own cybernetic book on the brain, “The power to learn implies the dan-
ger of breakdown.”19
    As Ashby would point out, the brain was a special kind of machine in
that its many highly differentiated component parts—the neurons—were
constantly connecting and disconnecting with each other as the brain re-
sponded to perturbation and change. Built into its dynamic organization
was an inherent tendency to break down and thereby give way to new or-
ganizations, for the neurons have a built-in latency period: after a certain
amount of activity, neurons temporarily “disappear” from the system, only
to reappear fully active again once they have recovered their potential.
Ashby suggested that the cybernetic machine and the organism could be
linked by this shared capacity to self-organize in moments of breakdown,
a capacity that ultimately could be traced to the tendency to fail—at least
temporarily—on a repeated basis.
    In later works such as Design for a Brain (1952) and Introduction to Cyber-
netics (1961), Ashby introduced a formal way of thinking about the behavior
of complex, adaptive systems. He noted that if we take the basic states of a
system as variables—capable of change, that is—then we could plot them
graphically as vectors. In turn, individually plotted variables could be inte-
grated in a multidimensional “phase space” as a way of representing, with
one single vector, what Ashby called a line of behavior, an integration, that
is, of multiple vectors into one line that would represent the dynamic inter-

                          AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   251



play of different states in motion within the total system.20 Ashby’s innova-
tion was to think of the cybernetic being as a set of potential states, states
that could be visually represented in phase space as vectors whose func-
tions were limited by boundary values. Ashby showed how the interpreta-
tion of these lines of behavior as mathematical functions opened up a new
way of understanding complex systems. Mathematical analysis of physical
systems was normally limited to continuous systems of a linear nature. A
mathematical approach to biology, in contrast, would have to accommo-
date the nonlinear, discontinuous features of much organismic behavior.21
Ashby gave an example: any sudden transformation of an activity may well
be governed by a so-called step function, where the value of the function
moves continuously, imitating a linear function, until it changes abruptly
(and seemingly unpredictably) when it reaches a certain point. This math-
ematical representation of behavior would suggest that spontaneous, sin-
gular events or actions in the life of a being are in fact governed by hidden,
dynamic processes modeled by relatively simple step functions, or more
complex nonlinear descriptions of threshold changes and singularities.22
The main insight was the idea that transformations of the system’s behav-
ior were strictly analogous to mathematical transformations of the oper-
ands.23 For Ashby, this made it possible for cybernetics to study the innate
“determinateness” of a system formally, in mathematical terms, and to ig-
nore in effective the actual “material substance” of the system.24

Cybernetic Plasticity


Ashby’s cybernetic experimentation was more or less abstract—despite the
solid, if at times mysterious, materiality of his infamous electrical device,
the Homeostat.25 However, the abstract question of artificial homeostasis
did not exhaust the cybernetic attack on understanding living, dynamic
systems. And the brain, in particular, was a zone of intense study, not, as
in Ashby’s case, as a generic problem in organization and stability, but as a
novel and complex “technology” of command and control.
   Cybernetics put a great deal of energy and thinking into the theory of
the central nervous system as an information processor that governed behav-
ior. From 1948, the date of publication of Wiener’s seminal book that coined
the term itself, cybernetics would be associated with the computer-brain
analogy. Weiner’s book originally appeared (in English) with a Parisian
publisher, with whom MIT Press hastily collaborated only after belatedly
learning of the arrangement. In this seminal book on cybernetics, Wiener
enumerated the fundamental analogy between neural organization and the

252   C H A PT E R 24



binary architecture of the computer, writing, for example, that the reali-
zation that the brain and the computing machine have much in common
“may suggest new and valid approaches to psychopathology, and even to
psychiatrics.”26
    Still, he also raised many questions about this comparison. He was
equally interested, for example, in how the brain maintains its information
states without ever localizing them in particular spaces, the very problem
that prompted Lashley’s earlier neurological research. Memory, for Wiener,
could not be something merely physical. Instead, it had to be a constantly
flowing circulation and therefore subject to perturbation and deviation; this
system, he said, could “hardly be stable for long periods of time.”27
    However, it was the nature of neural plasticity in particular that con-
stituted the main challenge to the cybernetic project of assimilating ma-
chine and organism into one comprehensive framework, and there were
differences of opinion even within cybernetics, in the United States and
the United Kingdom and in France. To be sure, from the very beginning
plasticity was on Wiener’s mind. A central question he posed was how to
explain the nervous system’s agile flexibility; Wiener wondered “how the
brain avoids gross blunders, gross miscarriages of activity, due to the mal-
function of individual components.”28 With instability and malfunctions in
mind, Wiener would explore several different analogies between psycho-
logical pathologies and computer malfunctions. He observed, for instance,
that the drastic effort to “clear” the brain of its pathological activity with
the use of electrical or chemical “shock treatment” (in lieu of the more per-
manent surgical lobotomy) might well parallel the necessary purging of
the computer of all data when a pathological “configuration of the system”
disrupts its operations.29 Wiener also remarked more than once on the es-
sential plasticity of the brain. He gave the example of Louis Pasteur, who
suffered a major stroke early in his scientific career. After his death, it was
discovered that he had only “half a brain.” Yet Pasteur was, Wiener pointed
out, only mildly affected by some physical paralysis, and mentally he was
not at all diminished, as his great scientific achievements following the
stroke proved. Wiener also used the very same example Canguilhem had
offered, noting that infants can suffer “an extensive injury” to one hemi-
sphere of the brain, only to have the remaining half take on all the func-
tions of the destroyed one. “This is quite in accordance with the general
great flexibility shown by the nervous system in the early weeks of life,”
Wiener wrote.30
    In this early, often speculative phase of cybernetics, Wiener could not
offer much in the way of a real explanation for this plastic quality. And yet

                          AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   253



he realized that if the brain is basically a processor of information and not
a purely physical system, we are likely to find that pathologies of the mind
will not be traceable to specific lesions of the mechanism (i.e., the level of
the neurons) but instead to a failure of the system as a whole to manage
information flows between functional centers.31 Wiener claimed that be-
cause complex human behavior no doubt involved a great deal of neuronal
connectivity, it may well be the case that the human brain is often running
“very close to the edge of an overload” that could at any moment result in
“a serious and catastrophic” failure. With increasing neural flows “a point
will come—quite suddenly—when the normal traffic will not have enough
space allotted to it, and we shall have a form of mental breakdown, very
possibly amounting to insanity.”32 Here Wiener hinted at a cybernetic form
of the “catastrophic reaction,” but again, he was limited by his inability to
say much about how the brain (or the computer network analogue) could
recognize the failure and reorganize itself in these moments of extreme
crisis and breakdown, as Goldstein and others had demonstrated. Still,
Weiner hoped one day that a “new branch of medicine” would be devel-
oped—he called it “servo-medicine”—that would deal with these kinds of
informational disorders of control when the “strains and alarms of a new
situation” put demands on an information system that was not equipped
to deal with it.33
    Much of the thinking about plasticity would focus on the importance of
the biological example of the brain as an anatomical structure whose orga-
nization was not determined by its histological form but rather by its pat-
tern of connectivity. The French neuroscientist Alfred Fessard expressed
this clearly at a 1953 conference on the methods and limits of cybernetics:
the key insight that can be drawn from cybernetics was the observation
that there need not be a “complete pre-structuration” of a system in order
to explain how it can produce behavior that is “coherent, adaptive, and goal
driven.” Indeed, it was the dynamic fluidity of feedback and transformation
that gave a system a kind of autonomy from its own “structure.” He pointed
to the significance “of a certain possibility of dynamic reorganization of the
connection schemes, whereby the living organization and its mechanical
models are partly freed from internal structural constraints and more in-
corporated into the medium, engaged in this medium.”34 The challenge,
Fessard notes here, is that the individual neuron is itself a living thing,
unlike the fixed switching devices of the new electronic brains, the com-
puters. Here is where cybernetics needed new conceptions and a technical
innovation. As he explains, for an organ like the brain to function dynami-
cally in the way it does,

254     C H A PT E R 24



      what needs to change is not, of course, the anatomical arrangement of the
      nerve pathways, woven once and for all time in adults; it is the susceptibil-
      ity that each neuron has to enter into activity, and which requires a certain
      neural plasticity that cyberneticists seem to have overlooked.35


“A General and [Patho-]Logical Theory of Automata”: Von Neumann


And yet . . . One of the most important and notorious cyberneticists, John
von Neumann, the brilliant mathematician and ultimate leader of the mili-
tary project to build a high-speed digital computer for the design of nuclear
bombs, was seriously engaged with this central concept of plasticity and
its relation with error. Von Neumann looked to the sphere of biology, es-
pecially neurophysiology, as a way of reconceptualizing the very future of
computing itself.
    In some of his earliest work on computing von Neumann had (with his
colleague H. H. Goldstine) hinted that “human reasoning” might at some
point be “more efficiently replaced by mechanisms.”36 Von Neumann was,
from the start of his transition from mathematician to digital computer de-
signer and military bureaucrat, thoroughly engaged with the metaphori-
cal and structural connections between organic systems and technology, in
particular, with the importance of the nervous system as the information
center for intelligent organisms. And so he would, to the puzzlement of his
technical collaborators on the project, describe the EDVAC (the first stored
program computer) as a machine built from “idealized neurons.”37 How-
ever, by the time he came to deliver his important series of lectures on the
theory of automata (natural and artificial), von Neumann, not unlike Wolf-
gang Köhler, questioned the value of any analogy between the brain and the
computer: “It’s terribly difficult to form any reasonable guess as to whether
things which are as complex as the behavior of a human being can or can-
not be administered by 10 billion switching organs. No one knows exactly
what a human being is doing, and nobody has seen a switching organ of 10
billion units; therefore one would be comparing two unknown objects.”38
    One of the “complex” human behaviors von Neumann was interested in
was, of course, intelligence—indeed, he often stressed the importance of
insight in scientific and mathematical work in a way consistent with the
epistemological ideas traced in the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies.39 “In pure mathematics,” he told his audience, “the really powerful
methods are only effective when one already has some intuitive insight. . . .
In this case one is already ahead of the game and suspects the direction in
which the result lies.” He did not claim that the computer would replace

                            AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   255



human insight. Instead, he merely suggested, pragmatically, that high-
speed computers could help out in those areas, such as turbulent flows
and shock analysis, where the problems facing physicists were so unique,
so “singular,” that very few “insights” were forthcoming, because the non-
linear equations involved were not analogous to the better-known linear
domain and in fact “violated” all of our expectations. Here, the computer,
with its astounding calculating ability, could serve as a kind of virtual space
of experimentation. The machine could solve certain critical cases first iso-
lated by the physicists as promising, and from analysis of these cases, we
might gain some form of “intuition” (as he put it) as to where other critical
cases might lie.40
   This attention to insight helps, I think, explain von Neumann’s perhaps
surprisingly harsh critique of McCulloch and Pitts’s seminal work on com-
putation and neurology in these lectures. Although he agreed with their
mathematical conclusion that idealized neural networks could well oper-
ate as a biological Turing machine, von Neumann emphasized what was
not demonstrated by the two collaborators—that anything like this system
actually occurs in nature. That is, von Neumann resisted the logical sim-
plification of a system that was, according to neurological research, almost
overwhelming in its internal complexity.41 But, more important, he was also
acutely aware of the psychological complexities involved. The two realms
were, obviously, intimately connected. As he noted in this suggestive, al-
most Wittgensteinian illustration:

   Suppose you want to describe the fact that when you look at a triangle you
   realize that it’s a triangle, and you realize this whether it’s small or large.
   It’s relatively simple to describe geometrically what is meant: a triangle is a
   group of three lines arranged in a certain manner. Well, that’s fine, except
   that you also recognize as a triangle something whose sides are curved, and
   a situation where only the vertices are indicated, and something where the
   interior is shaded and exterior is not. You can recognize as triangle many
   different things, all of which have some indication of a triangle in them, but
   the more details you try to put in a description of it, the longer the descrip-
   tion becomes.


Or, more precisely, the “logical” descriptions of such complex analogical
recognitions may even prove impossible at a certain point. In a perhaps
unconscious allusion to Gestalt theory, von Neumann noted that “with re-
spect to the whole visual machinery of interpreting a picture, of putting
something into a picture, we get into domains which you certainly cannot

256   C H A PT E R 24



describe in those [i.e., logical] terms.” There was no way of describing the
“wholeness” we recognize despite distorted, partial, or ambiguous forms.42
    At this point, von Neumann suggested an interesting “isomorphic”
relation between these intuitive forms of thought and the complex orga-
nization of the nervous system. If the “visual brain” was responsible for
such direct insights, he suggested, perhaps it was best to think of this neu-
ral network (consisting of two billion pathways) not as carrying out some
formal logical computation to produce the insight but as itself physically
organized as such a unity, according to its own vastly complicated logic—
one that was at this point totally unknown and frankly beyond our com-
prehension. “I think that there is a good deal of reason to suspect that this
is so with things which have this disagreeably vague and fluid impression
(like ‘What is a visual analogy?’), where one feels that one will never get to
the end of the description.” Neither the experience nor the neural processes
could be reduced to simpler categories.43
    Yet von Neumann went even further here, noting that not only were
these processes complex, but they were not necessarily predetermined.
After criticizing McCulloch and Pitts’s theory of memory circuits with the
observation that the brain’s memory, whose existence is undeniable, seems
to be located nowhere in particular, he went on to say that in general “it is
never very simple to locate anything in the brain, because the brain has an
enormous ability to re-organize. Even when you have localized a function
in a particular part of it, if you remove that part, you may discover that the
brain has reorganized itself, reassigned its responsibilities, and the func-
tion is again being performed.”44 This is exactly what so many brain scien-
tists had emphasized in the interwar period, and such plasticity (or “equi-
potentiality,” as it was often called) was at the center of Kurt Goldstein’s
important 1934 book on the holistic organism, which was, as we have seen,
based in part on the numerous studies Goldstein and his collaborators had
done on brain-injured soldiers during the Great War.
    For von Neumann, the creative plasticity of the nervous system served
only to highlight the rather simplistic, and inferior, mechanical structure of
the early computers, something he was of course well positioned to notice.
This was no mere philosophical question at the time. Von Neumann, like
many others involved in the origins of digital computing, was acutely aware
of the problematic unreliability of these early machines. From the start,
error loomed large in von Neumann’s thinking on machine computing—
and in fact, much of modern error analysis and correction techniques can
arguably be traced to his seminal work in this area with H. H. Goldstine.
But in his elaboration of his general automata theory, von Neumann was

                                  AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   257




Figure 24.1. From Martin H. Wiek, “The ENIAC Story,” ORDNANCE (1961).
Source: US Army photo. Courtesy ftp.arl.army.mil/~mike/comphist.



interested more in what was at stake conceptually with the problem of er-
ror. He could see that while the digital logic of computers had greatly in-
creased precision because it eliminated the whole problem of “noise” that
was so troublesome in analogical computing devices, the sequential logic
of the digital systems was, practically speaking, much less reliable, since
any single breakdown in the circuitry (a blown vacuum tube, for instance)
introduced potentially devastating errors that would quickly multiply in
long and complex calculations.45 (Figure 24.1.)
    With this in mind, von Neumann made one important assumption in
his automata theory: “In no practical way can we imagine an automaton
which is really reliable.”46 This would have far-reaching implications. Von
Neumann realized that any systematic form of error management, or any
single, centralized control mechanism, would also have to be considered
subject to failure.47 Error, he once said, had to be considered “not as an ex-
traneous and misdirected or misdirecting accident, but an essential part
of the process under consideration—its importance in the synthesis of au-
tomata being fully comparable to that of the factor which is normally con-
sidered, the intended and correct logical structure.”48
    Of course, it was here that the amazing plasticity of “problem-solving”
biological organisms was so important, and von Neumann would invoke
this nonlogical—or perhaps a-logical—plasticity as a model for any artifi-

258   C H A PT E R 24



cial automaton. “If you axiomatize an automaton by telling exactly what it
will do in every completely defined situation, you are missing an import-
ant part of the problem,” he stated. “It’s very likely that on the basis of the
philosophy that every error has to be caught, explained, and corrected, a
system of the complexity of the living organism would not run for a mil-
lisecond. Such a system is so well-integrated that it can operate across er-
rors.”49 In this context, von Neumann was fascinated by the fact that the
nervous system did not seem to use digital forms of notation at all, operat-
ing instead with a statistical messaging technique that was less precise, to
be sure, but much more reliable because it never relied on any single, spe-
cific message for its successful operation.50
    As we can see clearly, in cybernetics and in neuroscience of the period,
the “system” could only operate across errors because its essential unity
was not fixed in any one specific location. The system did not just spread
its information over many neural connections, in case some failed. It also
could actively bypass a whole series of performances for the good of the
whole system when systematic error was detected. To accomplish this, the
system had to possess a direct form of insight, von Neumann implied, and
he used rather psychological language to describe this ability: “The system
is sufficiently flexible and well-organized that as soon as an error shows up
in any part of it, the system automatically senses whether this error matters
or not. If it doesn’t matter, the system continues to operate without pay-
ing attention to it. If the error seems to be important, the system blocks that
region out, by-passes it, and proceeds along other channels.”51
    The “radically different” approach to error and organization in the phys-
ical nervous system raised a key question: What was the principle of orga-
nization that would explain this flexible form of self-regulation? What
was this very active systematic order? At this point, the best von Neumann
could do was suggest that “the ability of a natural organism to survive in
spite of a high incidence of error . . . probably requires a very high flexibil-
ity and the ability of the automaton to watch itself and reorganize itself.”52
This entailed an important autonomy of parts, where “there are several or-
gans each capable of taking over in an emergency,” but also a logic of sys-
tematic order that could in some way define these creative solutions to cri-
sis. In other words, the parts could only take control if they had some inner
connection to the principal structure of the whole organism. “The problem
consists of understanding how these elements are organized into a whole,
and how the functioning of the whole is expressed in terms of these ele-
ments,” he pointed out—returning to one of the central tropes of Gestalt
psychology.53 Yet, until the end of his life, von Neumann admitted repeat-

                         AU TO M AT I C P L AST I C I TY A N D T H E PAT H O LO G I CA L M AC H I N E   259



edly that this logic was beyond any present understanding. His unfinished
and undelivered Silliman lectures for Yale University, published as The Com-
puter and the Brain after his death, in the end just detailed the fundamental
differences between these two entities. His terse conclusion was that the
logical structures involved in nervous system activity must “differ consider-
ably” from the ones we are familiar with in logic and mathematics.54

Reading cybernetic concepts with and against contemporary theorizations
of open, living systems, we glimpse some important and provocative in-
tersections between the technological discourse of cybernetics and conti-
nental forms of thought that emphasized holistic and vitalist concepts of
organismic order. A crucial marker of the open living system was the im-
portant and productive role played by pathological and even catastrophic
states in maintaining the persistence of organismic unity. Having recog-
nized this themselves, the cyberneticists had faith that it would be possible
to create artificial machines that possessed genuine plasticity, so necessary
for survival in times of extreme crisis.55 In the cybernetic era, both organ-
isms and advanced machines were sites of stability and instability, truth
and error, order and disorder, health and pathology; all were intertwined,
in sometimes strange ways, to produce fragile yet powerful beings, en-
dowed with astonishing and unpredictable creative powers.
