27
Leroi-Gourhan on the Technical
Origin of the Exteriorized Mind



In a very real sense, tools created Homo sapiens.
                            Sherwood Washburn (1959)1



The Transmission of Memory: On the Materiality of Culture


Taking up the postwar question of the emergence of the human in the
depths of prehistorical time, André Leroi-Gourhan affirmed the connection
between technology and the evolution of the hominid into the “human”
that is defined by its separation—or liberation—from genetic evolutionary
determination and the limits of biological memory and cognition.
    The concept of time figures prominently in essays leading up to the pub-
lication of his masterwork, Gesture and Speech, which appeared in 1964. In
one essay, he explains that, zoologically speaking, there is no “abyss” that
would differentiate humans from any other vertebrates. The “originality”
of the break that constitutes the human is not a biological novelty, a gift be-
stowed on the species. Which is to say, as Sherwood Washburn also argued
in this period,2 that the human was not produced by the biological presence
of a larger brain or some other physical attribute. As Leroi-Gourhan states,
“The sole criterion of humanity that is biologically irrefutable is the pres-
ence of the tool.”3 To identify the human through anatomy, say, of the hand,
is already posing the question of technology. However, Leroi-Gourhan’s
original approach is this: he does not use technicity as the threshold be-
tween animal and human but instead admits that all living beings are in a
sense “technical” in that they use “neuro-motor equipment” within organic
structures to effect action that has a psychic element directing it. For Leroi-
Gourhan, the absolute break that constitutes the human lies in the cogni-

                                                                            311

312   C H A PT E R 27



tive transformation, a transformation that takes place in the sphere of tech-
nicity. The psychic originality is not in the implement, per se, but rather in
the construction of novel chains of gestures in the use of tools, sequences
that are capable, then, of being transmitted to other members of the human
group. Any gesture (of even the lowliest organism) assumes a certain de-
gree of memory, Leroi-Gourhan observes. However, animal memory is de-
termined by the evolutionary development of the species—including the
acquisition of memories in the course of life experience, which is a func-
tion of the neural machinery each organism inherits (119). The human is
not defined by an increase in memory or its sophistication but by its un-
precedented form. Acknowledging its essential “mystery,” Leroi-Gourhan
explains that “human memory is cast in language; it is totally socialized
and constitutes a store of practices, transmitted from one generation to the
next” (121). But it must be emphasized that, for Leroi-Gourhan, language is
in its essence nothing other than a tool. The word is not a psychic or indi-
vidual expression. To be language, a word must be “isolable” from the indi-
vidual. It must precede its actual expression, which is to say, it is a “material”
object, an artificial tool that must be learned in order to be operable as com-
munication. “The technical behavior of the individual becomes inconceiv-
able outside of a collective device in which language is, strictly speaking,
the seat of memory” (121). Memory is therefore radically exterior to the in-
dividual: no animal makes use of such collective, exteriorized, materialized
memory, memory that is preserved through the generations by external de-
vices (122).
    Looking ahead to key themes of Gesture and Speech, here Leroi-Gourhan
confronts the leading-edge technological developments of the day, develop-
ments that raised new questions concerning the nature of the human and
the future of thinking itself. Human cultural-technical evolution has led
to increasingly efficient and massive externalized memories that prolong
and solidify individual memories limited by the capacity of the individual
brain, and this process was now accelerating with the new “programs of
automatic machines or computers [machines à calculer]” (122). Homo faber,
technical man: the power of “making” itself has been exteriorized in auto-
matic technologies, and the supposed “sacred limit” of human intellectual
thought itself has now been breached by electronics. We can now speak,
in a way, with “machines that think, and which, with total mastery of the
instructions given to them, think faster and more accurately than a hu-
man brain” (127). The machine philosopher, says Leroi-Gourhan, will beat
any human one, because it will be capable of thinking of and comparing
all possible intellectual situations. We hear an echo of Turing in these pas-

                L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   313



sages: there is nothing “spiritual” about the human. We are creatures who
are, uniquely in nature, capable of being formed—interfered with—by sys-
tems external to the logic of our individual physiological and neural orga-
nization. The computer is then a mirror of the human capacity to interiorize
and exteriorize its memory, the “instructions” that frame and govern our ac-
tions. “The brain,” as Leroi-Gourhan puts it, “is an extraordinary machine
that can be assisted by even more extraordinary machines” (128).
   The significance of Leroi-Gourhan’s intervention here is plain. Taking
up multiple threads drawn from leading-edge work in brain plasticity, evo-
lutionary theory, prehistorical anthropology, and postwar cybernetic and
computing technologies, he positions the human mind as both conditioned
by exteriorized memory that always precedes it, through the medium of
technology, and capable, because of an originary plasticity more radical
than mere neural reorganization, of genuine innovation and invention. The
“true catastrophe,” he observes, would have been the biological evolution of
cerebral integration, the “technical perfection” of increasingly larger brains
with “more complicated and more precise and efficient gestures,” for that
would mean our technicity would now be inscribed in genetic memory and
not cultural forms. This nightmare scenario—the intelligent ant colony, in
effect—is avoided precisely because of the imperfection of the human brain
(129). This is the setup for Leroi-Gourhan’s complex argument on the emer-
gence of the human through technology itself: with new questions and new
evidence—archaeological, sociological, technological—Leroi-Gourhan
will take up the line of thought that was so prominent in interwar reflec-
tions, across many disciplines, on the specificity of the human, namely, the
elaboration of a peculiar lack marking a certain productive plasticity at the
very center of our existence.

Gesture and Memory: On the Technical Evolution of the Human Brain


Leroi-Gourhan begins his major work on technology and evolution with
the destruction of the myth of the human, a myth that has metaphysical,
theological, but also biological and evolutionary versions: that is, the idea
that the human results from a certain acquisition of a capacity that allows
for a certain transcendence of the rest of nature—that could be a special
spiritual capacity, a new ability (“to speak, to reason”), or, more materially,
a larger or more complex brain.4 The myth is shattered by the spectacular
postwar findings that revolutionized (and were still transforming) the un-
derstanding of the evolutionary lineage of the hominid line. By the time
Leroi-Gourhan is writing, it is clear that human beings did not emerge as

314     C H A PT E R 27



“smarter apes,” who could be defined by their special anatomical, cerebral,
or behavioral superiority. The “human” that became us is an evolutionary
line parallel to that of the great apes. The common ancestor (neither ape nor
human) was the connection, and therefore the search for some “missing
link” between ape and human was now thoroughly discredited. The scien-
tific fact was that there were humans who did not seem to be human, at least
from any of the mythological perspectives. Yet they were distinct from any
other animal.
    The human that appears first as a distinct form is defined by its essen-
tial features, according to Leroi-Gourhan: bipedalism and the use of simple
tools. These two features are intimately linked, as we have already seen in
Washburn’s account. Upright posture constitutes the “freeing of the hand”
for the novel use of tools. Here is where we can isolate the gap—not the zo-
ological gap between human and ape, say, but the radical gap that allows for
the unique and peculiar evolution of the human, a trajectory that literally
takes us out of nature. As Leroi-Gourhan notes, it all begins with the hand.

      Freedom of the hand almost necessarily implies a technical activity differ-
      ent from that of apes, and a hand that is free during locomotion, together
      with a short face and the absence of fangs, commands the use of artificial
      organs, that is, of implements. Erect posture, short face, free hand during
      locomotion, and possession of movable implements—those are truly the
      fundamental criteria of humanity. (19)


The challenge, then, is to explain how this simple and relatively uninter-
esting creature becomes intelligent, acquires culture, creates a civilization.
These developments, it is clear, cannot by definition be explicated directly
by some biological narrative. Even the brain itself—the focus, as we know,
of so much attention from theorists of intelligence and reason—cannot
be the site of human development because the brain is, and again Leroi-
Gourhan affirms Washburn, only a “secondary development.”
   To explain how the original human becomes human as we know it is a
paradoxical exercise. What Leroi-Gourhan demonstrates is that this be-
coming is not a biological transition across some specific threshold. The
earliest human is already human in a way that does not distinguish us
from the other primates, even as it identifies us as a separate species. Leroi-
Gourhan states clearly the main thesis, which links his work to a variety of
theorizations of cultural evolution in this period and earlier. “Homo sapiens
represents the last known stage of hominid evolution and also the first in
which the constraints of zoological evolution had been overcome and left

                L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   315



immeasurably far behind” (20). Last and first. The hinge of human history
is that transition from morphological development in biological time to the
emergence of a being defined from now on by its transformations in histor-
ical time. The question of the origin is the question of how, at some point in
the distant past, a human animal could remain an animal while becoming
at the same time not an animal in the most radical sense. The new factor is
not a biological factor. It is the existence of a new organization, a social body
that itself has no logical relationship with the physical organization of the
individual bodies (and brains) of the hominids. The new human, possessing
language, technics, and art, results from a process whereby “our uniquely
organized mammalian body is,” as Leroi-Gourhan puts it, “enclosed and ex-
tended by a social body whose properties are such that zoology no longer
plays any part in its material development” (21).
    How to account for the escape from biology from within the very sphere
of biology? That is the challenge of any scientific theory of human evolu-
tion. So Leroi-Gourhan begins with primordial evolution, detailing how—
from the fish to the early land animals to the appearance of mammals with
complex nervous systems—the demands of locomotion in diverse environ-
ments created a certain evolutionary line, the organism with an “anterior
field” that coordinates and orients the living being in its space, creating a
structural topology that links the facial zone with the manipulable limbs
and, eventually, the sensory system and the coordination of that informa-
tion in the brain (26 ff.). The brain is an unusual organ, according to Leroi-
Gourhan, because it is not structured or evolved in terms of its materiality;
it is mechanically passive, so to speak. The brain, he says, is a “tenant” in
the body and therefore is marked as a consequence of a crucial biological
separation (47). The container and the contained (body and brain) are in “di-
alogue” but can never be identified with each other (59). They constitute two
distinct zones, two systems that are to some extent independent of one an-
other. This is all to say that the brain does not just “get bigger” and produce
a new capacity, with humans ultimately receiving the best brains. Rather,
the evolution of the anatomy and morphology of the organism is driven by
the mechanical demands of the situation. The brain evolves in response to
these developments. “In the progression of the brain and the body, at every
stage the former is but a chapter in the story of the latter’s advances. We can-
not cite a single example of a living animal whose nervous system preceded
the evolution of the body but there are many fossils to demonstrate the
brain’s step-by-step development within a frame acquired long before” (47).
    Technicity is, for Leroi-Gourhan, the mode that exemplifies the funda-
mental relationship between brain and body. Every advanced animal pos-

316   C H A PT E R 27



sesses technical abilities, namely, the capacities of its bodily organs. Yet
they also possess an ability “to organize” themselves, and that ability is ex-
ercised by the brain and nervous system. Leroi-Gourhan suggests here that
evolution is effected, in part, by the acquisition of certain technical func-
tions, which are then selected for again when the organism (through the
evolution of the brain) acquires the ability to use these technical systems
in new ways and in a variety of circumstances. The range of possibilities is
opened up by a nervous system that responds to anatomy, but the anatomy
can never determine the deployment, so to speak, of the “natural” imple-
ments that are the organs and limbs and other anatomical features of the
body (60). Organization is depicted here as a strictly material process that
could be simulated, modeled, or perhaps even identified with the kind of
cybernetic electronic circuits featured in simple experimental automata
such as Grey Walter’s “Tortoise.” From the simple reflexes of basic organ-
isms through the primitive brains of more responsive creatures to the com-
plex behaviors of predatory mammals with complex neural organization,
Leroi-Gourhan shows how these systems can all be understood as control
centers, deploying a sequence of operations that control body functions.
    The point is that there is no “instinct” but instead more or less complex
repertoires preserved in the species memory. The organism is always, to a
certain degree, “plastic” because it must respond to the environment. As
Leroi-Gourhan puts it, and again note the use of cybernetic language: “The
nervous system is not an instinct-producing machine but one that responds
to internal and external demands by designing programs” (221). There is
more or less freedom in action depending on the options available to the or-
ganism. Many higher animals have what Leroi-Gourhan calls an advanced
degree of “technicity,” in that they have fine control of their grasping organs
(paws, hands). His point is that technicity as a conceptualization of the link
between control systems and “implements” (natural or otherwise) appears
well before human beings arrive on the evolutionary scene and before the
kind of brain organization characteristic of Homo sapiens. Technicity is, in
other words, already zoological, which is to say, determined through mate-
rially organized sequences. The question is not technicity itself, then, but
what is particular and distinct about human technicity.
    At the beginning, according to Leroi-Gourhan, the human is simply a
zoological being. The simple tools found in abundance at various archae-
ological sites, the so-called pebble tools, prove that humans were already
“technical” in a way. However, as Leroi-Gourhan describes it, these tools
are more “secretions of the body” than any profound example of higher in-
tellectual capacity. The tools remain the same, for millions of years, imply-

                 L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   317



ing their stability as part of a “natural” zoological dimension of the human
body. Leroi-Gourhan is not exactly clear in these sections where he remarks
on how the simple tools are “exuded” (almost passively) from the “body.”
But to elaborate on this point, we might suggest that what Leroi-Gourhan
has in mind is that the free hand of the hominid can grasp rocks more easily
and more often than other animals whose hands are occupied with a mul-
titude of important tasks (locomotion, feeding, etc.). However, the rock is
just a rock. The “tool” is at best a modification of the rock so that it can func-
tion better as a rock, that is to say, as more or less an extension of the hand
itself. It substitutes for the hand, and any construction is driven by the ma-
teriality of the stone itself—that is what Leroi-Gourhan establishes in his
analysis of these early tools. “The Australanthropian making a chopper al-
ready had a mental picture of the finished tool because the pebble chosen
had to be of suitable shape” (97).
    This is why we can interpret the pebble tool as natural in the sense that
its construction and use are determined in advance by the body. The sen-
sory and motor operations of the nervous system confronts an object that
can be viewed, it seems, pretty much in only one way: as a shape and mass
that can be transformed into a slightly better version of itself. And we can
note that early humans did not keep their tools, instead abandoning them
after use, implying a complete lack of any intelligent foresight. This is why
Leroi-Gourhan can argue: “Throughout the greater part of our chronolog-
ical existence (for only a few instants of geological time still remained to
be covered), human technicity would thus seem to have been related more
directly to zoology than to any other science” (98). The original human
does not use some “intelligence” to invent a new object, the tool, to escape
nature, as many modern anthropological myths relate.

   The Australanthropians, by contrast, seem to have possessed their tools in
   much the same way as an animal has claws. They appear to have acquired
   them, not through some flash of genius which, one fine day, led them to pick
   up a sharp-edged pebble and use it as an extension of their fist (an infan-
   tile hypothesis well-beloved of many works of popularization), but as if their
   brains and their bodies had gradually exuded them. (106)


But of course we know that tools themselves evolved. Leroi-Gourhan’s new
question, then, is to explain that difference, the radical threshold between
the zoological and the cultural.
   Leroi-Gourhan is, perhaps necessarily, rather hazy on this moment of
origin; however, the central issue for him is anticipation. If the earliest stone

318     C H A PT E R 27



tools demanded some kind of minimal attention to the future use of the
chosen pebble, the characteristic of later tools is clearly something of a new
order.

      The development that took place between Australopithecus and the Archan-
      thropians thus consisted in the acquisition of a second series of actions. This
      was more than simply the addition of something new, for it implied a good
      deal of foresight on the part of the individual performing the sequence of
      technical operations. . . . [A] second operation has to be performed in order
      to reduce the initial flake to a shape that must be preexistent in the maker’s
      mind. (95–97; my emphasis)


Intelligence, tool, language, social form: these are all redescribed by Leroi-
Gourhan as complex sequences, sequences that are in essence unnatural,
which is to say, not necessary. The sequences are constructed and will need
to be remembered, and then learned again, in order to be preserved. The
human on this edge is a human on the way to becoming intelligent—and
only one feature can be seized on to narrate this development because it
was what distinguished the human animal in the first place: namely, the
hand, liberated by the unique erect posture of the bipedal hominid.
    If the brain emerges in evolution as the organ of an organism’s “organi-
zation,” the separation of the human from biology will result in a new kind
of brain altogether, a brain that is not just the control center of the physio-
logical systems. The human brain becomes an organ capable of organizing
the “unorganized.” The argument that Leroi-Gourhan gives is not spelled
out in detail, but we can identify the crucial steps. The fact that the hand
is freed in the move to bipedal locomotion produces a strange disruption
of the advanced nervous system of the hominid: there is a complex instru-
ment that no longer has a primary role in the activity of the organism. Of
course, in evolutionary development, many things can become less useful
and disappear or remain only in vestigial form. But with the human being,
the hand is there, within the nervous system’s order but also outside the ge-
netically determined order of repertoires. What Leroi-Gourhan (and oth-
ers) was suggesting is that the demands of life selected for the new adap-
tations that gave the hand new tasks, new actions. But not in the sense of
normal evolutionary selection. The brain and the hand evolve together, and
what happens is that the brain must learn to organize the actions of a bodily
instrument that has no natural role. The hand emerges as a flexible instru-
ment that can be adapted to a variety of challenges, while the human brain
emerges as a new form of plasticity—not just capable of taking on form in

                L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   319



the course of psychic experience and memory, a kind of passive plasticity
characteristic of the responsive animal brain, but capable of giving form
itself, giving form to the hand and then, by an extension that is already be-
ing performed internal to the body, giving form that organizes external na-
ture itself.
    This is all quite unlike the building of nests or dams or the use of im-
plements by chimpanzees, because those actions are all still the result of a
natural and inherited form of organization. The human brain becomes in-
telligent in this sense: it can reorder its environment unnaturally to provide
solutions to the challenges of survival. The human survives by evolving a
technicity of organization that is not limited by nature itself. Indeed, the
human that lacks especially impressive physical abilities succeeds by turn-
ing itself into a kind of adaptable implement, a not so obscure reference to
Rousseau it would seem.
    Here is Leroi-Gourhan’s framing of the exceptional turn, a veritable bi-
furcation in evolution that is unprecedented: “The stabilization and even-
tual overtaking of the technical brain were of particular importance to the
human species. Had development continued toward ever increasing corti-
calization of the neuromotor system, our evolution would have stopped at
a stage comparable to that of the most advanced insects” (117). The human
brain is not a brain specialized in certain technical feats: “The motor areas
were overtaken by zones of association having a very different character
that, instead of orienting the brain toward ever more developed technical
specialization, opened up unlimited possibilities of generalization unlim-
ited at any rate by comparison with the possibilities offered by zoological
evolution.” The result is that humans acquire a radically new kind of brain,
one “superspecialized in the skill of generalizing” (118). At this moment,
however primitive the forms of symbolization/technicization, humans are
on the way to a form of life no longer determined by the biological: “Their
journey will be not so much a matter of biological development as of free-
ing themselves from the zoological context and organizing themselves in
an entirely new way, with society gradually taking the place of the phyletic
stream” (116).

Exteriorization and the Origin of Artificial Intelligence


For Leroi-Gourhan, the name for the kind of technicity enabled by this plas-
ticity is exteriorization. The organization of the psychic sequence is literally
symbolized in the tool where it takes on a material form. The sequence is
visible in the order and form of the tool, and to make or use or understand

320   C H A PT E R 27



the tool, the mind must already be capable of interiorizing new sequences
that have no prior blueprint or presence in the mind. This is why, for Leroi-
Gourhan, language is a tool—not because it has practical use or must be
shared to be effective. Rather, the tool is the embodiment of an idea that can
move from brain to object to another brain.5 The tool is already language we
might just as easily say. The crucial factor is the separation of the sequence,
the organization, from the materiality of the object, so that it can serve as
a vehicle for the expression and internalization of that sequence. Using
tools develops the brain in such a way that symbolization becomes more
and more pronounced, producing what might seem to be “‘gratuitous’ in-
tellectual operations” (107) but are in fact major factors in the solidification
of the social edifice necessary to maintain the traditions of the tool, which
must be learned and practiced with greater and greater attention as the
tools become more and more complex and “abstracted” from their material
ground as they evolve (114–15).
    The origin and central animating force of the social “organism” is the
externalized memory that becomes a collective and shared store of vari-
ous “operating sequences” that enable artificial and technical forms of life
to be maintained and preserved across time and space. The social body is
now organized according to the logic of organization itself, which, as Leroi-
Gourhan emphasizes, is the very form of human intelligence. Whether
bodily practices, linguistic representations, or technical systems, Leroi-
Gourhan insists, “it is the organization of matter that, in various ways, di-
rectly shapes all aspects of human life” (147; my emphasis). Organization is
the determination of human life but also the evidence of human liberation
from their genetic inheritance. As Leroi-Gourhan writes, “The whole of our
evolution has been oriented toward placing outside ourselves what in the
rest of the animal world is achieved inside by species adaptation. The most
striking material fact is certainly the ‘freeing’ of tools, but the fundamental
fact is really the freeing of the word and our unique ability to transfer our
memory to a social organism outside ourselves” (235). The “programming”
of the human is via artificial storage mechanisms, unlike the genetic deter-
mination of the various forms of animal memory (222).
    This is the space for a new definition of technology: the human invents
gestures to manipulate organized objects, whereas animals use stored ges-
tures to direct their “natural” endosomatic implements or, occasionally,
external objects. So the human, liberated by tools and language as forms
of exteriorized memory, is liberated from what Leroi-Gourhan calls “lived
experience” (227). In an echo of Heidegger, human intelligence operates
here in the register of history and anticipation that is quite simply unavail-

                L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   321



able to any other living being. Humans compare and reorganize represen-
tations, symbolic forms. In being liberated from lived experience and en-
tering the domain of cultural formation and organization, the human does
not give up one form of “determinism” for another. The complex mammal
has freedom of action, but it is not intelligent because it cannot exteriorize
its experience and interrupt the sequence of operations—however plastic
that sequence might be. The human has another kind of freedom, the free-
dom to organize, and that freedom to organize always entails the capacity
of the individual to resist organization or, to put it another way, to reorganize.
The dynamism of a technical and social system is the result of fundamen-
tal instabilities: technics evolve with individual extensions or breaks in the
shared practices; social order evolves as it responds to changing conditions
but also according to the internal stresses that come from the repeated “in-
dividualization” of shared norms (228).
    As Leroi-Gourhan will demonstrate, in the second part of his book, the
history of human civilization will be the history of a series of exterioriza-
tions that constitute the technical core of any social system. As the hand
constructs a tool that will be driven by the hand itself, eventually the hand
will make a tool that is driven by external forms of power, “guided” by the
gestures of the hand—the plow, for example. And then the gestural se-
quence of the hand will itself be exteriorized in certain kinds of automatic
machines, such as the windmill or watermill. Still, the “hand” is present in
the organization and operation of these machines, which are also depen-
dent on their external sources of energy (235 ff.). The “last” stage, according
to Leroi-Gourhan, the industrial age, that is, is marked by the exterioriza-
tion and integration of the tool, the gesture, and the motive force—the era
of the steam engine. As Marx and others noted with dismay, humans (or
at least a certain number of individuals in society) become tools of the au-
tomatic machines, feeding, tending, and assisting the largely autonomous
organization that is the factory (247). Here Leroi-Gourhan emphasizes that
the “last stage” is not simply the appearance of automaticity, but the first
appearance of the exteriorization of human intellectual functions, the con-
struction, that is, of artificial nervous systems. “Developments in the use of
electricity, and above all the rise of electronics, taking place less than a cen-
tury after the mutation that produced automotive machines, have triggered
another mutation that leaves but little in the human organism still to be
exteriorized” (248). We see in the cybernetic age the emergence of the ro-
botic ideal, the automaton “twin” that has haunted humanity throughout
the machine age: “Today’s machinery with its multiple sources of energy is
leading to something like a real muscular system, controlled by a real ner-

322     C H A PT E R 27



vous system, performing complex operating programs through its connec-
tions with something like a real sensory-motor brain” (248).
   But also more than a sensory-motor brain, in fact: the development of
punched-card data systems and then the digital computer has made it pos-
sible to imagine the exteriorization of intelligence itself.6 “The electronic
brain,” writes Leroi-Gourhan,

      can compete with the brain in terms of the ability to compare. They can—on
      a gigantic scale and within a negligible period of time—process a mountain
      of data to achieve a well-defined end, and they can produce every possible
      answer. If provided with the data needed for an oriented choice, they can
      weigh those answers and enrich such preestablished weightings with judg-
      ments based on experience drawn from precedents stored in their memory.
      (264–65; my emphasis)


This mirroring of the human mind was, we know, the source of much con-
cern in the postwar period even as the “ideal” animated extensive (and well-
funded) research in cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence proj-
ects that were, often, ultimately aimed at replacing humans in situations
demanding intelligent decision making—for example, in new military con-
texts where the speed and the scale of events were beyond human compre-
hension. (Many AI projects in the postwar era were in fact funded by US
military agencies.)7
    The artificial brain is, however, a step in the evolution of technology, like
any other innovation, and cannot be repressed so easily. However, machine
intelligence is the most peculiar kind of exosomatic organ. Can the artifi-
cial brain take on the capacity to create the artificial? There is no doubt, says
Leroi-Gourhan, that the artificial brain (like any other prosthesis) will ex-
ceed the capacities of the natural organs of humanity. “We already know, or
will soon know, how to construct machines capable of remembering every-
thing and of judging the most complex situations without error.” The inad-
equacy of our cortex will inevitably make the human being “a living fossil
in the context of the present conditions of life.” As Leroi-Gourhan puts it:

      Hardly anything more can be imagined other than the exteriorization of in-
      tellectual thought through the development of machines capable not only
      of exercising judgment (that stage is already here) but also of injecting af-
      fectivity into their judgment, taking sides, waxing enthusiastic, or being
      plunged into despair at the immensity of their task. Once Homo sapiens had
      equipped such machines with the mechanical ability to reproduce them-

                  L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   323



   selves, there would be nothing left for the human to do but withdraw into
   the paleontological twilight. (248)


With a transhumanist flourish avant la lettre, Leroi-Gourhan observes that
perhaps we “must eventually follow a path other than the neuronic one”
if humanity is to continue” (265).8 In any case, the absolute distinction
between human and machine in the realm of modern computing and cy-
bernetic systems could no longer be maintained, and, as Bruce Mazlish
argued, humans will have to accommodate themselves to yet another re-
description of its essence as unexceptional, what he called the “fourth dis-
continuity” that has appeared after previous disenchantments and decen-
terings of our prominence.9

The Pathologies of Industrial Exteriorizations


Within the realm of technology there exist solely technical purposes.
                  Friedrich Georg Jünger, The Failures of Technology (1949)10



The question was, however, a serious one. We can read in one book on auto-
mation from 1964, the same year Leroi-Gourhan’s appeared: “In some dis-
tant future, when cybernetic brains higher than their human equivalents
have been constructed, humanity will have to decide whether it is really af-
ter the progress of intelligence in the universe or whether it prefers to fos-
ter its own ends of domination.”11 No less an intellect than Hannah Arendt
would remark, in a lecture she delivered at a conference devoted to cyber-
netics:

   First of all, automation is a new revolution; automation brought about as
   distinguished from the Industrial Revolution of the last into the present
   century seems, from this point of view for me, to reside in two things: one,
   the Industrial Revolution replaced only muscle power, but not brain power.
   The very fact that machines can take over a certain amount of activity which
   we always have identified with the human mind, calls, in my opinion, for a
   re-evaluation of the activity, of our intellectual activity as such.12


In this talk she tried to make a distinction between technically stored
“memory” and human remembrance. The goal was to assign the computer
to the mere “computational” labor of the brain and not have it contaminate
our genuine intellectual capacities.
    A year earlier, Arendt had raised this same question, consistent with

324   C H A PT E R 27



Leroi-Gourhan’s analysis. She wrote, “Electronic brains share with all other
machines the capacity to do man’s work better and faster than man. The
fact that they supplant and enlarge human brain power rather than labor
power causes no perplexity to those who know how to distinguish be-
tween the ‘intellect’ necessary to play good checkers or chess and the hu-
man mind.” And yet, as Arendt will observe, perhaps we should not be so
complacent. “There are,” she writes, “scientists who state that computers
can do ‘what a human brain cannot comprehend,’ and this is an altogether
different and alarming proposition.” As Arendt would argue, there was
something quite different about a mind as opposed to a mere “brain,” and
the important factor was, indeed, that of automaticity. As she states here,
“Comprehension is actually a function of the mind and never the automatic
result of brain power.”13
   Arendt had commented on this in her 1958 work, The Human Condition,
where she claimed that the new technical devices were not at all perform-
ing genuine intellectual actions; they were instead just another kind of
exosomatic organ, to use Lotka’s term. For Arendt, the new electronic com-
puters “are, like all machines, mere substitutes and artificial improvers of
human labor power, following the time-honored device of all division of
labor to break down every operation into its simplest constituent motions,
substituting, for instance, repeated addition for multiplication.” The idea of
an intelligent machine is mistaken because intelligence is not something
that can be reduced to an automated sequence. “All that the giant computers
prove,” Arendt claims, “is that the modern age was wrong to believe with
Hobbes that rationality, in the sense of ‘reckoning with consequences,’ is
the highest and most human of man’s capacities.”14
   Here we come up against the key turn Leroi-Gourhan carefully plotted
in his own account of the “condition” of the human and the idea of Homo
faber—namely, the emergence of temporality. Arendt will argue that the
computer can only follow the sequence in a linear fashion. Human thought,
human memory, on the other hand, is organized, which is to say, integrated
into a temporality that links the historical memory with anticipated futures
and a present saturated with both, as Heidegger had elaborated in 1927, in
Being and Time. Human action, Arendt states emphatically, is also marked
by “its inherent unpredictability.” The “boundlessness” of human action
means it is not determined in advance. “This is not simply a question of an
inability to foretell all the logical consequences of a particular act, in which
case an electronic computer would be able to foretell the future.” The point
Arendt is making is that the future anticipated in the technical sense is a
future that is already present. The cybernetic “future” that is the telos of the

                L E R O I - G O U R H A N O N T H E T E C H N I CA L O R I G I N O F T H E E X T E R I O R I Z E D M I N D   325



machine-organism must be present in order for the errors and deviations
to be corrected in light of the goal. Now, the fabricated object must be pres-
ent in the mind (as Leroi-Gourhan explained) for the technical process to
begin. However, with human action, the future is not present at all in this
sense. For as Arendt explains, “In contradistinction to fabrication, where
the light by which to judge the finished product is provided by the image
or model perceived beforehand by the craftsman’s eye, the light that illu-
minates processes of action, and therefore all historical processes, appears
only at their end, frequently when all the participants are dead.”15
   With Heidegger, Arendt tries to preserve an essence of the human in this
capacity to be in time and to exist in the rupture that is the awareness of
being in time. This is the space where the mind can judge, where the in-
dividual can truly act and where technology can be disaggregated from
the human. As Heidegger argued in the famous essay “On the Question of
Technology” (1950), what marks the human is not the essence of technology
as Gestell, the framing of nature as the space of human “reason,” but in-
stead the very capacity of the human mind to penetrate the essence of some-
thing—a capacity that was not at all contaminated with the fabrication
of machines and the exploitation of nature. Just the opposite: the human
mind was poised on the edge of nature, experience, and Being beyond all
possibilities of “natural” or artificial means of perception and understand-
ing. Technicity, now industrialized and globalized, threatened human exis-
tence, human thinking, that is, at its core. As he put it in the preface to his
1967 collection, Wegmarken, “The question remains whether thinking will
also end in the transmission of information [Ob dann auch das Denken im
Informationsgetriebe verendet . . . bleibt die Frage].”16 Indeed, for Heidegger cy-
bernetics meant the end of philosophy, the end of thinking itself.17
   Leroi-Gourhan insisted, against Heidegger, that the origin of human
intelligence and temporality is just this primal exteriorization of thought,
which is the invention of the tool—but also, we must remember, the inven-
tion of language itself. The two are indistinguishable. Still, Leroi-Gourhan
offered his own perspective on the nightmare vision of a cybernetic future,
not unlike the future as portrayed by figures such as Heidegger and Arendt.
As Leroi-Gourhan speculated, we may be on the way to establishing an au-
tomated and self-regulating order melding humans, machines, and nature
into one monstrous system. In the last part of his book, the paleoanthro-
pologist will look between the biological and the machinic, between nature
and technics, to identify a form of “humanity” that might be recuperated in
this automatic age—“an area as yet untouched by the machine.” As he ex-
plains, “We have all along gone round inside a triangle formed by the hand,

326   C H A PT E R 27



the word, and the sensory-motor cortex and have shuttled back and forth
between the human and the monkey in search of what cannot be shared
with the rest of the zoologically or mechanically animated world.”18 What is
it about the human that cannot be captured by biology or technology, that
would resist the cybernetic incorporation of the living and the artificial?
    For Leroi-Gourhan, the inimitable element lies in the sphere of culture,
in the specific organizations of the “ethnic groups” that constitute the plu-
rality of humanity as a species—this is similar to Arendt’s defense of the
human as fundamentally a plural species. “Beyond this dual image of the
human machine and its improved artificial copy lies something else. Anal-
yses made thus far have deliberately left out of account those things that
constitute the fabric of the individual’s relationship with the group—that is
to say, everything that has to do with aesthetic behavior.”19 Leroi-Gourhan
does not, emphatically, invoke the aesthetic as some kind of special char-
acter, for that would only raise again the radical question of origin already
confronted with the paleontological account of the human itself. Instead,
Leroi-Gourhan argues that the aesthetic is, like technics and language, just
one more dimension of this fundamental transition that marks the human
as human: the exteriorization of memory into material artifacts, the ex-
teriorization of experience into symbols. The aesthetic is, ultimately (and
here we will have to end our engagement with Leroi-Gourhan for the time
being), the exteriorization of the organization of the social body itself, the
formal rhythms, styles, and structures that are embodied in the cultural ex-
pressions of an ethnic group.
    The threat to humanity, then, does not lie so much in the advance of a
machine intelligence or the like, but instead in the industrial and postin-
dustrial destruction of the plurality and specificity of ethnic groups. There
is an echo here of an important Arendtian theme. To be sure, automation
and integration play a fundamental role in this process of destruction and
homogenization, but that is no indictment of the human as technical crea-
ture. The challenge of modernity, for Leroi-Gourhan, will be preserving the
aesthetic, those spaces and forms where an individual participates in the
collective life of society as a collective, within a highly technologized life-
world.
