The Beginning
of an End

28
Technogenesis in the
Networked Age



The moving hand and its material traces do not just externalise the internal
workings of a mind. Instead, intelligence is enacted through them; it
proceeds along lines and material signs of one kind or another. For instance,
the making of a stone tool is not the product of thinking; it is a way of
thinking.
                Lambros Malafouris, “Mind and Material Engagement” (2019)1


According to the standard accounts of the “history” of artificial intelli-
gence, the mainstream efforts to model human cognition in computer pro-
grams based on a symbolic processing model had absolutely failed, leading
to the so-called AI winter—the collapse of the massive funding initiatives
that had supercharged both digital technology and AI and cognitive science
research related to these efforts. The new AI would look different. It would
pay attention to all of the dimensions of cognition absent in the symbolic,
hyperrationalist approach: embodiment, enactive perception, and the ex-
tension of the mind outside the body. The new architectures were radically
different, technologically speaking, based on artificial neural networks that
did not function sequentially and through high-level symbolic languages
and nested conceptual categories but instead were massively parallel and
distributed, to cite two key words of this moment. Part of this revolution
in AI was a project of recuperation, as researchers and thinkers in the field
looked back to pioneers in neural network systems, such as Frank Rosen-
blatt, who built an artificial sensing system (the perceptron) that used an
early form of “machine learning” to recognize patterns, such as letters.
   The 1980s can be figured as the decade of distribution and all that went
with it, conceptually—hybridization, posthumanism, poststructuralism,
systems theory, and so on. This was the time when Bruno Latour and col-

328

                                       T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   329



leagues developed actor-network theory, to take into account nonhuman
and nonliving “actants” in systems of knowledge and social order, and Ed-
ward Hutchins was doing his innovative sociological research on distrib-
uted cognition, studying naval ships and Micronesian navigators.2 We can
even see the theoretical interest in thinkers such as Michel Foucault and
Donna Haraway—among many others—as an indication of a general (crit-
ical and academic) consensus around the idea that human beings are other
than what they are, or seem to be. As a historical and cultural species, the
human could never stabilize, only be redistributed. The foundation of so
many classic theorizations in politics, sociology, and economics, namely,
the so-called autonomous individual, was now understood to be just one
particular and contingent social determination with its roots in Enlight-
enment systems of economic and political organization, buttressed by an-
thropological regimes of knowledge.

The global organization of capitalism (or at least the imaginary that partly
sustained it) was transformed dramatically by what Francis Fukiyama called
the “end of history” as the Soviet bloc disintegrated and a new historical mo-
ment was proclaimed. Not coincidentally, it seems, this was also the age
when networked computing rapidly accelerated and expanded, alongside
the emergence of “personal computing” and the integration of culture and
computation. Whatever we make of the landmark date on a global scale,
1989 did see the birth of the World Wide Web and the death of the Cold War,
initiating new sets of protocols that launched what we now call simply “the
internet” and “globalization.” The stress in this era on the study of complex
interconnected networks and multiple distributed systems, at varying levels
and in both material and intellectual registers, is vastly important. Not only
did it lay the groundwork for thinking about media technology in new ways,
but it was also the conceptual foundation of contemporary neuroscience
and the most prominent models of computing systems and artificial intel-
ligence.
   Whatever the discipline, and however sophisticated—or not—the con-
ceptualization of networks and network theory (which of course has its
own mathematical history that originates in the eighteenth century, with
Leonhard Euler), one question that was brought to the fore was this: What
exactly was the relationship between individuals and these networks and
systems? What was the relationship of the body to the individual, and how
did both bodies and minds lend themselves to assimilation into what Fou-
cault would call disciplinary regimes? Or was it necessary, as Deleuze ar-
gued, to redefine the relationship altogether? Were we mere dividuals,

330   C H A PT E R 28



tracked and organized by invisible control regimes organized by new dig-
ital technologies?3
    The difficulty of this question, philosophically speaking, but also with
respect to the development of cognitive psychology, neuroscience, biol-
ogy, cybernetics, and artificial intelligence, often provoked two incompat-
ible and equally problematic responses, and we are to a large degree still
caught in this dilemma. Network theory either entered the micro domains
of research (as a model for the brain, or the operations of various technical,
or biological, systems) or functioned as a framework for the explanation of
systemic structures in social, political, economic, and other domains. What
was less attended to, in retrospect, was thinking at the boundary: Were hu-
man beings constituted as networked, or capable of being networked, in
ways that could not be understood in scientific or technical terms?
    To trace a line of thought through this period and beyond, to point to
the “decision” that is still to be made concerning our contemporary digital
infrastructures, is to remain with the question of human intelligence and
the origin of technology. To think of an extended mind (Andy Clark, David
Chalmers),4 or an embodied mind (Francisco Varela, Hubert Maturana),5 or
a distributed mind (Hutchins, Latour), or even a radically skewed cyborg be-
ing that is no longer really “human” at all in any singular sense (Haraway),6
meant to think of what was being dispersed into networks beyond the
“mind” as it was traditionally understood, philosophically. And, of course,
the mind itself was being understood as a networked system in neuroscien-
tific models but also in more conceptual work such as J. A. Fodor’s Modu-
larity of Mind (1983) or the ruthlessly reductionist evolutionary psychology
of John Tooby and Leda Cosmides, who argued that language and culture
emerge from a human mind that is itself composed of multiple “mecha-
nisms” individually evolved for specific survival purposes.7
    What kind of thinking is being played out in these systems and fields of
organization and power, within minds and brains, within social and techni-
cal organizations? How does a network think? Can a network be intelligent?
Given the stakes of the issue today (given our predictive algorithmic cul-
ture, based on the hyper-distributed intelligence systems using deep learn-
ing), it is useful here to maintain some of the lines of thought, the concepts
and questions, that have circled and intersected with the idea of human
intelligence as an exception, a question for us. Artificial intelligence in the
networked age was no longer an exercise in “simulation.” It was the begin-
ning of the end—the end of the human brain, or even the human being,
as the center of intelligence. Would we be “living fossils” as Leroi-Gourhan
predicted, or maybe partners with an alien intelligence, or even its compet-

                                            T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   331



itors, implanting “neural chips” to try to match our own technologies? The
fantastic element of these scenarios cannot be dismissed or ignored, but
the goal here is to see how technogenesis and the evolution of technology
opens up a critical perspective on intelligence that resolutely does not hold
out some special or exceptional metaphysical position for the human. What
is artificial intelligence when intelligence cannot be naturalized so easily
anymore? After the end of metaphysics, what is a thinking being?

The Artificial Neural Network


To begin, we need to bypass philosophy and engage with network tech-
nology as it confronts its own lack of philosophy, or at least the need for a
new philosophy. The early neural network researchers working in artificial
intelligence can be aligned, as I said, with a number of parallel projects in
defamiliarizing complex systems by modeling them in distributed and sta-
tistical forms. Maturana and Varela’s landmark study of what they called
autopoiesis in one word took autonomy and automaticity as two sides of one
coin. The idea was that a system was closed and responded to itself as it un-
derwent modifications with respect to its environment. The living system
was intelligent, we could say, if it could learn and learn to predict, simply by
reorganizing its bounded parameters.

   What the observer calls “recall” and “memory” cannot be a process through
   which the organism confronts each new experience with a stored represen-
   tation of the niche before making a decision, but the expression of a mod-
   ified system capable of synthesizing a new behavior relevant to its present
   state of activity.8


There are no “sequences,” only processes. And there are no “interactions,”
only couplings.

   An autopoietic organization constitutes a closed domain of relations spec-
   ified only with respect to the autopoietic organization that these relations
   constitute, and, thus, it defines a “space” in which it can be realized as a con-
   crete system.9


Thus the interest in older models of intelligence, or at least responsive be-
havior, developed in the early days of AI. Frank Rosenblatt, for example,
has offered a simple but effective design for a machine that learned, not
through specific “trial and error” or heuristic methods championed by in-

332      C H A PT E R 28



fluential figures such as Alan Newell and Herbert Simon, but instead by
imitating simple brain activity. As Donald Hebb had argued, in The Organi-
zation of Behavior (1949), the synaptic connectivity of neurons in the brain
would, through repetition, become more and more consolidated, easier to
trigger when excited in future iterations. Rosenblatt used this idea to build
a network of “neurons” whose cognitive weights (represented by electrical
flows) could change depending on the result of the particular trial. (Figure
28.1.) As simple as it might seem, compared to today’s vast, almost incom-
prehensible machine learning networks, with layers upon layers of con-
nections and untold numbers of parameters, Rosenblatt’s perceptron was
meant to be a vision for intelligence itself. As he wrote in 1958:

      By the study of systems such as the perceptron, it is hoped that those funda-
      mental laws of organization which are common to all information handling
      systems, machines and men included, may eventually be understood.10


You could say he was right—as we will see. But it is more important to point
to Rosenblatt’s caveat here.

      Does this mean that the perceptron is capable, without further modifica-
      tion in principle, of such higher order functions as are involved in human
      speech, communication, and thinking? Actually, the limit of the percep-
      tron’s capabilities seems to lie in the area of relative judgment, and the ab-
      straction of relationships. In its “symbolic behavior,” the perceptron shows
      some striking similarities to Goldstein’s brain-damaged patients. (404)


   As Rosenblatt explained, there was something lurking in human un-
derstanding that seemed more clear, more organized, than mere statisti-
cal waves could imitate. And note the reference here to Kurt Goldstein. The
brain is a dynamic system, yes, but it is also self-organizing and capable of
Gestalt interpretation and understanding. The perceptron could not “rec-
ognize” meaning, only repeat (as with some injured patients) memorized
operations (such as marking letters). Rosenblatt will admit, “Statistical sep-
arability alone does not provide a sufficient basis for higher order abstrac-
tion. Some system, more advanced in principle than the perceptron, seems
to be required at this point” (405).
   I highlight this not to critique neural networks (that is the famous
role played in the standard historical accounts by Seymour Pappert’s
devastating—if fundamentally incorrect—takedown in his 1969 book, Per-
ceptrons) but to note the presence of this same issue in the revival of neural

                                                    T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   333




Figure 28.1. From John C. Hay, Ben E. Lynch, and David R. Smith,
Mark 1 Perceptron Operator’s Manual (Buffalo, NY: Cornell Aeronautical
Laboratory, 1960).



net research in the 1980s. Yes, the brain was a good place to look for genu-
ine insights into intelligence that assumed that embodiment and material-
ity were important for understanding what it was humans could do cogni-
tively. As Geoffrey Hinton and David Touretsky explained:

    The brain is built from painfully slow and unreliable components: neurons,
    which fire less than once per millisecond, are susceptible to fatigue, and die
    off regularly. The only way the brain can succeed as a symbol processor is by
    exploiting massive parallelism using organizational principles that remain
    unknown for the present.


However, they will also admit that the massive network approach might
leave something important out, namely, the kind of rational cognition that
was the early focus of AI research and theory.

    Computer scientists and others have long been interested in neural network
    architectures as a means of exploring the question of intelligence. . . . To im-
    plement the highest level of cognitive functioning, the one responsible for
    general reasoning, requires some sort of symbolic inference architecture.11

334      C H A PT E R 28



Hinton was part of the Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) group whose
work was represented in the iconic two-volume set of articles that appeared
in 1986 and set the stage for much future discovery in this arena. What is
fascinating here is that the one key theoretical article laying out the project
was also the one place where serious questions were raised about the tena-
bility of a network that was, as Varela and Maturana described, fundamen-
tally closed.12 The authors of the essay recognize that the way networks “an-
swer” the question posed by their inputs is by coming to a certain state, and
the language is maybe telling: the system “settles” into a state and thereby
indicates its response. However, this process seemed to be inadequate as a
way of explaining or modeling fundamental aspects of human intelligence.
As they wrote:

      If the human information-processing system carries out its computations
      by “settling” into a solution rather than applying logical operations, why are
      humans so intelligent? How can we do science, mathematics, logic, etc.?
      How can we do logic if our basic operations are not logical at all? (44)


The question is not naive, and it was not really appropriate to simply answer
that the original AI field was right, symbolic sequential processing is im-
portant. That was because the model of distributed networks was in a sense
bounded and closed, metaphysically speaking. That is, the challenge (com-
ing from brain science, which many of the researchers hailed from) was to
explain how a certain kind of thinking (logical, sequential, abstract) could
emerge from a neurological organization that was foundational organized
as a system of parallel interconnections undergoing constant changes, pro-
ducing more ephemeral moments and zones of regularity.
   This is why the answer suggested here is so provocative, astonishing
even, as it pinpoints what so many philosophers and scientists have (for
centuries) been grappling with, our central question in other words: How is
technology related to human cognition? The authors of this piece make an
astute, but highly troubling (theoretically, that is) suggestion:

      We suspect the answer comes from our ability to create artifacts—that is,
      our ability to create physical representations that we can manipulate in
      simple ways to get answers to very difficult and abstract problems. (44)


Externalization of thinking into the object creates a possibility of objectiv-
ity that allows for a productively new organization of thinking itself. It is

                                           T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   335



not accidental that the metaphor here is one of manipulation. From Kant to
Leroi-Gourhan, the hand can be seen as the facilitator between the inside
of thought and the exterior world that is to be grasped by thought and not
remain (as for animals) the mere occasion for thought. As they explain:

   These dual skills of manipulating the environment and processing the envi-
   ronment we have created allow us to reduce very complex problems to a se-
   ries of very simple ones. This ability allows us to deal with problems that are
   otherwise impossible. This is real symbol processing and, we are beginning
   to think, the primary symbol processing that we are able to do. Indeed, on this
   view the external environment becomes a key extension to our mind. (46)


The implications of this hypothesis are not lost on the authors. Thinking, in
this sense, is not merely a function of the brain, or at least, the brain is able
to internalize a logic that is not produced simply from its own statistical
waves of transformed inputs.

   Not only can we manipulate the physical environment and then process it,
   we can also learn to internalize the representations we create, “imagine”
   them, and then process these imagined representations—just as if they
   were external. (46)


The philosophy of exteriorization suggested here is (perhaps not surpris-
ingly) not followed up. Of course, everyone knows that human beings are
capable of such thought, with their brains, so if artifacts are essential to the
evolution of intelligence, that fact can be marked then displaced. They will
admit that “it seems to us that such representational systems are not very
easy to develop.” Yet essential nonetheless. “We are good at manipulating
our environment. This is another version of man-the-tool-user, and we be-
lieve that this is perhaps the crucial skill which allows us to think logically,
do mathematics and science, and in general build a culture” (44). But to
make progress, clearly it is necessary to avoid or at least set aside the prob-
lem. The work is off-loaded to another department or discipline.
   Where do artifacts come from? “Usually they are provided by our culture”
(47; my emphasis). Culture stands as both the origin and the result of tech-
nology, an impossible lever that moves the brain into the new field of intel-
ligence that is necessary to begin the process in the first place.

336    C H A PT E R 28



The Technical Evolution of Culture


Cultures are best seen not as complexes of concrete behavior patterns,
customs, usages, traditions, habit clusters—but as sets of control
mechanisms—plans, recipes, rules, instructions, what computer engineers
call “programs” for the governing of behavior. The second is that man is
the animal most desperately dependent upon such extragenetic control
mechanisms for ordering his behavior.
                        Clifford Geertz, “The Impact of the Concept of Culture
                                               on the Concept of Man” (1966)13



As Leroi-Gourhan had argued, the very definition of the human rests on
a break with biological evolution in the turn to a form of cultural—and al-
ways therefore technical—evolution based on the exteriorization of mem-
ory and gesture. In a wave of postwar work on evolutionary psychology and
the birth of culture, this fundamental insight was reaffirmed. Interest in
the artifact (material medium) for thinking about reason and human intel-
ligence was, as we know, hardly unknown before this period. Indeed, much
of the new thinking on media and literacy (in the influential and widely
cited work of Marshall McCluhan most notably) was showing how certain
forms of technical systems imposed those forms (“linearity” of thought, for
example) on human minds, for better or worse.
   A notable case is that of Merlin Donald, whose early career was in exper-
imental cognitive sciences, with decidedly modest aims, but who later took
up the crucial grand question of “culture” as it defines the emergence of the
human. Donald would outline an ambitious “history of the modern mind”
that isolated stages in the way human biological beings began not just to
interact, but to communicate in a way animals never do. A new relationship
between human psychology (rooted in models of brains understood as in-
formation systems) and the advent of technology was crucial to the forma-
tion of a new culture. Human cultural forms are ways in which we share
experience and learn from previous experiences. While the first efforts
of cultural communication and control are seemingly more natural (i.e.,
based on individual capacities), the emergence of the artifact becomes, for
Donald, the revelation of the importance to all culture of external memory
storage.14 His stages of history (from thought to oral speech to external stor-
age systems such as writing) are to be sure unconvincingly schematic; how-
ever, he argues persuasively, as Popper, Lotka, and Leroi-Gourhan did be-
fore him, that the most crucial stage, the genuine crossing of the threshold
to humanity, is the artificial exteriorization of memory (what he would later
call the “exographic revolution”),15 which unleashes, for better or worse, the

                                        T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   337



development of human rationality and science. What Donald does not rec-
ognize here is that the first stages of thought and speech are already tech-
nical in the sense that they are a reengineering of natural behaviors. The
disarticulation of natural and artificial is the structural key to the founding
of a “modern mind.”
    The effort to disentangle biological evolution from culture was not a
project to extricate human beings from determination. Rather, the empha-
sis in disciplines such as paleoanthropology and evolutionary psychology
was on the distinction between different forms of evolutionary determina-
tion. Cultural evolution, which is nongenetic, “has transgressed organic
evolution and shows a certain autonomy,” wrote Franz Wuketits, in the
same year that the PDP volumes appeared.16 Citing evolutionary epistemol-
ogy and in particular Karl Popper’s theory of “objective knowledge” through
material culture, Wuketits offered a systems theory critique of cultural evo-
lution, in line with a general trend in the 1980s toward network and dis-
tributed models of organization.17 Still, what is essential for Wuketits is the
appearance of what he calls exosomatic structures, where ideas become ma-
terialized and thereby made transferable to others in a social group. Even
a dead person, he explains, can pass on cultural information through, say,
books or artworks, but “a dead person no longer can transmit genetic infor-
mation.”18 One implication I would draw out here is that with the cultural
turn, the individual mind now confronts “alien” thought through these
exosomatic organs. Ultimately, Wuketits avoids any explanation of how an
enclosed, biologically determined nervous system could ever create and
then make use of these exosomatic structures, a key challenge that Leroi-
Gourhan faced in his own work.
    The philosophical biologist Tom Stonier had made a similar case in 1981,
when he argued that with the emergence of the human tool, a biological
species was able, for the very first time, to extend and modify its own “econ-
iche.” This was, Stonier asserts, an epochal “breakthrough in the history
of Life.” Technology is what initiates a never before seen process of non-
genetic evolution that will “permanently” alter the relationship between
the organic society of humans and their environment. Both will leave na-
ture behind as they are transformed into cultural and technical systems.
Like Leroi-Gourhan, Stonier speculates that we are now, in the twentieth
century, on the cusp of a new breakthrough, the development of an infor-
mation society, one that will take us “beyond ourselves.”19 As he put it in a
later book, Beyond Information: The Natural History of Intelligence (1992), hu-
man beings form a collective intelligence predicated on the development
of the artificial storage of memory. The danger of collective intelligence,

338   C H A PT E R 28



he warns, is that with the increasing automation and complexity of infor-
mation systems, “computers will rapidly become more intelligent than hu-
mans” just as human minds are increasingly being merged with machine
intelligence.20
    The collective mind, enabled by the exosomatic cultural transmission of
human thought across the boundary of the biological brain, must always be
considered what is called a “hetero-technic co-operation,” a collective form
of cognition distributed between organisms and machines.21 The informa-
tion theorist Pierre Lévy would presciently describe the contemporary zone
of collective intelligence, now coordinated in “real time” by a new digital in-
frastructure, as a cyberspace—borrowing the term from the science fiction
author William Gibson.22

Deacon on the Symbolic Species


As we know, across the world, people with equal intelligence, equally
complex language can be living in radically different cultures with radically
different kinds of technologies. Those that can look as the stone age of a
million years ago, those that can look as modern as we are today sitting in
this studio. The same brains can be producing all of those systems, in part
because it is not all inside the head.
                                          Terrence Deacon, interview (2003)23


But in all this work a key philosophical question remains: What is the in-
vention of technology; and then how do we understand the second inven-
tion, that of artificial memory? As Donald admitted, this abyssal “gap” be-
tween “pre-symbolic and symbolic thought” can only be explained by some
evolutionary event in the emergence of the human brain—which is to just
displace the question of origin into an equally problematic space.24 What-
ever the location, we have here what Andy Clark calls the “missing link”
between animal cognition and human symbolic systems, which are, at their
heart, technical systems.25
   This gap is the subject of Terrence Deacon’s impressive book on the or-
igin of symbolic thinking.26 Like Leroi-Gourhan, Deacon refuses to locate
the origin of the human break from animal cognition in some evolutionary
miracle, instead arguing that language and the brain emerged in a mutual
process of development. While it is not possible to do justice to the com-
plexity and richness of Deacon’s argument here, it is important to note that
a key shift for him is the turn from mere associative predictions to symbolic
predictions, that is, anticipations of the radically new event. For Deacon,

                                        T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   339



this is the result of a mnemonic shift, an internal “offloading” of details from
working memory (89). But this requires, he says, the creation of “artificial
systems” for the internal re-presentation of associations. With these “to-
kens” symbolic thought becomes possible: “insight learning” (Deacon re-
fers explicitly to Köhler here) occurs because higher-order associations can
be made between internal representations (93–94). Symbols do not refer to
objects only; they can, as Peirce first emphasized, relate to other symbols. At
any rate, what is equally important to note here is that the symbolic struc-
tures are what we are calling, after Lotka, exosomatic. As Deacon notes, the
adaptation that is language evolves in its own way, and its history of evolu-
tionary adaptation “has been going on outside the brain” (109). What Dea-
con is arguing is that the emergence and “evolution of symbolic commu-
nication” is an extrabiological system “with a sort of autonomous life of its
own” (409).
   Unlike so many evolutionary psychologists and cognitive scientists,
Deacon tries to provide some kind of—admittedly hypothetical—account
of the origin of symbolic thought and its exosomatic supports, by focus-
ing on the evolution of the brain. However, Deacon, who did experimental
work on brains that included neural tissue transplantation across species,
looks to evolution but without any interest in invoking a bios ex machina.
The main thesis is that according to the then current data, it was clear that
there was no evolution of “the” brain. Rather, the different regions of the
brain evolved in different scales according to different pressures and selec-
tion, and each region is subject to displacement processes that are internal to
the organization of the whole brain. With the revolutionary enlargement
of the brain and especially with the increase of the cortex region, Deacon
explains, humans were provided with a new flood of internal inputs gen-
erated from association patterns, inputs that mimicked an increase in sen-
sory information.
   What the brain could now do was something different from the older
complex, to be sure, but limited capacity to correlate experiences of the world.
Now, the context made possible associations between associations, leading
to a liberation from mere “indexical” association and inference to some-
thing like iconic relations, setting the stage for forms of thought that re-
lated simply to the relational structures themselves—what can be called
genuine symbolic thought. The correlative processing that takes place in
the frontal region is where the “mnemonic architecture” of symbolic refer-
ence is created. For Deacon, symbolic systems only emerge after “a radical
re-engineering of the whole brain has taken place, and on a scale that is un-

340   C H A PT E R 28



precedented” (45). Different regions of the brain are newly connected by in-
creases in cortical tissue and links across topological levels, and this creates
new possibilities of association that are “arbitrary” in relation to sensory
experience but meaningful within this novel architecture of the machinery
of association. Language, therefore, is a form of internal and external orga-
nization that emerges in this matrix of association rather than simply the re-
sult of “size,” or of the evolution of a specific language center—as Chomsky
and his followers, along with many evolutionary psychologists, would nor-
mally assume.
   However, equally important for us is Deacon’s argument that the lan-
guages—structured systems of association—that emerge from symbolic
thinking also evolve independently, and are always having to adapt to the
capacities of the brain as they transform (biologically but also “culturally”).
There is therefore always a coevolution of internal brain organization, of
learning, and of what we are calling exosomatic processes. And this co-
evolution never stabilizes into a single trajectory since each process has its
own logic of organization and its own line of development.
   Deacon emphasizes language in his account of the origin of the human.
However, his look back to the early tool-making capacity of Australopith-
ecines is illuminating—for like Leroi-Gourhan, Deacon argues (with ref-
erence to Baldwin’s account of evolution that supplemented Darwinian
theory) that the “transformation into Homo was in part the consequence
rather than the cause” of the new forms of technicity. Both the artifacts and
the social organization that learning depended on were (however fragile in
their early forms) essential “external supports” of symbolic thought, in that
they helped the brain develop the possibilities of connectivity and also sup-
ported symbolic expression materially. This is also why human thinking
is never natural to the brain: it is a system involving both “alien” internal
inputs with no natural zone of organization and the alien thinking that is
another mind (423).27 “Stone tools and symbols,” writes Deacon, “must both,
then, be the architects of the Australopithecus-Homo transition, and not its
consequences.” The new brains, the implements, the dramatic changes in
the body, improved bipedalism, all were just “physical echoes of a threshold
already crossed” (348).
   The threshold. There is something about the human that is not simply
about what comes after but rather involves the threshold itself. With this
in mind, we can turn to the one philosopher to engage directly with this
question of the threshold between biology and culture, between prehuman
and genuine human, namely, Bernard Stiegler. The turn will hinge on the
question of technology.

                                           T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   341



Originary Technicity: Stiegler’s “Technics and Time”


You know—technology wasn’t invented by us humans. Rather the other
way around.
                                  François Lyotard, The Inhuman (1988)28



The French philosopher Bernard Stiegler, immersed in both poststructural-
ist thought and phenomenology, as well as scholarship on the history and
theory of technology, looked back to Leroi-Gourhan as the starting point for
an intensive investigation of the question of the origin of the human, and
he will come to exactly the opposite conclusion of any other philosopher in
this period—though we see hints of the argument in some of the specialist
literature in paleoanthropology. For Stiegler, the paradox of the artifact is
not a paradox if we understand that it is not the human that invents the tool
but rather it is the tool that invents the human. While agreeing with Leroi-
Gourhan’s critique of the mythology of the human, the idea of a “gift” that
enables us to leave nature, Stiegler denies Leroi-Gourhan’s effort nonethe-
less to locate an origin of the “real” human, the user of tools as symbols, the
conscious and aesthetic mind that only appears late in our hominid evolu-
tion. For Stiegler, we must confront the radical beginning. The human, as
Leroi-Gourhan argued, is a zoological fact. How can the tool be at once on
the side of zoology and the site of the emergence of the modern mind, to use
Merlin Donald’s term here. We have to realize, against Leroi-Gourhan, that
the earliest, most primitive tool is already a tool. It marks an anticipation
even if the human is not aware of it.

   “Technical consciousness” means anticipation without creative conscious-
   ness. Anticipation means the realization of a possibility that is not deter-
   mined by a biological program. Now, at the same time, the movement of “ex-
   teriorization,” if it seems to presuppose this anticipation, appears here to be
   of a strictly zoological origin, to the point of still being determined by the
   neurophysiological characteristics of the individual. When this determi-
   nation will have completely ceased its action on technical evolution, Leroi-
   Gourhan will introduce a notion of spirituality: a second origin.29


For Stiegler, and I admit this is not always easy to grasp, the human is what
results accidentally from the tool’s appearance with the early hominids,
or to put it better, the tool is an inhuman intervention into the biological hu-
man that produces a new evolution of the human (the increase in the size
and complexity of the brain most importantly) from within. The tool could

342      C H A PT E R 28



never show any evolution, a transformation in a history, if it was already
not human. And simultaneously, the human could not extricate itself from
nature without the intervention into its nature by artifice, or the unnatural.
We can see that a human cannot produce the inhuman (that which is alien
to the human and having its own logic of being), but equally, something
inhuman cannot become human without the human changing in the pro-
cess.30 The argument here, consistent with Leroi-Gourhan, is that the hu-
man does not “improve” to accept or invent the tool. The human must lose
a certain human experience to gain the inhuman element that is enabled by
the artifact.31
   So the first tool (defined as the rock that is changed by being struck) is
the site for the intersection of the inhuman and human: the zoological crea-
ture in breaking the rock is already “affected with anticipation, because it is
nothing but anticipation, a gesture is a gesture.” And this is the difficulty:
“There can be no gesture without tools and artificial memory, prosthetic,
outside of the body, and constitutive of its world. There is no anticipation,
no time outside of this passage outside, of this putting-outside-of-self and
of this alienation of the human and its memory that ‘exteriorization’ is”
(152). Animal gesture is not anticipation, it operates in time but not as time.
The gesture as radically novel gesture must be different. It makes possible
the tool but the memory must not be natural—which is to say, the memory
that makes the tool possible is already outside the brain, it consists of the
tool itself.

      The question is the very ambiguity of the word “exteriorization” and the
      hierarchy or the chronological, logical, and ontological preeminence that
      it immediately induces: if indeed one could speak of exteriorization, this
      would mean the presence of a preceding interiority. Now, this interiority is
      nothing outside of its exteriorization: the issue is therefore neither that of
      an interiority nor that of exteriority—but that of an originary complex in
      which the two terms, far from being opposed, compose with one another
      (and by the same token are posed, in a single stroke, in a single movement).
      Neither one precedes the other, neither is the origin of the other, the origin
      being then the coming into adequacy [con-venance] or the simultaneous ar-
      rival of the two—which are in truth the same considered from two different
      points of view. (152)


Following Derrida, the prosthesis is not a substitute or an extension, but
in its essence a putting forward, the creation of an “end” that was not there
before it. The prosthetic that is the tool as exteriorized memory “is not a

                                          T E C H N O G E N E S I S I N T H E N E T WO R K E D AG E   343



‘means’ for the human but its end, and we know the essential equivocity of
this expression: ‘the end of the human,’” writes Stiegler (153).
   In any case, the conclusion is what is important here: the human is
something less than natural; it is differentiated from nature by the technical
inhumanity and will always be at once inside technology but also never in
control of the evolution of technology, which is always driven by its own
logic, the logic of the not-living. Now a social, cultural, technical being, the
human is not so much liberated from genetic evolution, set into “history,”
but instead subject to an evolution which is part of us but never congruent
with us. That will be the basis of Stiegler’s invocation of the pharmakon of
Plato (via Derrida) to depict the role of technology in our world: both poi-
son and cure, it is always indifferent to our plight, our experience. Humans
are, in Stiegler’s language, epiphylogenetic beings. “It is in this sense that the
what invents the who just as much as it is invented by it” (178).
   Technics is time, because artificial organization is the basis for the se-
quence cut from the continuity of lived experience. The trace of that cut
remains, in our minds, in our tools, and is the source of both the power of
temporalization and the contingency of our being. Rewriting Heidegger,
Stiegler argues that technics is not just another word for Heideggerian
“facticity.” The “rift” in Being that sets up Heidegger’s account of historic-
ity and being-toward-death is already dependent on the exteriorization of
memory, because the historicity of human experience is constituted by the
inhuman structure of technicity.

   Nothing can be said of temporalization that does not relate to the ephiphy-
   logenetic structure put in place each time, and each time in an original way,
   by the already-there, in other words by the memory supports that organize
   successive epochs of humanity: that is, technics—the supplement is ele-
   mentary, or rather elementary supplementarity is (the relation to) time [dif-
   férance]. (183)


So for Stiegler, the pathology of modernity is not, as it was for Heidegger,
modern technology. Or at least not technology per se. As Stiegler will ar-
gue, the pathological and disturbing element is not industrialization and
automation, on the technical side of things. Rather, what concerns Stiegler
is what he calls the industrialization and automation of memory—the in-
dustrial production and hence homogenization of tertiary retention. No
longer is the human social, cultural, and economic sphere defined by an
interaction between memory, technicity, and the living being. Instead the
logic of technical systems now imposes itself on the cultural forms of mem-

344   C H A PT E R 28



ory themselves. In the process, human minds in their plasticity are deter-
mined in a new way. They are not merely shaped and configured by the de-
mands of technical know-how and sociopolitical organization, but formed
according to the logic of industrial capital itself, that is in the name of the
reproduction of industrial economic systems.32 Human memory is no lon-
ger shared primarily through concrete instances of collective individua-
tion. Instead, we relate one to another via the machinery of culture as mass-
produced memory, which is also to say mass-produced imagination, which
means foreclosing the genuine “event” of knowing and remembering.
    As Stiegler would go on to demonstrate, relentlessly, the emergence of
planetary scaled digital infrastructures threatens genuine thinking and
memory even more drastically than the industrialization of thought.33 Not
only do all forms of culture depend on tertiary retention for survival, and
therefore can be violated and expropriated by the logic of the machine;
in the digital age the machines gain a vast new power, what Stiegler calls
reticulation: that is, digital machines integrate all other forms of memory
production, and at a speed and scale that is both persistent and beyond the
comprehension of our own “slow” brains, so that our minds are learning
and anticipating (if that is the right word) according to the organizing logic
of the digital. This pathology comes to the fore most clearly in technologies
of prediction—in our era the systems of machine learning.
