29
Failures of Anticipation
The Future of Intelligence in the Era of Machine Learning




Prediction is the essence of intelligence.
                                    Yann LeCun1



As Claude Shannon and John McCarthy noted, in the 1950s, concepts of the
brain and intelligence are inevitably shaped by contemporary concepts of
technical systems. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the most dom-
inant technology in the contemporary world of artificial intelligence is
that of “machine learning,” which is an umbrella term for a number of ap-
proaches that utilize artificial neural nets, such as deep learning, generative
adversarial networks, and reinforcement learning. The key feature of ma-
chine learning is prediction. Trained on large data sets, the system aims to
predict an outcome—whether that is an actual event or perhaps belonging
to a certain classification. Another key feature of machine learning is error.
The system in fact learns via prediction errors, which are used, mathemat-
ically, to alter predictions continuously in order to fine tune predictions.
Trained systems make use of an external observer to tell right from wrong,
whereas untrained systems work themselves to maximize various parame-
ters. The third feature of machine learning systems that I want to highlight
is that they are generative. What makes contemporary deep learning meth-
ods so successful is not simply the size and number of their neural network
layers but also the fact that the networks produce generative models, hy-
potheses about the state of things, which are then tested and reexamined.
A deep learning network, at each layer, has been individually trained to
generate a model of some feature of the world from its input, and these gen-
erative models are aggregated in new layers that similarly produce model
outputs from input data.

                                                                            345

346   C H A PT E R 29



    So we can say that a modern machine learning system predicts outcomes,
learns from prediction errors that are back-propagated through the system,
and discovers in this process how to generate models from certain input
signals at various levels. So a system might first train to recognize “edges”
from various visual input data, and these particular models will be aggre-
gated with other trained nodes (generating, say, color or shape designa-
tions) until finally we would have a prediction that the total data stream
represents a particular object.
    Machine learning obviously traces its lineage to earlier work in artifi-
cial neural networks and especially the return to research marked by the
publication of the two volumes on parallel and distributed processing in
1986. However, the artificial neural network paradigm has now emerged
as one of the most powerful models for neuroscience and cognitive theory,
which borrow the key concepts of prediction, error, and generation from
machine learning.2 The success of machine learning lies to a great extent in
the revolution in both computing power and the immense size of data sets
enabled by the move to networked computing in the 2000s. The transition
from singular technologies (the “computer”) to a vast network of parallel
and distributed systems housed in data centers around the world has made
possible a new way of thinking about the brain and the mind, one that gains
credence given the scope of the hardware and software technologies.
    Although there are numerous ways in which machine learning and ar-
tificial neural networks have influenced researchers in the cognitive sci-
ences and the neurosciences, a new “school” of sorts has emerged in the
past two decades or so that is explicitly tied to the techniques and tech-
nologies of machine learning and its kin. This school has been called pre-
dictive processing (sometimes referred to as predictive coding). As Jakob
Hohwy, an influential proponent, has concisely explained, predictive pro-
cessing (PP) “is the theory that the brain is a sophisticated hypothesis-
testing mechanism, which is constantly involved in minimizing the error
of its predictions of the sensory input it receives from the world. This mech-
anism is meant to explain perception and action and everything mental
in between.”3 The implication is that there is a singular “mechanism” (the
logic of a Bayesian neural network) that underlies all cognition. As Hohwy
writes, approvingly, “Though the description of the mechanism is statisti-
cal it is just a causal neuronal mechanism and the theory therefore sits well
with a reductionist, materialist view of the mind.”4 Indeed, the research in
both cognitive science and the functioning of the brain, especially the vi-
sual brain, in this mode has been impressive.5 In particular, the way that

                                                       FA I LU R E S O F A N T I C I PAT I O N   347



predictive processing approaches make use of Hinton’s internal generative
models is striking and can help explain both inherited “hard-wired” input
processing and network layers that have emerged from initially plastic
conditions.6 The brain, it seems, does not so much “analyze” data and use
stored concepts and reasoning systems to make sense of the world. Rather,
the brain uses past experiences to predict the future and pays cognitive at-
tention only to those moments when prediction fails. And the “action” of an
organism in this context can be understood as a way of making a “predic-
tion” come true through a reorientation within, or transformation of, the
environment.
   It is quite clearly the case that our problem, the problem of intelligence
and technogenesis (the origin of technology, which is to say, the origin of
the modern human) remains a difficult issue. Hohwy’s enthusiastic account
of predictive processing is tempered by the admission that the focus on the-
ories of perception “largely leave out higher cognitive phenomena such as
thought, imagery, language, social cognition, and decision-making” (2). A
similar caution appears in a recent collection of essays on Philosophy and
Predictive Processing:

   in principle, one can use the language of PP across multiple domains of
   cognition and even across different disciplines. However, a gap remains be-
   tween the domains of (relatively simpler) action-perception loops and (rela-
   tively more complex) higher cognitive abilities. The former have been char-
   acterized in formal and quantitative terms using PP, whereas explanations
   of the latter tend to appeal to the same PP concepts but often lack a compre-
   hensive quantitative and computational characterization. Thus, it remains
   to be seen if PP really “scales up” to higher cognition domains.7


However, another major interpreter of predictive processing, the phi-
losopher Andy Clark, is more than aware of the challenge these domains
raise for the theory. Clark’s early work in philosophy was on inactive and
embodied perception, and he was also an innovator (with his collaborator
David Chalmers) in the theory of the “extended mind,” which argues that
cognition is not limited by the mind but is distributed through a system of
biological and technological support systems. Clark would go on to write
a general interest book on the topic, Natural Born Cyborgs. The challenge
for the predictive processing model would be integrating technology and
distributed cognition, given that the very starting point of the model is a
brain that must learn about the world and itself from within the highly con-

348     C H A PT E R 29



strained world of neural stimulation—what are known as “spike trains.”
How does a self-enclosed nervous system learn to extend itself, to “exterior-
ize” itself in new and artificial forms of perception and action?
    In his own overview, Clark celebrates predictive processing as the “per-
fect neuro-computational partner” for the philosophical theories of en-
active and embodied cognition, that is, research “that stresses the con-
stant engagement of the world by cycles of perceptuo-motor activity. The
predictive brain, if this is correct, is not an insulated inference engine so
much as an action-oriented engagement machine. It is an engagement-
machine.”8 For Clark, the brain is engaged with the environment and ac-
tively constructing its view of the world. Its predictions constitute a kind of
“intuitive” judgment about the world. But this judgment is resolutely un-
conscious, which means that predictive processing fits nicely with so much
ancillary work on unconscious cognition and intuition within cognitive
science. As Clark admits in the opening of his book, conscious, directed
thought is bracketed. The brain is a prediction machine, but in this predic-
tion there is nothing like we would call, with Heidegger and Stiegler, antic-
ipation. There is in fact no gap between “learning,” “experience” and “pre-
diction” here—which is to say, no genuine temporality, only a constantly
shifting and updated “presence.”9
    But how can Clark reconcile the reductionism and limited scope of pre-
dictive processing with his prior work on extended minds, which dovetails
to a certain degree with the philosophical claims that Bernard Stiegler was
making on the technical origins of cognition in the same period? First,
Clark will argue that what makes predictive processing so appealing is that
it can explain both active inference in the perceptual sphere and what he
calls “off-line” reasoning, or the imagination, since these all can be under-
stood as the result of the internal generation of “models,” just at different
levels of the neural network system (3).
    However, we are still left with the more difficult argument to make—
namely, how does the brain (the human brain) exhibit the novel behavior of
technology, and how does technology alter radically the cognitive potential
of our species, in ways that have no parallel in the animal world? Clark is
hardly one to avoid this question. He says very clearly:

      We humans—uniquely in the terrestrial natural order—build, and repeat-
      edly rebuild, the social, linguistic, and technological worlds whose regu-
      larities then become reflected in the generative models making the predic-
      tions. It is because the brain itself is such a potent organ of unsupervised
      self-organization that our sociocultural immersions can be as efficacious

                                                     FA I LU R E S O F A N T I C I PAT I O N   349



   as they are. But it is only in the many complex and ill-understood inter-
   actions between these two fundamental forces (between complex self-
   organizing neural dynamics and the evolving swirl of social and material
   influence) that minds like ours emerge from the material flux. (270)


The answer is frustratingly vague. As Clark puts it, artifacts and symbols
do enable new learning and new cognition. Instead of the brain looping
and relooping generative models and prediction errors, the human mind
makes use of “symbol-mediated loops” from social culture, such as note-
books, smartphones, and the like—what Stiegler calls “tertiary retentions”
(277–78). The language deployed by Clark echoes Stiegler’s own argument:
“Once externalized, an idea or thought is thus able to participate in brand
new webs of higher order and more abstract statistical correlation” (278).
Humans must be constructing what Clark calls “designer environments”
(art, culture, science), but there is no clear explanation for how, or why, hu-
man brains are capable of externalizing their thought in artificial technical
forms of organization.
    But this is a central problem in predictive processing if it is to be a model
of human intelligence. As Regina Fabry recently explained, “Enculturation
is a developmental process that is characterized by plastic changes to neu-
ral circuitry and motor profiles. It is strongly influenced by the structured
interaction of human organisms with the cognitive niche.”10 For Fabry, cul-
ture provides “cognitive practices” that shape our interactions. In essence,
Fabry—along with a number of scholars involved in what is called “cogni-
tive archaeology”11—points to the importance of what Stiegler calls the epi-
phylogenetic essence of our cognitive capacity,12 without directly acknowl-
edging the radical question of origin. Human “niche construction” amounts
to the unprecedented anticipation that is constituted by the appearance of
the tool as a new (artificial, unnecessary) organization and therefore cannot
simply be the result of a prediction based on the given organization of both
brains and environments, as it is in the animal Umwelt.
    The bridge between what we can call “natural” cognition and the artifi-
cial and “in-human” technicity of human thought may be found in another
concept that emerges from neural network theory but that is not absolutely
essential to the predictive processing paradigm. Taking up the idea of the
Markov blanket, both Karl Friston and Andy Clark have sought to under-
stand the boundaries between levels of the organism (Friston) or levels
of cognition (Clark) by arguing that within neural networks there exist
bounded zones where network nodes are protected, so to speak, by border
nodes. In a Markov blanket internal nodes respond only to the bounding

350      C H A PT E R 29




Figure 29.1. A Markov blanket.



nodes and other internal nodes and are never directly involved with the
“outer” world of the network. (Figure 29.1.) There is a kind of homeostatic
quality to the entity bounded by a Markov blanket, and indeed, as Friston
and others have shown, the organismic cell can be described as a Markov
blanket in line with the more statistical depiction of bounded areas within
a network. The main point is that Clark sees in the Markov blanket a con-
cept that unites neurophysiological systems, predictive inference, and, fi-
nally, the enculturated space of cognitive and symbolic practice that defines
human intelligence. There is, to be sure, an unacknowledged spirit of the
Leibnizian monad lurking here.13
   In any case, what Clark argues is that humans transform themselves, in
the sense that they “knit” their own Markov blankets, in the form of arti-
facts and symbols. These new organizations are self-enclosed and operate in
the world—in our brains—as systems. For Clark, there is a slippage, a pro-
ductive slippage, between the neural networks that harbor Markov blan-
kets of relative stability (natural or “learned”) and the exteriorization of an
organization into the environment.

      Importantly, the predictive processing architecture itself provides a power-
      ful mechanism enabling the flexible, repeated integration of capacities and

                                                              FA I LU R E S O F A N T I C I PAT I O N   351



   operations made available by the use of reliable bio-external resources. I
   won’t rehearse those considerations here, since it is in any case evident—
   merely from observing our human capacity to become fluent users of a life-
   time succession of new tools and technologies—that such fluidity is a cru-
   cial part of our heritage.14


Still, no account is offered (can be offered) of this critical leap across the
threshold of interior and exterior, and thus no account of either the dif-
férance of thinking or the difference between animal and human cognition,
the leap that is technology.



The living being is very far from being a perfect machine and it’s this
imperfection which is both the cause and the means whereby poetry,
resonances come about.
                                                 Paul Valéry, Cahiers, 1927–2815



The paleoarchaeological and historical record shows clearly that the hu-
man at some point escaped natural determination and embarked on a new
form of life that was superimposed on the biological—a political existence
that navigated the inevitable conflicts between social forms of organization
and the technical systems that enabled biological survival. This much is ac-
cepted by thinkers such as Clark and researchers in certain areas of evolu-
tionary psychology. However, what this entails goes completely against the
mainstream of contemporary cognitive neuroscience, namely, that we have
to acknowledge that the human mind is not simply a product of the brain,
but is instead the site for the operation of several different systems, systems
that are often in competition even as they work together to maintain the
cohesion of social groups and the survival of biological individuals.
   What marks the human is this “invasion” of alien thought within our
own minds—the thought of other minds, stored in technical forms of mem-
ory (like writing, for example) and reanimated in our own brains. Or the
alien logic of cultural norms that dictate behaviors that will guarantee the
survival of the group formation. Alongside this, the biological demands of
the body also invade the mind, operating with their own insistent logics—
both Freud and Damasio could be invoked in this context.
   The point is that there are no norms governing these multiple systems
that are instantiated by the individual human mind-brain. Or to put it an-
other way, what we mean by “the mind” in this context is the continuing
(and always failing) attempt to bring unity to the multiple systems in play.

352   C H A PT E R 29



As such, the mind is not itself a unity with given norms, and therefore an
object of scientific study, but instead an evolving contingent effort to cap-
ture the varying logics of survival that stem from our biological, sociopoliti-
cal, and technical systems. The mind is both defined by these systems and is
resolutely not these systems.
    This is why the mind is always the site of crisis, of the unexpected, of the
event. This is why the human mind is capable of genuine decision in crisis:
the decision that there is a crisis (and not merely a prediction error) and
the decision for a future that will relieve crisis—even if that means aban-
doning certain given norms of existence. One might imagine a computer
programmed with conflicting norms and operations; however, there would
never be a comprehensive unity in which this conflict could be recognized
as a moment for genuine decision. To decide the conflict means taking se-
riously the possibility of an undetermined future. To imagine a future that
exceeds past experience.
    That is to say that the mind has no norms of operation itself but is only
the site for the determination and configuration of alien norms. The mind
is therefore not at all a biological entity conditioned by history, or a purely
historical construction buffeted by biological imperatives. The mind ap-
pears in human existence as a novel entity, the space in which technical
organization, social organization, and organismic organization, each with
its own logic and its own demands, meet and can be constituted as code-
pendent.
    Human intelligence is constituted within this space—a mind that can
escape its determinations and thereby open up an unforeseen, unpredict-
able future. To be sure, the imagination of a new path, a decision for a novel
future and the institution of new norms is never an act of an actual entity.
Like Carl Schmitt’s sovereign, who decides the “exception,” the mind is a
kind of necessary fiction—the name for a unity that is not unitary, a unity
that holds together difference while allowing a certain slippage, or leakage,
that is to say, gaps, between the three spheres of life.
    What escapes the machine, even the computer, even networks of com-
puters, even the human mind in its “automatic” phases, is this capacity to
escape from its own determination. As Stiegler wrote, human thought has
“the power to disrupt and to dis-automatize, that is, to change the rules.”16
Only by leaving its own normative existence, through shock and deci-
sion, can a new norm ever be created, as a function of a novel future that is
imagined—collectively—and not merely predicted.
