THINKING WITH WHITEHEAD

 A Free and Wild Creation of Concepts




 ISABELLE STENGERS

 Translated by Michael Chase




 FORE WORD BY BRUNO LATOUR




 Harvard University Press
 Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England 2011
Copyright © 2 0 1 1 by the President a n d Fel lows of H a rvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America


Th is book was originally p u b l ished as Penser avec Whitehead: .. Vne lihre et
sauvage creation de concepts," copyright © Ed i ti ons du Seu i l , 2002


Th i s book was p u b l i shed with the su pport o f the French M i n istry of Culture -
National Book Center I Cet ouvrage a ete publie avec I 'assistance du Ministere de la
culture - Centre Nation a l d u Livre


Lihrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Puhlication Data

Stcngers, Isa bel le.
[Pcnser avec Whitehea d . English]
Th ink ing with Whitehead : a free and wild creation o f concepts I Isa bel le Stengers ;
translated by M ichael Chase.
p.   cm.
Includes b i b l i ogra ph ica l references and index.
ISBN 9 7 8 -0-6 74-04 803-4 ( a l k . paper)
I. Wh i tehea d , Alfred North, 1 8 6 1 - 1 947.   I. Title.
B 1 6 74.W354S8413           201 1
192--dc22               2 0 1 004 7 1 5 3
To all the students who, in the course of the last
few years, have taken my classes on Whitehead.
It is thanks to them that I have become convinced
that, for better or worse, this book could be, and
therefore should be, written.
Contents




     Foreword: What Is Given in Experience?
       by Bruno Latour         ix
     Abbreviations and References         xvii

     Introduction: Whitehead Today?          1


PART ONE
     FROM THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE TO METAPHYSICS

 1   The Mathematician and the Sunset            31

2    Events and Passage        42

 3   The Foothold of the Mind        58

 4   There It Is Again    73

 5   Attention to Objects       85

 6   The Ingression of Scientific Objects        94

 7   Interlude: A Pragmatics of Concepts          105

 8   Science and the Modern World: A Strange Book       114

 9   A New Epoch?        123

10   From the Concept of Nature to the Order of Nature        142

11   Scientific Objects and the Test of the Organism    165

12   The Event from Its Own Standpoint?           185
V I I I    C O NTE NTS




13        Entry into Metaphysics         201

14        The Great Refusal     218


PART TWO
          COSMOLOGY

15        Hic Circuli, Hic Saltus     233

16        Thinking under the Constraint of Creativity      2S4

17        The Risks of Speculative Interpretation    277

18        Feeling One's World      294

19        Justifying Life?   312

20        The Adventure of the Senses          336

21        Actuality between Physics and the Divine     364

22        And They Became Souls          392

23        Modes of Existence, Modes of Thought       423

24        God and the World        449

25        An Adventure of Ideas       479



          Conclusion: Word o f a Dragon, Word of Trance          503



          Index   521
                                                                       FOREWORD




What Is G i ven i n Experience?

      Bruno Latour

Every synthesis begins "anew" and has to be taken up from the
start as if for the first time.
      -Isabelle Stengers




       T
      I
           COULD BE ONE of those little games j ournalists play on televi
         sion talk shows about books: " Who was the greatest philosopher
         of the twentieth century whose name begins with W?" Most
learned people in America would answer " Wittgenstein." Sorry. The right
answer is " Whitehead "-another philosopher whose name begins with
 W, to be sure, but one who is vastly more daring, and also, unfortunately,
much less studied . Among his many m isfortunes, Al fred North White
head had the very bad one of provoking too much i nterest among theo
logians and too little among epi stemologists. His reputation in America
is thus skewed toward his theological innovations to the detriment of his
epistemological theories . He also suffers from the terri ble stigma of hav
ing i nd ulged in metaphysics, something one is no longer supposed to do
after the ed icts of the first " W," even though those who think that meta
physics is passe know usual ly much less science than Whitehead and
swal low-without an ounce of criticism-hook, l ine, and sinker the en
ti rety of metaphysical beliefs about nature that one can easily derive by
l umping together the least-common-denominator views of geneticists
and so-cal led cognitive scientists. As Isa belle Stengers says in her recently

The Foreword is excerpted from my review of the French edition of this book,
Isabelle Stengers, Penser avec Whitehead: Une fihre et sauvage creation de concepts.
The review was published as Bruno Latour, "What Is Given in Experience?," in
houndary 2, Volume 32, no. 1, pp. 223-237. Copyright © 2005 by Duke Univer
sity Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. I thank
Lindsay Waters for his valuable comments on earlier drafts of this essay. Cita
tions to Penser avec Whitehead appear in parentheses, and, unless otherwise
noted, a l l translations are my own.-B.L.
X   F O R E W O R D




published ma sterpiece a bout Whitehead, " critica l consciousness admits
so many th ings without criticizing them " ( 74 ) .
   What makes Stengers's book Penser a vee Whitehead-in English, " to
th ink with Whitehead "-such an importa nt work for Anglo-American
philosophy is that in it the greatest phi losopher of the twentieth century is
fina lly studied in great deta il by someone who is one of the most innova
tive philosophers of science of the present time. Now we finally have, in
other words, after yea rs of emba rrassed commentaries in which people
had eulogized Whitehead 's God and d isparaged Whitehead's science, a
book in which Whitehead 's science and Whitehead 's God are each given
their rightful place. This development is not going to put process theol
ogy on a new footing. After having worked for years on the physics of
time with lIya Prigogine,l and then a fter having written her seven-volume
treatise laying out her own version of Cosmopolites,2 Stengers has dedi
cated 572 pages to her favorite philosopher, retranslating herself many
pages of this most difficult of authors for the sake of her ana lysis in French.1
   For people who have read both Stengers and Whitehea d for yea rs,
the prospect of rea d i ng the prose of the first commenting on the prose
of the second might be somewhat da unting. And yet, one gets exactly


 I Because of this long and friendly collaboration, Stengers has been associated with

the physics of complexity pioneered by lIya Prigogine. In her own work since,
Prigogine's influence is important not because she tried to prolong some more
elaborated naturalism but because she learned from Prigogine's experience to
which extent scientists would go to ignore something as crucial as time. Hence her
admiration for science and her deep-seated suspicion for some of its sleight of hand.
2 From Cosmopolitiques-Tome 1: La guerre des sciences (Paris: La Decouverte

Les Empecheurs de penser en rond, 1996), to Cosmopolitiques-Tome 7: Pour en
finir avec la tolerance (Paris: La Decouverte-Les Empecheurs de penser en rond,
1997).
 1 Isabelle Stengers teaches philosophy in Brussels. Only a small part of her works

is available in English: Power and Invention, with a foreword by Bruno Latour
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997); The Invention of Modem
Science, trans. Daniel W. Smith (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2000); Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent and Isabelle Stengers, A History ofChemis
try, trans. Deborah Van Dam (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1996); and Leon Chertock and Isabelle Stengers, A Critique of Psychoanalytic
Reason: HY11110sis as a Scientific Prohlem from Lavoisier to Lacan, trans. Martha
Noel Evans (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1992). I have attempted
to present Stengers's epistemological principle in "How to Talk about the Body?
The Normative Dimension of Science Studies," in Part 3: Body Collective of
"Bodies on Trial," ed. Marc Berg and Madeleine Akrich, special issue, Body and
Society 10, no. 2-3 (June-September 2004): 205-229.
                                                               F O R E W O R D   X I




the opposite result: Stengers ill uminates the most obscure passages of
Whitehead in a style that is supple, often witty, always generous. So read
ers should not be put off by the surprising subtitle, which Stengers actu
ally borrowed f rom Deleuze: there is nothing "wild " in this book, except
as that word might be used to characterize the freedom and i nvention of
the author. Of those virtues the book is stuffed f ul1 .4
   Following Whitehead, Stengers has been able to turn around many of
the metaphors usually borrowed from critica l thinking: "To think with
Whitehead today means to sign on i n advance to an adventure that wil l
leave none of the terms we normally use a s they were, even though none
will be undermined or summarily denounced as a carrier of i l l usion " (24 ) .
   Whitehead i s thoroughly p u t to the test here, a n d yet I have n o doubt
that, had he lived, Deleuze would have celebrated this book as a major
event in the geopolitics of philosop hy: a great but neglected Anglo
American is reimported into France through Belgium, and the event is
taken as the occasion to reinterpret pragmatism, Bergsonism, and empiri
cism. What a wonder! What an interesting ecologica l " inter-capture " !
   Although the book i s a close reading, i n chronological order, of the
major books of Whitehead, and although it makes good use of the body
of existing scholarship, it does not simply try to explain or popularize the
history of Whitehead 's thought. As the title i ndicates so wel l, the aim is to
think with Whitehead. Because she is hersel f a philosopher of science who
has explored minutely many of the same fields as Whitehead-chemistry,
physics, Darwinism, ethology, and psychology ( but not mathematics nor
logic, although she ta kes very seriously the fact that Whitehead thinks as
a mathematician )-Stengers's book can be seen as an effort to test out
Whitehead 's most da ring concepts on new materials and in new exam
ples. But contrary to the rather cava lier way in which Whitehead treats
his own predecessors, Stengers is very precise and fol lows with great at
tention Whitehead 's own hunches. Have no doubt: when we read this
book, we are thinking with Stengers and with Whitehead all along; we
are not thi nking with Whitehead about what is on Stengers's mind .

The whole book turns around the most arduous question of Whitehead,
wi thout making any attempt either to avoid the dif ficulties or to obfus
cate his philosophy by bringing i n new i rrelevant conundrums. The basic
question is to decide whether or not empiricism can be renewed so that


4 The choice of the subtitle is even more bizarre, since on page 307 Stengers re

veals a clear contrast between the positivity of Whitehead and the exaggerated
tropism of Deleuze for chaos and organicism.
X I I   FOREWO R D




" what is given in experience " is not simplified too much. Agai nst the
tradition ina ugurated by Locke and Desca rtes, then pushed to the limits
by Kant until it was terminated by Wi ll iam James, Whitehead offers an
other role for the object of study to play: "The object [for him] is neither
the j udge of our production nor the product of our judgments " ( 93 ) .'
   What has been least critica lly considered by the philosophical tradi
tion, and especially by the anti-meta physical one, is the feature of West
ern thought that occupied Whitehead for most of his career, what he ca lls
" the bifurcation of nature," that is to say, the stra nge and ful ly modernist
d ivide between primary and secondary qualities.1> Bifurcate is a strange
and awkwa rd word, strange to the tongue and ear, but what it betokens
is somethi ng even worse for our thinking. Bi furcation is what happens
whenever we think the world is divided i nto two sets of things: one which
is composed of the funda mental constituents of the universe-invisible to
the eyes, known to science, rea l and yet valueless-and the other which is
constituted of what the mind has to add to the basic build ing blocks of
the world in order to make sense of them. Those " psychic additions," as
Whitehead calls them, are parts of common sense, to be sure, but they are
unfortunately of no use to science, since they ha ve no rea lity, even though
they a re the stuff out of which dreams and va lues are made.?



, "It is because William James has refused to give to reflexive consciousness and to
its pretensions to invariance, the privilege to occupy the center of the scene, that
James has explicated so well [for Whitehead] what human experience requests from
metaphysics and, more precisely, to what it requests metaphysics to resist" (2 30).
Far from psychologizing everything, Whitehead sees in James-and especially in his
celebrated essay on consciousness-the thinker who has ended all the pretensions of
the mind. If the "actual occasion" is depsychologized, it is thanks to James.
I> Here is a standard definition of the problem: "However, we must admit that the

causality theory of nature has its strong suit. The reason why the bifurcation of
nature is always creeping back into scientific philosophy is the extreme difficulty
of exhibiting the perceived redness and warmth of the fire in one system of rela
tions with the agitated molecules of carbon and oxygen with the radiant energy
from them, and with the various functioning of the material body. Unless we
produce the all-embracing relations, we are faced with a bifurcated nature; namely,
warmth and redness on one side, and molecules, electrons and ether on the other
side. Then the two factors are explained as being respectively the cause and the
mind's reaction to the cause" (Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature
[Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920J, 32).
7 On the political dimension of this divide, see my own footnote on Whitehead's

argument in Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy. trans.
Catherine Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004).
                                                          F O R E W O R D   X I I I




   If I could summarize Stengers's version of Whitehead by a sort of syl
logism, i t could be the fol lowing one: modernist philosophy of science
implies a bifurcation of nature i nto objects having primary and second
ary qualities. However, i f nature really is bifurcated , no living organism
would be possible, since being an organism means being the sort of thing
whose primary and secondary qual ities-i f they did exi st-are endlessly
blurred. Since we are organisms surrounded by many other organisms,
nature has not bifurcated . Corollary: if nature has never bi furcated in the
way phi losophy has implied since the time of Locke, what sort of meta
physics should be devised that would pay ful l j ustice to the concrete and
obstinate existence of organisms? The consequence of considering this
question is radical indeed : " The question of what is an object and thus
what is an abstraction must belong, if nature is not allowed to bi furcate,
to nature and not to knowledge on ly" ( 95; my emphasis ) .
   Hence the roughly three equal parts o f the book (although Stengers
divides her book in two ) : How to overcome the bifurcation of nature ?
What is an organism of a creati ve sort? What sort of strange God is im
plied for this new philosophical business ?
   r...J
   I think it is with Whitehead 's God that Stengers's book reveals its u lti
mate power. Commentators have often tried either to drag Whitehead
in theology seminars-forgetting that his God is there to solve very pre
cisely a technical problem of philosophy, not of belief--{)r to get rid of
this embarrassing appendix altogether. Stengers does not hesitate to go
all the way in the d irection of Whitehead 's argument: if nature can't be
seen as bifurcated, if actual occasions are the stuff out of which the
world is made, if " negative prehensions" are the only way actual occa
sions have to envisage the world, to apprehend it, i f eternal objects are
there as guardians aga inst the shift back to substance and foundations,
then a God-function is implied in this philosophy.
   But, of course, everything now turns around the word implied, or im
plicated. Ta ken superficially, it shifts the concept of God into one of a
king who sits on a throne or some great plant ensconced in a sort of
flowerpot, holding this position in order to close a book of metaphysics
the equivalent in philosophy of the Q ueen of England in pol itics. Or else,
taken as a belief, God gives some philosoph ical luster to parts of the
creed of some church, becoming what you confide in when you have lost
confidence in the world and especially in science. Without disregarding
those possibil ities, Whitehead means something else altogether. Implied
is not only a logical function-who is less a logician than the Whitehead
of the famous team " Russell and Whitehead " ?-but a thoroughly onto-
X I V   F O R E W O R D




logica l involvement into the world. God is the feeling for positive, i nstead
of negative, prehensions. After years (or shou ld I say centuries ? ) of asso
ciating God with negativity-think, for instance, of Hegel-it will take
some time to see his role as consisting of a positivity, but that would be a
welcome cha nge ! " Divine experience is, in that sense, conscious but also
incomplete. God does not envisage what could be. His existence does not
precede nor predict future actua lizations. His envisagement comes from
the thirst for some novelty that this thirst is going to induce but which,
by definition, will go beyond it" ( 525 ) .
   I n a way, it i s not surprising that theology has found Whitehead so
congenial, si nce i nnovations in theology are few and far between. But
Stengers red resses the usua l i mbalance and places Whitehead's i nvention
of a God impl icated squarely inside the world-and unable to " expli
cate " it, nor to " extricate " himself out of it-as the most daring but a lso
the most indispensa ble consequence of his early refusa l to let nature bi
furcate. No more than you can choose i n nature to eli mi nate either pri
mary or secondary qualities can you choose, i n Whitehead, between his
epistemology and his theology. And, of course, it would be impossible to
say that the modernist philosophy has " no need for God ," as philosophers
are so proud of saying and say frequently. Their crossed-out God-to use
my term-is always there but only to fill gaps in their reasoni ng. By tak
ing Whitehead 's God as seriously as Whitehead 's epistemology, Stengers
is leading us in the first systematic attempt at finding a metaphysical al
ternati ve to modernism. The reason why her attempts are so beautifully
moving is that Whitehead has a gift of the most extraordinary rarity: he
is not a creature of the culture of critique. " He knows no critique," as one
could say of a saint " she k nows no sin."

What does it mean to " spea k Whiteheadian " ? Amusi ngly, Stengers's book
begins with some of those long Whiteheadian sentences that Grendel, the
dragon hero of John Gardner's remake of Beowulf, thunders when he
wishes to frighten his human victi ms out of their wits. Stengers's book is
a frightening one, no question about that: five hundred pages of purely
speculative metaphysics . But Grendel, as we learn when we read the
story, is not there to eat all of us up. On the contrary, he is there to re
mind us of our lost wisdom. How can it be that America, nay, the Har
vard Phi losophy Depa rtment, provided a shelter to the most i mportant
philosopher of the twentieth century and then has utterly forgotten him ?
Why has it ta ken us so long to understa nd Grendel's moaning? Probably
beca use it does not offer the easy grasp of the usual domesticated philo
sophica l animals presented in zoos beh ind bars, always there to be in-
                                                            F O R E W O R D   X V




spected and endlessly monitored. Maybe this is what Deleuze mea nt by
" a f ree and wild i nvention of concepts." " Wi l d " does not mean " savage,"
but out in the open, as when we go searching for some elusive wildlife.
   I have a lways felt that Wh itehead-watching had a lot to do with
whale-watching as it is practiced, for i nstance, on the coast of San Diego
i n the winter. You stay on a boa t for hours, see nothi ng, a nd suddenly,
" There she blows, she blows ! " a nd swiftly the whale disappears again.
But with Stengers at the helm, the little ship is able to predict with great
accuracy where the whale wi l l emerge aga i n, i n a few hours. Come on
board, prepa re your bi noculars, and be confident i n the capta i n 's watch.
Abbreviations and References




[Works from which passages are cited in the text)
AI Alfred N. Whitehead, A dventures of Ideas (New York: Free Press, 1967).
ANW Victor Lowe, A lfred Whitehead: The Man and His Work, vo!' 2, ed. j. B.
    Schneewind (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990).
CC Gilles Deleuze, Critique et clinique (Paris: Minuit, 1993).

CN Alfred N. Whitehead, The Concept of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni
    versity Press, 1964).
DANW Dialogues of A lfred North Whitehead. as recorded by Lucien Price (Bos
    ton: David R. Godine, 2001).
DD William James, "The Dilemma of Determinism," in The Will to Believe, and
    Other Essays i11 Popular Philosophy. and Human Immortality (New York:
    Dover, 1956), pp. 145-183.
DIT Steven Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory (London: Vintage Books, 1993).
DR Gilles Deleuze, DiffCrence et repetition (Paris: PUF, 1969).
EWM Lewis S. Ford, The Emergence of Whitehead's Metaphysics. 1925-1929
    (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1984).
Gr John Gardner, Grendel (London: Robin Clark, 1991).

I Stuart Kauffman, Investigations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
1M Henri Bergson, "Introduction a la metaphysique," in (Euvres. edition du cen-
    tenaire (Paris: PUF, 1970).
LdS Gilles Deleuze, Logique du sens (Paris: Minuit, 1969).
LP Gilles Deleuze, Le Pli (Paris: Minuit, 1988).
LWL William James, "Is Life Worth Living?" in The Will to Believe, and Other
    Essays in Popular Philosophy, and Human Immortality (New York: Dover,
    1956), pp. 31-62.
X V I I I   A B B R E V I AT I O N S   A N D   R E F E R E N C E S




MEOF Etienne Souriau, "Du mode d'existence de I'ceuvre a faire," Bulletin de la
       Societe Fran�aise de Phi/osollhie, seance du 25 fhrier 1956, pp. 4-24.

MP Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Mille plateaux (Paris: Minuit, 1980).
MPML William james, "The Moral Philosopher and Moral Life," in The Will to
       Believe, and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy, and Human Immortality
       (New York: Dover, 1956), pp. 184-215.
MT Alfred N. Whitehead, Modes of Thought (New York: Free Press, 1968).
PAF William james, "The Place of Affectional Facts in a World of Pure Experi
       ence," in Essays in Radical Empiricism (New York: Longmans, Green and
       Co., 1912; repr., Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1996), pp. 137-154.
PP William james, The Princililes of Psychology (New York: Holt, 1890; repr.,
       London: Macmillan, 1891).
PR Alfred N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, corrected edition by D. R. Griffin
       and D. W. Sherburne (New York: Free Press, 1979).
QPh Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Qu'est-ce que la phi/osophie? (Paris:
       Minuit, 1991).
RAT William james, "Reflex Action and Theism," in The Will to Believe, and
       Other Essays in Popular Philosophy, and Humall Immortality (New York:
       Dover, 1956), pp. 1 1 1-144.
RM Alfred N. Whitehead, Religirlll in the Making (New York: Fordham Univer
       sity Press, 1996).
5MW Alfred N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World (New York: Free
       Press, 1967).
5PP William james, Some Prohlems in Phi/oso/lhy (New York: Longmans, Green
       and Co., 191 1; repr., Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1996).
55 David Abram, The Spell of the Sellsuous (New York: Pantheon Books, 1996).
Th Gottfried W. Leibniz, Essais de theodicee (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1969).
WjEP David Lapoujade, William James: Empirisme et pragmatisme (Paris: PUF,
       1997).
WPE William james, "A World of Pure Experience," in Essays in Radical Empiri
       cism (New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1912; repr., Lincoln: University
       of Nebraska Press, 1996), pp. 39-91.


Other References Used Explicitly in the Text

[References whose oh;ect should not give rise to any difficulties of identification
have heen omitted.)
Andy Clark, Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together A gain (Cam
     bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1998).
William james, "Does 'Consciousness' Exist?" in Essays in Radical Empiricism
     (New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1912; repr., Lincoln: University of
     Nebraska Press, 1996), pp. 1-38.
                                 A B B R E V I AT I O N S   A N D   R E F E R E NCES   X I X




Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Confessio Phi/osophi, trans. Robert C. Sleigh Jr.
    (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2006).
Raymond Ruyer, La Genese des formes vivantes (Paris: Flammarion, 1958).
Donald W. Sherburne, ed., A Key to Whitehead's Process and Reality (Blooming
    ton: Indiana University Press, 1966).
Daniel Stern, The Interpersonal World of the Infant (New York: Basic Books,
    1985).
There are concepts wherever there are habits, and habits are
made and unmade on the plane of immanence and radical
experience: they are "conventions." This is why English philosophy
is a free and wild creation of concepts. Once a proposition is
given, to what convention does it refer, what is the habit that
constitutes its concept? This is the question of pragmatism.
      -Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Qu'est-ce que /a Phi/osophie?
                                                                   INTRODUCTION




Whitehead Today?




A Discreet Philosopher

He glanced at me, suspicious. " You're not paying attention."
    " I am ! " 1 said, joining my hands to show my seriousness.
    But he shook his head slowly. " Nothing interests you but excitement,
violence."
    "That's not true ! " 1 sai d .
    His eye opened wider, h i s body brightened from end t o e n d . " You tell
me what's true ? " he sa i d .
    " I'm trying t o fol low y o u . 1 do m y best," I said . " You should b e reason
able. What do you expect ? "
    The dragon thought about it, breathi ng slowly, full o f wrath. A t last he
closed his eyes: " Let us try starting somewhere else," he said . " It's damned
hard, you understand, confining myself to concepts familiar to a creature
of the Dark Ages. Not that one age is darker than another. Technical jar
gon from another dark age." He scowled as if hardly capable of forci ng
himself on. Then, a fter a long moment: " The essence of l i fe is to be found
i n the frustrations of established order. The universe refuses the deaden
ing influence of complete conformity. And yet in its refusal, it passes to
ward novel order as a primary requisite for important experience . We
have to explain the aim at forms of order, and the aim at novelty of order,
and the measure of success, and the measure of fa il ure. Apart from some
understa ndi ng, however dim-witted, of these cha racteristics of historic
process . . ." His voice trai led off (Gr, 5 7-5 8 ) .
    How does a dragon ta l k ? Such is the problem John Gardner had to
solve when he undertook to reinvent the epic poem Beowulf, a poem
2   I NTRODUCTI O N




that, as eve ry Englis h-speaking student has learned, is the oldest E uro
pea n lite ra ry work written in a ve rnacular tongue to have come down to
us. In the orig inal work, slow and sombe r, Beowulf is the hero who fights
against the forces of evi l : the monste r Grendel, whom he kills in the first
part of the poem, and the d ragon whom he will likewise kill in the sec
ond pa rt, but who will morta lly wound him. In Gardner's fiction, how
eve r, it is Grende l who tells his story, for the question of knowi ng how
one gets to be a monste r produces a more inte resting viewpoint than the
one defined by the good. One thus discovers that if Grendel kills me n, it
is because he is simultaneous ly the witness, j udge, a nd i mpotent voyeur
of the strange powe r fiction has ove r the m, and confe rs upon them. He
has seen them build themselves a destiny, a hero ic past, a glorious future,
with the words invented for them by the Shaper, or the Poet i n the strong
sense of giver of form. Grendel is aware of the lies in these words, but
this knowledge excl udes him from what is taking shape before his eyes:
his lucidity brings him noth ing but ha tred and despa i r. Thus, he chooses,
foreve r solita ry, to be the Great De stroye r for human beings, or more
precisely the Great Deconstructor. He will derive a bitter, monotonous
pleasure from the p roof he neve r cea ses infl icting on humans of the im
potence of their Gods, the senseless characte r of their lives, and the van
ity of their heroes.
   Ha tred is a choice, not a consequence . Before becoming the scou rge
of humankind, Grende l met a being much older than hi mse l f, the dragon
that Beowulf was to fight one day. This dragon is " beyond good and evi l,"
beyond both the passion for constructing and for destroying illusory con
structions. For him, nihil istic rage is just as absurd as bel ief, for eve rything
is tied together, eve rything goes hand in hand, creation and destruction,
lies and authenticity. And he knows that Grendel will choose excitement
and violence , despite his advice, the only one he can give: seek out gold and
sit on it . . .
   The homage of fiction to philosophy. It is fairly easy to give voice to a
denouncer, an idol-sma she r, a denie r of all be lief. Yet it is much ha rde r to
give voice to a nonhuman knowledge, more a ncient than humankind,
able to see fa rthe r than the i nsignificant ripple they create in the rive r of
time . To escape the human point of view, and to do so with the calm self
evidence that is appropriate, as i f the workings of the unive rse belonged to
what is given, beyond a l l conquest and hypothesis, Gardne r turned to the
philosopher Alfred North White head, copying out entire passages from
Whitehead's last book, Modes of Thought.
   In what fol lows, Grende l was to encounte r Whitehead a second time .
It happened i n the course o f an incursion that took h i m toward the ci rcle
                                                           I N T R O D U C T I O N




of the Gods, those statues that terrorized men ask i n vain for p rotecti on
aga i nst him. Grendel meets the blind Ork, the el dest and wisest of the
priests. He decides to have some fun and, before killing Ork, he asks him
to confess his fa ith, and say who is the King of the Gods. This time, in
breathless succession, it is the God of Science and the Modern World, the
principle of limitation, ulti mate i rrationality, then that of Process of R eal
ity, with his infinite patience, his tender concern that nothing may be
lost, that come from the blind man's lips. Grendel , bewi ldered, lets his
prey get away.
   The words of a dragon, surging forth from the depths of the ages, as
sociated with the neutrality of one for whom epochs, importances, and
arrogances succeed one another, but a lso words of trance, come from
nowhere, a ble to rout Grendel, who has declared wa r on the poet's ta le
spinning: the reader has now been wa rned . It is a strange tongue that will
gradually be elaborated here, a language that cha llenges a l l clea r distinc
tions between description a nd tale-spinning, and ind uces a singular expe
rience of disorientation in the hea rt of the most familiar experiences. It is
a language that can scandalize, or else madden, a l l those who think they
know what they know, but also a l l those for whom to approach the non
knowi ng at the heart of a l l k nowledge is an underta king that is meticu
lous, grave, and a lways to be ta ken up again.

And yet, of the philosophers of the century that has just ended, the one
who proposes this strange test was the quietest, the most gentle, and the
least anxious to shock. For most of those who know it, the name of White
head has, until very recently, merely called up an image of the couple " Rus
sel l and Whitehead," authors of the Principia Mathematica, a monumen
tal attempt at the axiomatization of mathematics. Nor is anyone supposed
to be unawa re that Godel's fa mous theorem sounded the death-knoll for
this undertaking. The na me of Bertrand Russell, initially Whitehead's
student at Trinity College, Cambridge, and then, between 190 1 and 19 10,
his colla borator, is associated with many of the century's adventures.
Whitehead's name, in contrast, has escaped the " Russell-and-Whitehea d "
association only gradually, a n d i n the a fterma th, to vibra te with i t s own
resonance: first in the United States, and then, gradua l ly, in other regions
of the world, as translations of his grea t work Process and Reality were
published .
   Whitehead's personal l i fe was not only without stories, but it has left
very few traces behind. He answered the letters written to h i m only
ra rely, and at his death his personal papers were destroyed, a s he had
req uested. This i s why his biogra phy, by Vi ctor Lowe, is extremely
4   I N TR O D U CTI O N




sober, especia lly with regard to the second pa rt of his life (volume 2,
1 9 1 0- 1 94 7 ) : there is nothing here to arouse the appetite of the fans of
biograph ica l-i ntellectua l speculation, in sea rch of the " man" beh i nd the
work. To my knowledge, only Bertra nd Russell, who a lways found ways
to denigrate what he did not understa nd, ventured such an i nterpretation
of the phi losophica l turn taken by his friend : it was, he suggested, the
death of his son Eric, a fighter pilot, i n 1 9 1 8 , that led Whitehead to reject
a purely mecha ni stic universe and turn toward phi losophy. No comment.
For the rest, what can we say, except that Whitehead's life was that of a
gi fted student, a respected university professor, a happy husband , and a n
attentive, affectionate father . . .
    Whitehead was born in Kent i n 1 86 1 , the son of a schoolmaster, later
an Anglican pastor, who took persona l charge of his education until the
age of fourteen. His youth, which was happy, was that of a student as
gifted for studies as he was for sports. Upon his ad mission to Cambridge
in 1 8 80, he was offered the rare choice of a scholarship either for classica l
or for mathematica l studies. He chose mathematics, which he then taught
at Trinity College from 1 8 85 to 1 9 1 0. Yet he did not devote himself to
mathematics a lone. Whitehead often sa id that his philosophica l ideas orig
inated from questions he had pursued throughout his life. This pursuit was
reflected, in particular, in a rather astonishing historica l, phi losophica l,
theologica l, and litera ry culture, of which he was to make free use through
out his works. Yet Whitehead was no scholar. According to Victor Lowe,
when he received his students on Sunday evenings near the end of his life,
"what he ta lked about rea lly concerned him" ( ANW, 302 ) . Whether in
phi losophy, theology, science, or literature, his goa l was neither to inform
nor to cultivate himself, but always and above all to understand .
    In 1 9 1 1 , at the age of fifty, Whitehead went i nto action. Fa r from the
protected rhythms of Cambridge, he taught at Uni versity College Lon
don, then at Imperial Col lege, and occupied a series of administrative
positions . The mathematician was henceforth associated not only with
an educationa l thinker-which, for him, is the same thing as a thinker of
human nature-but a lso with a phi losopher of nature, thinking the space
ti me of relativity with a nd against Einstein.
   This life " within the world," divided between public responsi bil ities,
reformist activities, and persona l research, should have yielded to peace
at the age of retirement, but two years before the fateful date, Whitehead
was to receive the invitation that would change the course of his l i fe: to
cross the ocean and go teach at Ha rva rd. To teach his own ideas there,
which he cou ld finally develop in the living, risky way that, for him, every
educationa l process impl ies.
                                                           I N TRO D U CT I O N




    Whitehead set sa i l at Liverpool on August 1 6, 1 924, and arrived at
Boston ten days later. As early as September 23, he gave his fi rst philoso
phy class, which, as he was to observe, was also the first one he ever
attended. For thi rteen years, Whitehead was to "think" in front of sur
prised, fascinated, and disconcerted students. For them, with them, and
i n front of them, he was to discover and explore the unexpected impl ica
tions of the q uestions on which he had meditated all his life. Perhaps,
moreover, it was the commitment that all teaching constituted for him
that inspired what my book will try to fol low, a m utation without equiv
alent in the history of philosophy. In a few years, the logician and philos
opher of nature was to transform himsel f into a metaphysician, the cre
ator of a strangely a udacious speculative philosophy.
    A homage of philosophy to fiction, John Gardner grasped the strange
character of this audacity quite precisely: it is bereft of all excitement, of all
appetite for destruction and scandal, simultaneously the word of a Shaper,
or a creator of forms who might perhaps be able to disarm Grendel 's
hatred, and of the dragon who, with his immemorial knowledge, knows
the vanity of arguments that try to fixate time, found the order of things,
refute or j ustify.
    Whitehead died in 1 947. At the time, his influence in the United States
was swept away by the rising tide of analytical thought. As far as England
was concerned, Process and R eality had gone out of print. For years, in
fact, it was through the teaching and the books of the philosopher and
theologian Charles Hartshorne that a thread of transmission was main
tained . The God conceived by Whitehead, and affi rmed by the blind man
Ork, thus earned him an improbable survival through the intermediary of
American theology. And the consequence of this intermediary was an initial
mode of reading that was rather peculiar: that of a theism that sought to
elaborate, by rational arguments a lone, the definition of a God conceived
as " perfection," but which often looked favorably upon convergence with
Christian doctrine ( there are even Whiteheadian theological constructions
that confer a philosophical foundation upon the Trinity ) .
    For a European l i k e me, a stranger t o the theistic tradition, the true
interlocutors make their appearance with Ivor Leclerc and William A.
Christian. It is not that these philosophers rejected proximity with theistic
concerns, but that their interest focused on the conceptual coherence
proper to the work, not its contri bution to theology. Thus, the question
for them was not to renew the ideal of perfection associated with God,
but to grasp the reasons and the extent of the conceptual creation White
head names God . One of these phi losophers' ambitions was to restore
Whitehead to philosophy, and more particularly to European philosophy,
6   I N TRODU CTI O N




which constitutes the nourishing soil of his concepts (al though today it
is in Korea and Japan tha t Whitehead's thought meets with its greatest
success ) .
   Henceforth, American " Whiteheadians" are recruited a mong both phi
losophers and theologians, a nd the palette has been enriched by practi
tioners from the most diverse horizons, from ecology to femi nism, prac
tices that unite poli tica l struggle and spiritual ity with the sciences of
educa tion. This forms a world that is astonishingly disparate from a Eu
ropean viewpoint, in which a New-Age type of thought can rub el bows
with metaphysicians discussi ng Plato, Lei bniz, and Kant: a strange drop
of water in the a mazing American multiplicity, but which affirms itsel f in
a singularly lively and tenacious way.
   This is a "slightly secret school " as Deleuze wrote in Le P I; ( LP, 1 03 ) ,
a n d here the secret is not associated with a desire for mystery, quite the
contra ry: Whiteheadian philosophers are passionately attached to tech
nical controversy, to expla ining conceptual difficulties, and to evaluating
possible or necessary modifications. The secrecy derives from the legacy
of a philosopher who, discretely and without polemics, without ever ask
ing his readers to thri l l to the audacity and radicalism of the risk or to the
threat of isolation, but with an obstinate tenderness, undertook to forge a
conceptual language that forces those who acquire a taste for it to think.
   Whitehead was a ma thematician, and it is no doubt because he was a
mathematician, because he knew and loved the way mathematics forces
mathematicians to thi nk, but also knew the rigorous constra ints to which
every mathematica l defi nition must respond , that he never thought that
mathematics could consti tute a model that was generalizable. The kind
of necessity proper to mathematical demonstrations cannot be transferred
to philosophy. Phi losophical reasoning that tries to be demonstrative in
this sense could only produce an imitation unworthy of the adventure that,
for mathematicians, is constituted by the production of a demonstration.
What is more, in order to conform to the logical-mathema tical model,
such reasoning would require the goodwill of the readers, their submis
sion to definitions that are simplistic compa red with the extraordinary
subtlety both of the situations and of the usages of natura l la nguage as
it confronts these situations. Such simpl istic defi nitions, which mutilate
questions, would be the price to pay for an approach that would finally
be rationa l . As a mathematician-cum-phi losopher, Whitehead trans
ferred from mathematics to phi losophy not the a uthority produced by
demonstration, but the adventure and commitment to and for a ques
tion, the " bad faith " with regard to every " as is well known," all consen
sual plausi bilities.
                                                          I N TRO D U C T I O N   7




    If Whitehead's work is hard to approach, it is because it de mands, with
utter di scretion, that its readers accept the adventure of the questions
that will separate them from every consensus. Of course, one could say that
th is is the case for all " great" philosophers, those who do not limit them
se lves to ask ing a " classic" question: that of human freedom, or that of
the va lidity of our k nowledge, or of the re lation between facts and val
ues, for instance . When phi losophers transform the landscape of ques
tions, their readers cannot limit themselves to " taking cognizance " of what
is proposed, or to evaluating, as " connoisseurs," the way certa i n we ll
known arguments are formu lated and used, and whose authors situate
the mselves, construct alliances, i ntroduce new distinctions that others
wi l l then have to discuss, conserve, or reject. Even when an a rgument is
taken up again, its meaning changes, and the readers must accept the
experience of this change . Yet even when philosophers innovate in this
way, the nove l ty is usually introduced i n a way that offers readers an
other kind of stability, the one that can be associated with progress. If
they dare, they will be the ones to topple the present into an obsolete
past, a past in which " people sti ll be l ieved that . . . " They will be united
by the audacity of what they deny, and what they no longer need. And
even a philosopher like Nietzsche, who thought he was writing for no
one, because no readers could bear to si tuate themselves " beyond good
and evil," supplied, no doubt involuntarily, the formula for a new con
sensus: not, of course , to live what is unlivable, or to think what is un
thinkable, but to refer to the unlivable and the unthinkable , to criticize or
deconstruct that in which others sti ll " believe ."
    If Gardner's monster Grendel flees, he lpless, instead of kill ing the blind
priest, it is because his hatred is fed by the way human be ings a re situated
in a history that he cannot share, a history that is the work of the Shaper,
who transforms their l i ves i nto epics. And to disarm Grende l 's hatred,
i t is not enough to deny progress, to reject human greatness. Time and
again, the monster will perceive that negation and re futation are equally
the a ffirmation of the superiority of those who have become capable of
de nying and refuting that in which others believed. Time and again, he
will discern the work of the Shaper, and he wi ll k i l l . Gardner needed
Whitehead to give voice both to the priest and to the dragon because he
needed sta tements that, in two different modes, separate Grendel from
what makes him a monster. The dragon is extra-epic, but the priest, for
his part, makes Grendel 's powers of discernment redundant. How could
one discern a mendacious construction where nothing claims to be au
thorized by the facts, where no argument ever claims the power to bring
into agreement those who wil l prove, by this agreement, that they are
8   I NTRO D U C T I O N




worthy of what is demanded of them? The priest's speech is " la ughable,"
as Whitehead's ambition may seem laughable in the eyes of contempo
rary phi losophers: to construct a philosophy that is openly and system
atically speculative.
   One of the tests Whitehead reserves for his readers thus concerns the
question of what is philosophically " serious," or what every serious phi
losopher k nows today: it is ill usory to deal in a positive way with the
truth of God, or of the universe. This seriousness is marked at the division
between the questions that belong to the history of philosophy, and those
that designate its contemporary territories. Historians of philosophy can
devote hundreds of pages to Plato's Ideas, the Hegelian Spirit, the Leibniz
ian monads, the Cartesian God, or the vision in God of Malebranche, and
they can experience the efficacy proper to these concepts, and even suc
ceed in transmitting them. They will not be asked how they situate them
selves with regard to these philosophical propositions, because they are
doing the job of a historian. They are protected by their distance. Yet White
head is a quasi-contemporary philosopher. He wrote at the same time as
Heidegger, Husserl, and Wittgenstein, who are stil l cited today as refer
ences for thinking about our epoch. It is thus impossible to keep him "at a
distance." And yet he seems to be unaware that there is a " before Kant,"
when philosophers considered themselves free to speculate about God,
the world, and the human soul, and an " a fter Kant," in which, except for
a few old-fashioned naifs, they have learned the lesson of human finitude,
have accepted the consequences of the fact tha t they do not have the ben
efit of a direct intuition of these ultimate realities, and have admitted that
" thoughts without intuitive content are empty."


Taking a Speculative Philosophy Seriously?
How can we take seriously a book l ike Process and R eality, which opens
with a chapter devoted to that speculative phi losophy that we are sup
posed to have relegated to history ? All the more so i n that Whitehead
does not undertake to defend the conditions of possibil ity of such a phi
losophy, or to answer the condemnation that has been decreed aga inst it.
He l imits himsel f to l i ni ng up, in a way that is perfectly serene, as if they
were so many self-evidences, statements l iable to pl unge serious philoso
phers into abysses of indignant perplexi ty, if they do not close the book
after two pages, not even seei ng how one could attack a thought that is
disarming in its na ivety and its dogmatism. And how could one take
seriously, a s a quasi-contempora ry, a book that ends with the grandiose
vision of a perpetual cosmic process such tha t " the love in the world
                                                          I NTRO D U C T I O N   9




passes i nto the love i n heaven, and floods back again i nto the worl d "
( PR, 3S1 ) ?
   The difficulty is all the greater because i t is impossible to maintain that
Whitehead, as a mathematician, was naive and ignorant in philosophy,
or to classify him among those who attempt a " return" to a philosophy
of the " pre-Kantian" type. Does he not himself explicitly deny the possi
bil ity of such a return when he writes that " philosophy never reverts to
its old position after the shock of a great phi losopher" ( PR, II) ? Of course,
Whitehead reads Descartes, Spi noza , Leibniz, and even Kant as if they
were his contemporaries, but he knows that he asks them q uestions that
are not theirs, he knows that he does not respect what matters for them,
or what made them think.
   Perhaps one had to be a mathematician to realize that it is not appro
priate to take seriously, for one instant, the unavoi dable di lemmas and
the insurmountable alternatives that phi losophers produce i n order to
give their demonstrations a necessity that also enables them to criticize
and denounce. Yet a humor of thought was also necessary in order not to
overestimate this knowledge, so as not to transform it into an i nstrument
of j udgment, to know that, unlike mathematical defi nitions, defi nitions in
philosophy a re j ust as interesting by what they deny, j udge, or refuse to
think, as by what they affirm. Philosophical statements must generally be
heard twice: in the mode of creation, they find their necessity in the prob
lem that set the philosopher to work; in the mode of j udgment, they desig
nate what the philosopher has undertaken to silence and disqua l i fy, that
is, also the transformation of what gave rise to the problem in polemics
against rivals and imposters .
   Whitehead 's speculati ve phi losophy is i ndeed si tuated " a fter K ant,"
a fter the shock consti tuted for philosophy by the Kantian prohibi
tions, beca use this phi losophy does not communicate with a " right to
think ." Thus, Whitehead does not infri nge upon any prohi b ition, for
prohibitions presuppose such a com munication. The q uestion for him
is not what we can k now, but what we k now. I f he became a phi loso
pher, i t is because q uestions to which, as a n empirica l fact, he felt that
his epoch demanded a n answer situated him i n that tra dition known
as philosophy.
   Reading Whitehea d is a test, for he demands of his readers not only
that they accept these questions, but a lso, and above all, that they accept
the possibi lity that such questions are not destined to remain without an
answer, the object of a meditation on the human condition, its paradoxes,
and even its tragedy. More than any other phi losopher, Whitehead was
permeated by the vertiginous distance between the possi bilities of the
10   I N TRO D U C T I O N




universe and our human abil ities to apprehend them. Yet he never bowed
down before a question, for every question is a human formul ation, and
none, as such, transcends the human adventure. The way we formulate
questions always comes from somewhere, and can always lead some
where: not, certa inly, to an answer that would be definitive at last, but
rather to new ways of formulating them, in a way that no longer com
municates with an insurmountable enigma, but with a problem. If there
is one position that denies the finitude of the human cond ition, it is the
one that claims to put a stop to the a dventure of thought, and supposes
that we know what is imposed by that cond ition.
   If reading Whitehead means accepting to commit oneself to an adven
ture whose starting point is always the formul ation of a problem, with
out the legiti macy of the problem being well-founded, without the pos
sibil ity of answering it being j ustified in terms of the right to think, one
may rightly wonder if the formulations he attempted a re sti ll able to en
gage us today. Such a question coul d, of course, be raised with regard to
every philosopher, and it is the greatness of the history of philosophy that
it succeeds, sometimes, in giving what one could cal l , with Gilles Deleuze,
a " portra it of the philosopher with his problem." Even when the problem
is no longer ours, the way it forced the phi losopher to think, create, and
reject can then become ours, in the sense that it creates the experience of
the movement of thought proper to philosophical creation. Deleuze was
wel l aware of this, he who discovered that philosophy would be his life,
would be what woul d make his life worth living, a fter a first class on
Plato's Ideas-even i f many consider him as the anti-Platonic philosopher
par excellence. The surest way to " k ill " philosophy is to transmit it in the
manner of a science : one does not need to enter i nto contact with New
ton's problem to learn rational dynamics-the equations of Lagrange and
Hamilton define what must be reta ined of it-but to deal with Plato
without first sharing his problem is somewhat analogous to studying but
terflies on the basis of a collection of pinned butterfl ies, without ever hav
ing seen one fly.
   Yet Thinking with Whitehead does not belong, properly speaking, to
the history of philosophy. In it, to be sure, Whitehead will never be sepa
rated from his problem, and more precisely from the way in which he
never ceased formulating and reformul ating his problem. Yet this is no
" portrait," for what is at stake in this book is a lso, and inseparably, to
present Whitehead as a phi losopher who belongs to our epoch. Unl i ke
the portraitist, whose task is to make the viewers feel, to transfer what
was lived and created, but without personally taking over from it, my
a pproach to Whitehea d cannot be dissociated from the importance of
                                                         I N TR O D U C T I O N   11




his work in my life. In this sense, I am pa rt of the motley crew of "White
head ians," of those ecologists, femin ists, educators, theologians, and so
on, who have discovered that Whitehead helped them to imagine and to
fight against " ready-made " models, a nd above all not to despa ir.
   The discovery that Whitehead hel ped me in this way is inseparable
from my practical situation more than thirty years ago: that of a young
philosopher who had come from the experi mental sciences to philosophy
because she did not accept the way researchers in science are trained, and
who was trying to figure out how to situate herself with regard to these
sciences. The goal, for her, was to be able to think about the creative power
of these sciences-the path of critical ep istemology was henceforth
closed-but also about their catastrophic indifference to what they judge
" non-scientific ." The path that ratifies this j udgment by making the sci
ences, in one way or another, an " access to reality " beyond our ill usions
was therefore closed as wel l .
   It could, however, be maintained that Whitehea d fai led, if not i n his
diagnosis, then at least i n his prognosis with regard to science. For an
important aspect of what engaged his philosophical adventure was his
conviction that what is cal led modern science had reached a turning
point, which demanded a new philosophical thought. The period when
modern science had developed by repudiating philosophy had been fruit
fu l, but as he wrote in 1 925, the threat was henceforth that science might
degenerate into a " medley of ad hoc hypotheses " ( SMW, 1 7) . It will be said
that this threat has not material ized, and that physicists have, without the
hel p of the philosophers, transformed the foundations of their science, and
have accompl ished what seemed impossible to Kant: to interrogate the ori
gin of the Universe, of matter, and even to place in debate the question
" why is there something rather than nothing ? " It will also be said that
biology has accompl ished its revolution, and that we have learned more
about l iving beings in a few decades than throughout the preceding centu
ries. Others could also say that if science is threatened today, it is rather by
the way in which its traditional all ies, the State and industry, have under
taken to enslave it directly through what is called the economy of knowl
edge, and that Whitehead's propositions ignore what should be thought
about today: not a science that is still a cousin of philosophy, trying to
confer an intelligible order on what confronts us, but a technoscience for
which to understand is to be able to transform, and which blindly serves
those who actualize that power to transform the world .
   Of course, Whitehead was only laterally interested in this last question,
although one could say that the way he designated the " method of training
professionals" ( SMW, 1 96 ) , as one of the great and most redou btable
12   I NTRODUCTI O N




discoveries of the nineteenth century, has lost none of its power. Yet his
goal was not to denounce professionals or to bring them culture, the
 " supplement of soul " they lack. Whitehead belongs to our epoch because
he asks a question that is ours, that of our lack of resistance to the way in
which, since the begi nning of the ni neteenth century, what has been
called progress has redefined the worl d. From this viewpoint, one could
say that today, a t a time when it has become impossi ble to ignore the
consequences of this progress, worrisome to say the least, Whitehead's
thought finds a n actua lity it lacked in its own day. To be sure, there has
been innovation, but also rarefaction of those who, still i n Whitehead's
time, took the time to think. Instead, we have to do with a veritable "cult
of the scienti fic revolution "-a new revolution will come a long to solve
the questions rai sed by the preceding one. One must " wa i t for genius,"
and meanwhi le nothing must slow down the race, the process of accu
mulating results by researchers who a re defined, in the fi rst instance, by
competition.
    Yet what, one wi l l ask, does Wh itehead suggest? Are we to believe
that his concepts, formulated so long ago, m i raculously conserve thei r
relevance in a world he cou ld not i magine ? Is he the genius we were
wa iting for ? By no means, and I must confess that the way some physi
cists who have withdrawn from the race to speculate have become i n
terested in Whitehead, and have found a mong the " p rocess philoso
phers " the sympathetic and a ttentive ear their col leagues refused them,
does not convi nce me. For this interest a ffirms what Whitehead refused :
that the questions that issue from the specia l ized adventure known as
physics a re the " big questions " that deal with rea l i ty as such. Much
more positive i n this regard is the interest of certa in chem ists or biolo
gists, who do not aim a t a summit meaning between their science and
metaphysics, but discover that the Whitehea d i a n concepts make aspects
of the situations they study i nteresting and signi ficant; they do not il
l ustrate the power of theoretical a pproaches that are habitua l, but i m
posed by experi mentation.
    However, for a philosopher l i ke me, i nterested in science, what is no
doubt most important is the way Whitehead suggests putting things in
perspective. It a llows us to resi st the identification of the question of sci
ence with that of knowledge. Confronted by science, philosophy does not
have to think of human knowledge, either to make thi s science the accom
plishment of human rationality, and extract from it epistemological or
normative norms i n order to diagnose, in the manner of Bergson, the
limits of rational knowledge, or, like Heidegger, to denounce science as
" that which does not think." Beyond their contrad ictions, all these philo-
                                                          I N TRODU CTI O N     13




sophical problematizations turn science into a n accomplishment o r a des
tiny that, beyond itself, speaks of something human, and of the knowledge
to which this something human may lay claim. For Whitehead, in contrast,
science must be understood as an adventure, and an a dventure never en
ables us to draw a general lesson. When the adventurer is perplexed, when
the adventure turns out badly, the question to ask is rather " what has hap
pened to us ? "
   The Chinese, i t i s sa id, smiled a t the na ivete o f the Jesuit missionaries
who reported to them the triumphs of seventeenth-century science, but
all the words we have available today are laden with this " fact " : " we,"
for our part, did not laugh. The community picked out by this " we " is the
one Whitehead is addressing in the fi rst instance. We are those who, for
instance, have accepted and continue to accept the separation, proposed
since the Galilea n origins of modern science, between the " why " and the
" how." Such a separation is always what prevails when a public question
highlights what scientists propose ( we know " how" to go about this . . . ) ,
a n d what is to b e decided according t o val ues defined as " purely human,"
alien to a nature supposed to be defined by the scientific " how." Such a
separa tion gives rise to, and presupposes, an inabil ity to resist, for as soon
as it is staged and accepted, it is too late. The roles have been distributed,
with the scientists on the side of innovation, and those who dispute their
proposition on the side of inertia, habits, and what will eventually give in,
for " you can't stop progress." And yet, we have not learned to laugh at this
scenario. We are the ones who ask the question of our lack of resistance to
what, in the name of progress, dismembers thought.
   One does not need, however, to benefit from Chinese wisdom to ques
tion the separation between the why and the how, in particular to show
that it has in fact no stable identi ty, and tha t the " how" never stops mu
ta ting. Yet this criticism will not go far, for scientists will be happy to
admit it: for them, the " how" follows the advance of scientific territories
and designates the " why " as what is left over, what is not scienti fically
demonstra ble but is relative to the tastes and passions of a n epoch; and
it will pass, l ike the epoch. This was the sense in which Galileo proposed
to distinguish between what he had succeeded in demonstrating, " how"
bodies fall, and the question of " why " they fall in tha t way, a question
which, as he remarked, there was " no great use" in asking: this is the
domain of the imagination and of undecidable fiction. The dice a re thus
loaded from the outset, and the distribution unequal , implying as a previ
ous proposition the relegation of what does not perta in to the terri tories
conq uered by scientific objectivity to the rea lm of fiction, human, a l l too
human as it is.
14   I N TRO D U C T I O N




    In other words, for one who learned to think with Whitehead, the con
frontation, which a few years ago inspired so many passions under the
name of the " science wars," was not at all surprising. If the "objective "
sciences can relegate to undecidable fiction what has not undergone a
redefinition that would finally be scientific, why would representatives
of the humanities depri ve themselves of transforming this fiction into a
counteroffensive category to show that the so-called " hows," finally ob
jective, conceal the " whys " of human undertakings ? As Whitehead wrote
with regard to the dual ity between free, entrepreneurial individual spirit
and regular, submissive matter bequeathed to us by the seventeenth cen
tury, " There is Aaron's rod, and the magicians' serpents; and the on ly
question for philosophy is, which swa llows which; or whether, as Des
cartes thought, they all live happy together" (SMW, 1 42-1 43 ) .
    History has proved Descartes wrong. Each " advance " of an objectivity
reputed to be scientific has been acclaimed by some as a gain in rationa l
ity, and condemned by others as a n a ttack on the subject. In fact, one
could almost say that provoking denunciation has become a favorite rhe
torica l trick in certa in scientific fields. The scandal stirred up bears wit
ness to the conquest. The barking dogs constitute in themselves the proof
that the caravan is passing, transporting the first fruits of the irresistible
conquest. And the dogs are all the more useful i n that the caravan in
question is transporting only goods that a re not very interesting at all:
that is, the pretensions of "evolutionary psychology."
   What has happened to us? One of the unique aspects of Whitehead's
suggestion is tha t is does not contain any " bad guys," nor an explanatory
construction of continuity that refers to something we "couldn't help."
That "adventure " is the first and the last word impl ies that all continuity
is questiona ble, and that no principle of economy should preva il that al
lows us to forget that the resumption of a seemi ngly similar theme takes
place in circumstances that a re di fferent every time, and with stakes that
a re always different. The question " what has happened to us ? " is there
fore not the search for an ultimate explanation, but a resource for tel ling
our stories in another way, in a way that si tuates us otherwise-not as
defined by the past, but as a ble, perhaps, to inherit from it in another way.
   Whitehead 's contemporaries could, with amusement, perplexity, or
scanda l, wonder whether one shou ld really incur the risks of a specula
tive operation, moving Heaven and Earth, God and matter, to remedy
difficulties that a re ulti mately secondary : does not modern " progress "
bear witness to the fact that, despite everythi ng, " we " have succeeded in
d istinguishing oursel ves from those peoples who, i n fact, profited at the
time from the benefits of civil izing coloni alism ? Ti mes have changed , and
                                                         I N TR O D U C T I O N   15




what may have seemed to be "excess" may be worthy of playing a role in
the apprenticeship that today imposes itself with regard to ourselves. For
good intentions and a conciliatory spirit are not enough. Visions of the
world that pacify contradictions by weakening them will always be at the
mercy of one of the terms that will transform the fragile bridge of resem
blances that has united it with the other as a means of passage and con
quest. And they allow us, in all good conscience, to propose to the rest of
the world a thought that is finally consensual . The speculative operation
attempted by Whitehead could well be more relevant today than it was in
his day, because it breaks with the claim to anonymity that inhabits us
and constitutes us, stil l and again, as " the thinking head of humanity." To
learn to resist, with regard to the " us " that made the Chinese smile, is also
to learn that our adventure can indeed make people smile.


T hinking with Whitehead
Thinking with Whitehead today therefore means accepting an adventure
from which none of the words that serve as our reference points should
emerge unscathed , but from which none will be disqual ified or denounced
as a vector of i l l usion. All a re a part of the problem, whether they refer to
the whys of human experience or to the hows of "objective rea lity." If
compromise solutions do not suffice, it is because they try to circumvent
the problem instead of raising it; that is, they try to mitigate the contra
dictions and to make compatible that which defines itself as conflictual.
Whitehead was a mathematician, and mathematicians a re they who do
not bow down before contrad ictions but transform them into an ingredi
ent of the problem . They are the ones who dare to " trust" in the possibil
ity of a solution that remai ns to be created . Without this " trust " in a pos
sible solution, mathematics would not exist.
   This truth is the one William James cal led faith or bel ief, his only an
swer when confronted by those who have declared that l i fe is not worth
living, " the whole army of suicides ( . . . ) an army whose roll-ca ll, like
the famous evening gun of the British a rmy, follows the sun round the
world and never terminates " ( LWL, 3 7 ) . It has nothing in common with
what I would ca ll, to underline the d i fference, " to be confident," that is,
to continue, to carry on in the mode of "everything will work out fine."
The mathematician's trust is insepa ra ble from a commitment not to mu
tilate the problem in order to solve it and to take its demands fully into
account. Yet it implies a certain deli berate amnesia with regard to the ob
viousness of obstacles, an active i ndetermination of what the terms of the
problem " mean." Tra nsferred to phi losophy, this indetermination means
16   I N TRO D U C T I O N




that what announced i tsel f a s a foundation, authorizing a position and
providing its banner to a ca use, will be transformed into a constra i nt,
which the solution will have to respect but upon which it may, if neces
sary, confer a somewhat unexpected signification .
   To ill ustrate this indeterminization, I will refer to a well-known fable.
There once was an old Bedouin, who, sensing that his death was immi
nent, gathered together his three sons and signified his last wishes to
them. To the eldest, he beq ueathed half his inheritance, to the second one
qua rter, and to the third one sixth. As he said this, he d ied, leaving his sons
in perplexity, for the inheritance in question consisted of eleven camels.
   How were they to respect the old man's will ? Should they kill those of
the camels whose division seemed prescribed, and share the meat among
them ? Was this the required filial piety ? Did their father really want them to
prove thei r love by accepting this loss ? Or had he made a mistake, dis
tracted or weakened by his imminent death ? In fact, at least one error was
obvious, because one-half pl us a quarter plus a sixth do not make one. Yet
to inherit on the basis of an interpretation that disquali fies a last wish, is
this not to insult to the dea d ? And i n this case, moreover, how could one
divide ? Who would take away the remainder of the divi sion ? All the in
gredients were there for a fratricidal war. The three brothers nevertheless
decided to try to avoid the war, that is, to wager that a solution could
exist. This means that they went to see the old sage who so often plays a
role in such stories. This old sage, on this occasion, told them that he
could not do anything for them except to offer them what might perhaps
help them : his old camel, skinny and half-blind. The inheritance now
counted twelve camels: the eldest took six of them, the second three, the
youngest two, and the old camel was returned to the old sage.
   What did the twelfth camel accompl ish ? By its presence, it made possi
ble what seemed contradictory, simultaneously obeying the father's wishes,
discovering the possi bility of respecting thei r terms, and not destroying
the va l ue of the i nheritance. All this because it made it possible to bring
to existence that which remained discretely undetermined in the paternal
statement, the q uestion of what it means to " share an inheri tance." It is
usually divided into parts, and this is what the statement seems to com
mand . Yet this norm is only one way of answering the problem. What is
requi red is that once the allocation has been made, the contents of the
inheri tance are distributed, but nothing determines what the allocation
must deal with. The content of the inheritance is a given that acts as a
constraint, but the role of this constraint belongs to the solution, and the
question of the allocation ca n thus be plunged within a wider field of
possi bilities. Thus, the sol ution does not enta il submission to the prob-
                                                         I N T R O D U CT I O N   17




lema tic statement, but the invention of the field i n which the problem finds
its solution.
    The fa ble of the twelfth camel illumi nates the meaning of what White
head was to cal l " speculative philosophy." First, it ill ustrates the d iffer
ence between " trusting" and " being confident in." If the brothers had gone
no farther than to wonder whether they could be confident in their father's
intentions, their situation wou ld remain without issue. It is only beca use
they accepted the paternal will as an unknown, because none of them
clai med to know what their father " meant," that they went to consult the
old sage. And the " trust " presupposed by their procedure is not d i rected
to the old sage hi mself, for the goal is not to yield to his authority rather
than to the paternal authority. It is d i rected to the possible as such, to the
possibil ity of a solution on the basis of which the unknown of the pater
na l will might find its meaning. As far as the twel fth camel added to the
inheritance is concerned, it ill ustrates the efficacy proper to the specula
tive proposition. This camel will not benefit any of the brothers. It makes
the division possible, in conformity with the father's will, but it is not dis
tri buted itself and is not added to any share.
    The specificity of the concepts proposed by Whitehead is that, like the
twelfth camel, once they have done their j ob, once they have transformed
the way in which a situation raises a problem, they d isappear without leav
ing a trace other than this transformation itself. This is why Whitehead
can write that the interest of the speculative scheme he has constructed
resides in its a pplications, in the transformations it carries out in our
ways of explaining or characterizing our experiences. It is these transfor
mations that are to give ri se to the experience Whitehead associates with
the goal of philosophy, an experience of " sheer disclosure " (MT, 49) rather
than the concepts themselves. The concepts are required by the transfor
mation of experience, but it is this disclosure that has, and always will
have, the last word . For i nstance, the question raised by the speculative
construction of God, required by Whitehead, does not imply the existence
of this God . The only question is that of knowing which experiences
would have been relegated to illusion-how the problem would have been
muti lated-i f what Whitehead names God had not been included in the
conceptual arrangement constructed by Whitehead.
    Yet the fact that Whitehead was a ble to discover that his conceptual
arrangement needed God implies an aspect of his speculative philosophy
that the fa ble of the camels does not a l low us to describe, beca use this
fa ble has the form of a riddle that allows one path to a solution, and only
one. In the case of speculative phil osophy, the role of the dying father,
whose last wishes define wha t the sol ution to the problem of definition
18   I N T R O D U C T I O N




must achieve, is not played by a nyone. Thi s is why one cannot say that
the Whiteheadian proposition constitutes " the answer," finally discov
ered . Quite the contrary, this proposition is i nseparable from the con
stra ints that Whitehead had to impose upon himsel f in order to formu
late the problem to be solved, for it is these constra ints that make him a
creator: in other words, they confer upon the solution being sought the
power to obl ige him to create. This is why the speculative a nswer formu
lated in Process and Reality is itsel f coherent with what it tries to bring
about: " sheer d isclosure." It is i nseparable from a n adventure i n which
the problem of philosophers, that is, the constrai nts that must be satisfied
hy the solution they construct, have not ceased to he reformulated .
     If Whitehead is the one who brings adventures into existence, where
what we seek a re reasons and j ustifications, or what is supposed to tran
scend a nd a uthorize our choices, it is crucial not to conceive of this ad
venture as reduci ble to what is arbitrary or contingent. What is at stake
here enables me both to cha racterize Whitehead 's approach as "construc
tivist" and to defend the constructivist position agai nst the curse that
weighs it down today, a weight it tra nsfers to the situations in which it
intervenes. There are social, cultural, linguistic, neurophysiological, his
torical, and pol itica l constructivisms, but their common feature is demys
tification. In a way that bears witness in itself to the polemical power of
our categories, to affirm " it's a construction" is to affirm "it is a mere con
struction," and it will then most often be a matter of affirming the a rbi
trary nature of what others believe they can j ustify. In particular, the rea lity
to which the sciences claim to have access must fall si lent, unable to make
a significant di fference between the interpretative constructions that con
cern it. Such claims are themselves " mere" constructions, or " narratives."
    Where polemics unmasks, Whitehead addresses adventures. In Process
and Reality, he speaks of rationalism as an " experimental adventure " ( PR,
9) and of metaphysics as an "adventure of hope " ( PR, 42 ), but he a lso
defines, in a speculative mode, a l l continuity as an " adventure in change "
( PR, 3 5 ) . For him, then, the term "adventure " is valid simultaneously, both
on an empirical level-to characterize what we are dealing with, but
which also situates us-and on a speculative level . And the choice of this
term accentuates a question that polemica l constructivisms render sec
ondary. There is no adventure without a risky relation to an environment
that has the power to compl icate this adventure, or even to doom it to
fa i l ure. Likewise, there is no construction that does not ra ise the question
of " how it holds together," or how it is a ffected by its environment and
how it a ffects it.
   That a bridge may hold throughout its "adventure of change," through
the multiple trials that its envi ronment imposes upon i t, is the achieve-
                                                        I N TRO D U C T I O N   19




ment that ma tters i n its case. And no one will say, with regard to a
century-old bridge, " it's only a construction ." However, it will be objected,
if no one says this, it is because no one claims the contrary: no one claims
that the bridge is " objective," or independent of human knowledge. Yet
this a nswer, a l beit legitimate, provides a good translation of the curse that
weighs upon constructivism, that is, on its capture by a polemical net
work. If the notion of construction is used in a pejorative way, it is be
cause it was initially mobilized by scientists to characterize what is not
scientific, then catastrophically preserving its same connotation of a rbi
trariness, by the " deconstructivists," to show that scientific knowledge can
not escape the same j udgment.
   The fact that all continuity must be described as an "adventure " creates
the possibility of esca ping polemics. Instead, a set of notions organizes it
sel f around the notion of adventure, and particularly that of a construc
tion that " is able to hold," which, following Whitehead , and in the math
ematical sense, we will cal l " generic." When Whitehead uses the word
" generic," and also when he spea ks of "general i ty," he is not thinking like
a logician and is not giving the term the power to define a class of partic
ular cases (all men are mortal; Socrates . . . ). The generic notion does not
authorize any definition. It suggests a way of addressing a situation whose
eventual success will be the relevance of the questions to which it gives rise.
Generalities in the logical sense authorize classifications, with each partic
ular case exemplifying the general characteristic that defines a set of
notions. Whiteheadian philosophical general ities, and the notions he calls
"generic," make the wager that the questions to which they will give rise
will shed light on features that are important for each situation.
   Importance is a Whitehead ian generic notion. It enables no classifica
tion, yet nevertheless does not condemn it: to classify may be what mat
ters, for instance, for a botanist. This is not a matter of psychology, for if
one questions botanists, they will spea k of vegetal proliferation, of the
thorny questions raised by each type of classification, in short, of an ad
venture that confronts one with plants. Every adventure thus calls forth
the generic question " what does it make matter ? " which can also mean
" how is the contrast between success and defeat defined for it ? " and this
question will cal l forth others in turn, which will imply the trials, risks,
and type of environment required for success, and so on .
   As an example, but also in order to introduce myself, I will a llow myself
to sketch here the way I have tried to characterize modern experimental
science. I have practiced an a pproach that could be ca lled constructivist,
but not in the sense of a theory of knowledge or an epi stemol ogy that
affirms that not real ity, but human acti vities a lone are responsible for our
knowledge. The constructivist question I have asked is " what makes these
2 0   I NTRODUCTI O N




human beings, these prod ucers of the knowledge we call 'experimental:
become active ? " In other words, " what is the uniq ueness of the adven
ture in which they have become engaged ? " " what matters to them ? "
" what does success mean to them ? "
   O f course, many things are important for individuals, but here the
question bears not upon them but on the way they define an achieve
ment, and the way this definition engages them. In The Invention of Mod
ern Sciences, I suggested that what unites experimenters, what forces them
to become active and to think together, is a question that can only be
asked in the la boratory : did this experimenta l arrangement provide the
phenomenon being questioned with the abil ity to bear witness in a reli
able way, concerning the way wha t is made observa ble a bout this phe
nomenon must be interpreted ? Has it succeeded in conferring upon the
phenomenon being q uestioned the role of " respondent" for the interpre
tation that is given to it?
   The ability to resist the accusation of " being a mere construction," in
the sense of a merely human ( social, linguistic, techn ica l , subjective) fab
rication, is thus no longer the privi lege of the experi mental proced ure,
but its key element. It is what defines the demands of the environment on
which the success of an experi menta l suggestion depends, and this ability
does not exclude the human beings who become active, discuss, and hesi
tate, but sol icits them and mobil izes them a round the eventual i ty of this
achievement. And this is an achievement that no theory of knowledge, no
epistemology could j ustify, for it belongs to the order of the event, of what
can happen but is not deserved, and does not correspond to any right. It
is an achievement that is rare, extremely selective, and radically situated .
Wha t situates it is not the world, objectively deciphered at last, but the
experimental a pparatus, for the questions that matter are established
around the experimental apparatus. It is here that human beings become
active, and that an art of testing and of consequences is practiced, whose
correlation is the signature of the event. The tests of an experi mental
proposition's reliabil ity are not a goa l in themselves; the true verification
of a proposition concerns its consequences or the new possi bili ties that it
makes conceivable and which, if they a re fruitful, will gather researchers
together, whatever epistemologists may say.
   That this type of success could become the model of a theory of gen
eral knowledge, conta ining the disquali fication of what is " merely sub
jecti ve," is the sign of a propaganda operation . The event " here we can
do something ! " is transformed into a norm ( most often emptied of what,
for experi menters, " ma kes an event," so as to extend it to the totality of
what is recogni zed as " scientific " ) , and everything that escapes this norm
                                                         I N TR O D U C T I O N   2 1




is placed in the same sack, defined by the "why" of human subjectivity.
The success story of this operation is part of the question " what has hap
pened to us ? " but i n order to resist it there is no need to " deconstruct" the
experimenta l achievement. On the contrary, it is by accepting it in its se
lective and rare uniqueness that we can understand that it is not " na ture "
t h a t ma kes an experi menter think. Heidegger w a s right: in t h i s sense,
in deed, " science does not thin k ." What matters to experimenters a re the
objections and the tests to which their proposition will be subjected, and
the future it ma kes it possible to envisage.
    Such an a pproach offers a certain analogy with the fa ble of the twelfth
camel, beca use it limits itself to adding an ingredient lia ble to produce a
" sheer disclosure " : the confronta tion only seemed inevitable beca use this
ingredient had been left out of the problematic landscape. This obviously
does not solve the very concrete problems raised by the role of science and
of scientists in our society, but i t separates these problems from wha t, for
the experimenters, can only be a declaration of war: the j udgment that what
produces agreement between them i s nothing more than a purely human
construction . One can l isten to scientists tell the story of their achieve
ments without having to challenge them, for they are situated in, and be
long to, an adventure that has nothing to say a bout what does not answer
to I ts demands. The q uestions that issue forth from this a dventure are
added to the other human questions and may complicate them, but i f they
appear to take the place of questions that matter in other adventures, as
constituti ng the " fina l ly objective " version of them, there is no need for
confrontation, and it is enough to search with trust for how the story has
been transformed into propaganda .
    However, this camel-which I would ca ll " practical," since the ingredi
ent it adds designates what matters for experimenta l practices-does not
accomplish the miracle of instantaneous reconcil iation proposed by the
original fable, any more than Whitehead's " speculative" twelfth camel does.
Instead, it proposes a way of addressing those who are divided into two
antagonistic poles.
    Thus, one can certainly ask scientists many things, but not to renounce
what matters to them, and particularly wha t resonates in the question " i s
it publishable ? " : the primacy of t h e objections of "competent colleagues,"
the only objections that can place their proposition in danger, because they
are the only ones capable of detecting a fault, an over- ha sty hypothesis, a
possible counterinterpretation . Quite the contrary, one would discern the
possible destruction of the experimental adventure if the knowledge econ
omy were to prevail and transform competent colleagues into complacent
colleagues, because they share the same dependencies. On the contra ry,
2 2   I N T RO D U C T I O N




one will wish that the link between rel iability and the presence of those
lia ble to object may be maintained " outside the laboratory " : that is, that
 all those who a re competent to put every proposition to the test should
actua lly be gathered a round it.
    In our academic world, however, where publication has become a ques
tion of life or death and where everyone henceforth depends on " compe
tent colleagues," particularly when gathered in reading committees or
eva luatory committees, questions also arise for those who have gathered
around the other pole, which could be ca l led the "critica l " pole. They too
a re situated by the questi on of success, and of what success renders im
portant. Is your success that of Grendel ? That of the justice-dea lers,
working in the name of a general truth, which demands the destruction
of those who do not bow down before it ? Or else, what a re the ques
tions that make you think, around which the demands that defi ne what
matters for you a re organized ?
    And it arises, in particular, for me. Who are my col leagues ? What defi
nition of what matters do I share with them ? To what tests sha l l my
proposition be subjected ? The person who raises this question is in
tensely aware of the fact that, if her publ ications had depended on most
of her "competent colleagues," that is, on those who mimic the sciences
by demanding that an a rgument present itself as capable of forcing the
agreement of a l l competent philosophers, she would have been profes
sional ly condemned . To think with Whitehead is also to a ffirm that the
success of a phi losophical proposition is not to resist obj ections but to
give rise to what he himsel f calls a " leap of the imagination " ( PR, 4 )-and
the point is to experiment with the effects of that leap: what it does to
thought, what it obl iges one to do, what it renders important, and what
it ma kes remain silent.
    Un l i ke French, English does not a l low the word " experiment" to be
used for an experience that implies an active, open, and demanding at
tention. No more than laboratory experi mentation can be reduced to
careful, systematic observation, can experience or the transformation of
experience brought about by a scientific proposition be reduced to a new
way of seeing. In both cases, a reciprocal influence is implied, that puts to
the test both what brings about and what is brought about. This is the
type of test that this book, which is written " with " Whitehead, demands.
What is at stake in it is not to share a vi sion, nor to provide a definitive
interpretation of Whiteheadian thought, but to experiment/experience in
the present what it means to ask the question "What has happened to us ? "
i n the way h e suggests .
                                                           I N TR O D U C T I O N   2 3




Choices of Writing
To try to render a philosophical proposition " present" means first of all to
try to avoid the form of commentary that is suitable for the exposition of
an author's beliefs, of what he or she thinks. It is to make thought insepa
rable from the problem of " how to think " that obl iges this thought. This
is why I have chosen an approach that has the look and feel of a narration,
accompanying Whitehead over the course of a few years ( from The Con
cept of Nature, published in 1 920, to Process and R eality, publ ished i n
1 92 9 ) , in which an iti nerary is accompl ished from nature t o metaphysics,
and from metaphysics to cosmology. This is not a real story. As I have
already emphasized, we have practically no biographical testimony that
allows us to tel l the story of how the person of interest experienced this
iti nerary. It is in the text itself (with one exception : "Apri l 1 92 5 " ) that I
have tried to fol low the construction of the problems and the way they
mutate and ricochet by colliding with the q uestions and demands for
which they open the way.
    The narrative form indicates that the person who is reading The Con
cept of Nature or Science and the Modern World is not reading them as a
contemporary of their writing, but with the knowledge of what was going
to happen. This does not, I hope, mean a finalized readi ng, imposing upon
the texts an end that was not theirs, but a reading that tries to deci pher
the paths of an adventure that has the nature of a riddle. At the beginning
of The Concept of Nature, Whitehead emphasized the extent to which it
would be hard for his readers to accept that he would indeed confine his
problems within the narrow limits he had j ust described, whereas it is
precisely beyond these limits that things usually start to get exciting ( CN,
4 8 ) . At the end of Process and Reality, the same author seems to have ex
ploded all the limits that modern good manners impose upon thought.
    Another approach would have been possible: it would have started out
from the questions raised by this world, and would have sought the way
they arise in Whiteheadian terms, as opportunities for " a pplications " of
the conceptual scheme proposed by Whitehead . In pa rticular, it would
have been possible to give more space to contemporary q uestioni ngs, that
is, to " bring Whitehead up to date," and to affirm his relevance today. One
of the reasons that turned me away from this possibility is the ease with
which releva nce can become a model, that is, a source of answers. White
head's proposition does not address itself to knowledge in the sense that it
could be detached from the situations in which it is operative. It does not
constitute a vision of the world or a " new paradigm "-indeed, this is prob
ably the worst confusion that can occur with regard to it. It is addressed
2 4   I N TR O D U C T I O N




to our " modes of thought," in the way a tool addresses our modes of ac
tion, modifying the relation that provides their identity relative to those
who act and to that on which they act, by redistributing what is proposed
as doable or not doable. In other words, it addresses the thinker qua situ
ated, in the way that the thinker defines his or her situation .
   I had the great good l uck to experience the efficacy proper to White
head's thought on the occasion of a twice-annual course, which had the
particula rity of gathering senior students in ph ilosophy and other senior
students who had never done ph ilosophy before. Each time, an experi
ence took place, both collective and individual, that suppressed a l l hier
archy between philosophers and non-phi losophers, but gathered them
together in a sheer discovery that is di fferent for each, because it is relative
each time to their a rea of competence: " one can think like that! " Faced by
the problem of a book to be wri tten, my concern was to red iscover, by
other means, what the i nterventions, questions, and astonishments con
tributed to the oral exercise of the class. Or else, to use an expression dear
to Gilles Deleuze, to provide myself with the constraints capable of forcing
me to " think Whitehead down the middle" in the twofold sense of the
term: without a " begi nning" from which the rest could be deduced, and
face to face with the problems to which it gi ves rise. How could one fash
ion a textual appa ratus that could introduce the unforeseen nature of the
objection that hinders the unfolding of a sovereign intentiona lity ?
   It is said that Whitehead hated to be bored, and elaborated his thought
in the presence of his students. Most of his philosophical writings have
their origin in lectures, which he later worked up. Perhaps the procedure I
have chosen is in response to this peculiar character of theirs: I chose it
first of all as an experi ment, " j ust to see," and then with a surprised inter
est in its effects, which stripped me of an author's position without thereby
constra ining me to disappear, quite the contra ry : " to let Whitehead " (and
a few others) " do the talk ing" in long fragments which, rather than quota
tions, are interventions, and to make my own text the sol iloquy of a per
son who is exploring in her way, always in her way, what the intervention
ma kes happen for her.
   Some of these interventions will be "cries," others elaborations, in which
thought is " put to work " in real time, but sti ll others are genuine operators
of brutal bifurcation. To let Whitehead do the talk ing at some length al
ways means exposing oneself to the risk that he may play the nasty trick of
derailing the orderly train of an explanation toward a seemingly incongru
ous horizon. And that is precisely what students do when a class awakens
their thought, incites their objections, thei r " but thens," their " in that cases."
Perhaps, as well , this is the way Whitehead himself functioned when the
                                                           I N T R O D U CT I O N   2 5




presence of his students provoked the risk of thought " i n real time," re
crea ting at every step the meaning or the necessity of the next step. I do
not know to what extent the solution I have experimented with will suit
those who will read this book. What I can say is that it has made of its
writing an adventurous and demanding itinerary, in which " what I already
knew" has not ceased to produce new consequences and also the most
close-fought work of negotiation with syntax and composition I have ever
known.
   The reader will note that I have, moreover, made the somewha t acro
batic choice of avoid ing a l l footnotes. This is not the easy sol ution, but
instead, once again, a constra int: the text should " hold " as it is, and above
all should not have the appearance of an exhaustive exposition . A note,
in genera l, refers either to a d i rection that the textua l iti nerary could have
ta ken, and which the a uthor decides not to ta ke any further, or to a tech
nica l d iscussion that the a uthor believes would overburden the text. The
former type of note implies that the number of decisions a bout the itiner
ary is l i mited, but here it is not, for at every step other d i rections could
have been taken, since each step is i n fact a decision i n the heart of a
labyrinth. As far as the " technica l " notes are concerned, most of them
would have referred to the network of discussions and controversies that
wea ve the links between process philosophers. But this book was written
in French, that is, for readers who a re foreign to this network, la rgely
unk nown in Fra ncophone lands. I a m aware that transla tion tra nsforms
th is aspect of situation, but it does not transform the conception of the
book itself, which is also the situation of the person who conceived it and
who did not encounter "process philosophy " unti l wel l after her encoun
ter with Whitehead . With the crucial exception of the reading proposed
by Lewis Ford, which I adopt, it is the baton of Whitehead's text that I
have wished to take up, and not of the d iscussions that concern him, for
the question for me was not-above al l-to claim to hold the " right inter
pretation," that is, to d iscuss other possible i nterpretations as well . What
matters to me i s to inhabit the movement that Whitehead proposes for
thought, and, without stopping this movemen t, to experience and put
to the test the way in which it is or is not able to receive questions that
Wh i tehead did not ask beca use they are not those of his time. In other
words, my choice is not to i nterpret but to try to transmit, that is, also, as
every lover of Whitehead knows, to take up again in my way, tying it i n to
my questions, that which has no other truth tha n the set of resumptions to
wh ich it will give rise.
   Another testimony to this choice is the absence in the index of the "great
Whiteheadian concepts ." They intervene " everywhere " ( for insta nce,
2 6   I NTRO D U C T I O N




" event," "object," " nature," or " organism" i n the first pa rt, " to feel,"
"concrescence," " actua lization," " society," "subject " in the second pa rt),
and ta king them up aga i n in the index would ha ve produced something
monstrous. I have, however, privileged certa in tra nsversa l themes that
characterize the way I ha ve inhabited the Whiteheadian movement. Some,
such as interstices and infection, are not even included in the Whiteheadian
i ndices, while others are not properly Whiteheadian. Yet they have im
posed themselves upon me as themes, in the musical sense of the term, and
I thought that the index might help those who might encounter one of
these themes in the manner of "well, here it is again" a nd would wonder
where it has a l ready intervened .
   By another aspect, the index bears witness to the way this book tries
to prolong the Whiteheadian movement outside of the usua l categories
of philosophy: the heading " socia l roles or types " brings together names
of practitioners ( mathematician, physician, chemist, biologist, psycholo
gist, etc. ) and na mes of animals (rabbit, fly, bacteria, etc . ) . I have taken
my inspiration in this rega rd from Bergson who, in the index to his Evo
lution creatrice, j uxtaposed the names of those who, for him, tra nslated
the culmination of two di vergent paths of evol ution: philosophers, on the
one hand, parasites and i nsects on the other. Except that the point here is
not to propose a sca le of bei ngs, distributi ng to each that to which it may
lay claim. What interests me is the adventurization of the experience that
philosophies of the subject have too often " d omesticated " under the cat
egories of the reflexive consciousness.
   It is the task of ethologists, and a l l those who live in attentive contact
with a ni mals, to q uestion, speci fy, and enrich what animals make us feel
and think. It is the job of scientific communities to test the releva nce of
the problematic definitions that make them work . But it belongs to specu
lative thought to fight against the i mpoverishment of experience, pa rticu
larly against its confiscation by the great theoretica l debates that oppose
ma nk ind, " endowed with consciousness," to a l l the others supposedly
deprived of it. Obviously, speculative adventurization does not produce
miracles: I do not cla i m to speak for flesh and blood physicia ns, psy
chologists, a nd sociologists any more tha n I claim to ha ve access to the
experience of a butterfly or a ra bbit. When I refer to practitioners a nd to
animals, then, the goa l is not to penetrate their own experience but to
think on the basis of the " habits" that ena ble us to say "a ra bbit" or "a
sociologist," that is, to evoke a style or experience or adventure that is en
dowed with a certai n sta bility.
   Alongside the Whiteheadian references, I have therefore added a few
others, fa ithful in this regard to the nomadism proper to British philoso-
                                                         I N T R O D U C T I O N   2 7




phy, as it has been cha racterized by Gilles Deleuze and Feli x Gua tta ri :
not to build nor to found, but to inhabit. "A tent is enough for them [ . . . 1
The concept is a habi t acquired by contempla ting the elements from
which one proceeds ( hence the very special Greekness of British phi loso
phy, its empi rica l Neoplatonism ) . We a re all contemplations, and there
fore habits. I is a ha bit. There is concept wherever there is habit, and
ha bits are made and unmade on the level of immanence and rad ica l ex
perience: they are 'conventions'. This is why British philosophy is a free
and savage creation of concepts. Given a proposi tion, to what conven
tion does it refer, what is the ha bit that constitutes its concept? This is the
question of pragma tism " ( Q Ph, 1 0 1 ) .
   " A free and savage creation o f concepts," perhaps: but one can only
" think with Whitehea d " if one is willing to sepa rate the adjecti ve " free "
from the noun " freedom," in the sense of absence of constraints, and the
adjective " savage " from the noun "savagery," in the sense of an appetite for
destruction. Free and savage creation, therefore, but not, especially not, fe
rocious, not defining that with which it deals as a prey to be attacked . The
point is not to declare war on the conventions that bind us, the habits that
enable us to be characterized . Instead, it is merely to place on the same level
that is, in adventure-all of our j udgments, or our "as is well knowns,"
and thus to separate them actively from what gives them the power to ex
clude and to disqualify.

In closing this introd uction, I would l i ke to offer my apology to the read
ers who might be shocked i f they encounter a physician or a poet "in the
ma sculi ne." Insofar as they are figures of thought, I would have l i ked to
place them in the neuter, as I would ha ve liked to place in the neuter that
God who, for Whi tehead, is a " he." But I could not bring myself to asso
ciate them with this kind of a problem, for they would then have desig
nated real persons. I hope these excuses will be accepted, for I feel deeply
indebted for the attention that American thi n kers have ta ught us to de
vote to the way in which word s infl uence thought.
                                        PA RT     O N E




From the Ph i losophy of Natu re to Metaphysics
                                                                C H A P TER   ONE




The Mathematician and the Sunset


This is going to be about nature.
But how can we define nature?
It is what we are aware of in perception (eN, 28).




              H I TE H E A D H A S P ROPOSE D a starting point that seems to be
              quite i nnocent. A bit too genera l or simplistic, one might say,
              although it attri butes a most interesting role to " awareness," a
word that we French-language phi losophers have some reasons to envy
our Anglophone colleagues. All we have availa ble is the word " con
science," which is a trap here because of the reflexive dimension that is
often associated with it. That is why 1 chose, when writi ng i n French, to
use the word " experience" (Ia nature est ce dont nous avons /'experience
dans la perception). My goal was to poi nt out tha t awareness designates
a mode of experience that includes a contrast between a " self" and " that
of which there is experience," but without d uplicating it by reference to
a n " I " or a " me " : a contrast, not an opposition. The question then a rises:
who is this " we," who is aware of nature, and what does i t i nclude? Most
ethologists will say without hesitation that a chimpanzee, a dog, or a rab
bit are " aware." Their perceptual experience, without implyi ng reflexive
consciousness, must give meaning to the possibility of an exploratory
activity, beari ng witness to the fact that that " that which" is perceived may
raise the q uestion of meaning: when a ra bbi t turns i ts head in the di rec
tion from which a noise comes, it is exploring that noise's meaning. Yet
the discussion may begin with the idea that bees a lso "explore." Does it
not conceal a much more radical di fference by means of a handy meta
phor ? Hesitation thus comes into play for bees, ticks, ants, or spiders.
And it d isappears when we have to do with thistles or mignonette.
   Whitehead's sta rting point, which leads us so q uickly i nto ethological
speculations, thus seems high ly indetermi nate, too indeterminate to be
3 2   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




able to guarantee a selection of wha t ca n testi fy, in a rel ia ble way, for that
nature whose concept is to be constructed .
    We must bewa re, however, as we conclude, that we will certa i nly have
to go beyond this starti ng point. Whitehea d is a mathematicia n . For a
mathema tician, a sta rting point is not what ena bles one to go beyond. It
is what commits us. It is that to which one must succeed in holding fast.
    To restrict ourselves to what we are aware of i n perception: this is the
archetypal Empiricist decision. Yet we must immed iately forget the cli
ches that often fol low that decision, a nd which Whitehead knows well,
beca use they a re those in which his former colla borator Bertrand Russell
henceforth indulges.
    If Whitehead had wri tten " nature is what we percei ve," a version seem
ingly close to the initial statement, what would ha ve fol lowed wa s a lmost
automatic. What do you perceive ? A grey stone. What does what you
perceive a uthorize ? The a ffirmation that " this stone is grey." In contrast,
the question " what a re you aware of in the perception of this stone you
ca l l grey ? " blocks the pedagogical series of explanations. A contrast in
sinuates itself, between the words immed iately a va i lable for saying "what"
we perceive, a nd the question, open for its part, of what we are aware of
" i n percepti on." An indefinite constellation of components becomes per
cepti ble, which " that stone is grey "-that statement appa rently so simple
and transpa rent-had skipped .
    First of all, however, when would I express such an appa rently simple
statement ? Perhaps I might say it to a pa inter, if I am sca ndalized by the
lack of fa ithfulness of his reproduction of the stone ? Or else, upon receiv
ing them, if I had ordered ochre-colored stones? I n this case, however, the
contrast between what I perceive and wha t I am aware of in this percep
tion becomes intense, for my experience will be dominated by the risk of
cha llenging the pai nter's choice, or by the prospect of entering into an
unpleasant discussion with a distracted or even dishonest mercha nt.
    As a starting point for philosophica l reasoning, what we are aware of
in the perception of the pri nted phrase " this stone is grey," is not, more
over, any simpler. The work of mourning to which rea ders a re going to
be obliged is a l ready announced to them. They will be asked to limit
legitimate sta tements a bout experience to those that designate a " pure"
perceptua l experience. The stone might, moreover, as the case may be,
become a "grey patch," if readers are constra ined to admit that the visua l
data do not let them affirm anything more.
  Thus language habitually sets before the mind a misleading abstract of
the indefinite complexity of the fact of self-awareness (eN, 1 0 8 ) .
  The empi ricist decision to limit oursel ves to what w e a re aware o f i n
perception, could thus b e called resisting what language proposes, trying
                              T H E   M AT H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S ET   3 3




to stick to the i ndefinite complexity of this " what." In this case, however,
one must immediately add " succeeding in sticking to i t." Without surrep
titiously moving from the selection of the " what" to a nother selection,
dealing this time with the case we choose. Without privileging the " pure
cases," whose false simplicity designates not nature, but a theory of
knowledge or subjectivity that remains to be founded . Whitehead was a
mathematicia n . If he said " what," his statement commits h i m : the goal
is to understand " everyth i ng " we are awa re of. If he said " perception,"
this means any si tuation in which perception comes i nto play. And if na
ture is ( a l l ) we are aware of in perception, then:
   [ . . . 1 everything perceived is in nature. We may not pick and choose.
For us the red glow of the sunset should be as much part of nature as are
the molecules and electric waves by which men of science would explain
the phenomenon (eN, 2 9 ) .
    " We may not." B u t o f course w e may, a n d i n fact w e do nothi ng else.
Nor is it a question of criticizing those who pick and choose. When men
of science describe the i nteraction between electromagnetic radiation and
the suspended molecules that inhabit the atmosphere, linking the red glow
to atmospheric pol lution, they do not insult the poet. Unless they want to,
unless they want to confer upon the relation they are studying the power
to red uce na ture to the terms of scientific expl anation.
    The " we" to whom this " we may not" is addressed does not exist prior
to the demand posited by Whitehead, the demand that the " concept of
nature " to be constructed must be bereft of the power of divid i ng, and
declari ng that one type of experience is right and another wrong. It is the
" we " of the problem when a mathematician takes charge of it, simulta
neously bringi ng i nto existence the problem and the constra ints that the
solution will have to satisfy. Here, moreover, this "we" affi rms the most
artificial demand: not to take advantage of the power to choose as we
wish, however theoretically well-founded this wish may be.
   Yet the problem must sti l l be wel l formulated, that is, formulated i n
terms that do not surreptitiously confuse the characteri zation of a situa
tion with a ready-made solution that commits the approach before it has
even begun. For i nstance, i f we were to accept as well-founded the scien
tists' affi rmation that electromagnetic radiation provides a n expla nation
for the red glow that poets try to celebrate, the matter would be under
stood from the outset, and the problem of affirming both the red glow
and the molecules together woul d be " missed " : what we are aware of
i n perception would i ndeed have to be called molecules, radiation, and
so on. The poi nt is therefore to state the terms of the problem i n a way
that resists the pretensions of sol ution i ncluded i n the usual modes of
formulation.
34   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   For example, the fire is burning and we see a red coal. This is explained
in science by radiant energy from the coal entering our eyes. But in seeking
for such an explanation we are not asking what are the sort of occurrences
which are fitted to cause a mind to see red. The chain of causation is en
tirely different. The mind is cut out altogether. The real question is, When
red is found in nature, what else is found there also? Namely we are seek
ing for an analysis of the accompaniments in nature of the discovery of
red in nature [ . . . I In other words, science is not discussing the causes of
knowledge, but the coherence of knowledge. The understanding which is
sought by science is an understanding of relations within nature (eN, 4 1 ) .
   Whi tehead does not hesitate to speak of radiation, molecules, and
electrons. The construction of his problem does not need to presuppose
the epistemological discussion of the well-founded ness of our specialized
statements, even if they mobil ize beings that we can not perceive di rectly.
It affirms itself as superbly indifferent to all technical and theoretical me
diations that enable scientists to construct their explanations. In contrast,
what matters to him is the trick to which scienti sts would have recourse
if they clai med to have explai ned " that which" causes perception , that
which explains the fact that we " see red ." These scientists can affirm that
rad iation has caused the excitation of such-and-such reti nal receptors;
they can, if their science has invented the means for such a proced ure, fol
low the repercussions of this excitation in the great population of neurons.
And they will probably succeed in reconstituti ng a continuous series of
relations: if they were to be surprised, it would be by the eventual brutal
interruption of that series, that goes from the perception of the red coal to
everything that can accompany that perception within nature. Yet from
explanation to explanation, from experi mental situation to experi mental
solution, the " mind " remains in brackets, in the sense that the characteriza
tion of the experi mental relation does not include the person for whom it
constitutes an explanation . To clai m to explain the " perceived red " is to
claim that there will suddenly surge forth, like a rabbit pulled out of a
magician's hat, a term that designates not what the scienti sts have suc
ceeded in perceiving but that which a l l thei r achievements presuppose.
   For Whitehead, when scientists claim that their approach should " some
day "-because you can't stop progress-come to " explain" that which,
in fact, it presupposes, one will not speak either of " scientific spirit" or of
" material istic persuasion." There is nothing to accept, nothing to negotiate,
nothing to respect. The rabbit will not come out of the hat. The explanatory
ambition translates and prolongs a problem that has been badly formu
lated, an arbi trary di stri bution, in the midst of what we are aware of,
between what is supposed to perta in to objective nature, independent of
                              T H E   M AT H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   3 5




knowledge, and what perta ins to the mind . That this badly formulated
problem should finally wind up as the ultimate mystery, the dizzying ques
tion of the possibility of a " materialist" explanation that would no longer
even limit itself to " that which is perceived," red, but would deal with per
ception or consciousness, is neither surprising nor interesting for White
head . The problem has been badly tackled from the outset, as soon as the
selection has been made, both of what explains and of what m ust be
expla ined.
   Will the mind then appear as the place of irreducible mystery, that which
science will a lways fai l to explain? Does Whitehead demand that the sci
entist bow down before the inexplica ble ? Not in the least. What White
head asks them to admit is not at a l l that their questions will a lways fa i l
in the face of the problem of the m i n d . There is n o defeat, insoluble prob
lem, or mystery. There is the simple fact that the scientists' questions do
not enable them to formulate the problem of the " mind " beca use these
questions and their answers presuppose it.
   The distinction between an insoluble problem and a badly tackled prob
lem might seem insignificant to those who decide to understand, first and
foremost, that Whitehead imposes limits on science, and will immediately
oppose their " material ist" convictions to this shameful " spiritualist." For
Whitehead, however, it is not a question of limits to be respected . It is
rather a question of " behavior," in the sense in which " to behave badly"
would here mea n to insult one's own work, to expect from it something
entirely other than what gives it its own value. It is impossible to describe
the scientists' work, the creation of ever more unexpected and inventive
experimenta l apparatuses, without ta king for "granted " the possi bility of
knowing, that is, a reference to a mind, as presupposed by a l l the questions
to which they seek an answer. Everything to which scientists could refer,
insofar as they are aware of it in perception, including the electromagnetic
radiation witnessed by "that which" their specia lized instruments give them
to perceive, is indeed a part of nature; that is, l ike the concept of nature it
self, it designates the mind qua presupposed and bracketed .
   Whitehead 's approach is thus not that of a j udge, imposing l i mits on
the approach to explanation. It is, once aga i n, that of a mathematician.
An art of problems, and of the creation of their possible solutions. White
head is not afra id of the scientists' materia lism; he is a fra id of badly for
mulated problems. And every problem will be badly formulated which,
dea l ing with the knowledge we ca n have of nature, forgets wha t it pre
supposes, namely, that there is knowledge.
   K n owledge is ultimate. There can be no explanation of the "why " of
k no wledge; we can only describe the "what " of knowledge ( eN, 3 2 ) .
3 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   There is nothi ng dizzyi ng, here, a bout what is ulti mate; it simply cor
responds to the question ra ised . It does not forbid any d ream, but desig
nates the path by which d reams can become nightmares, because it de
nies the d reamer, the path by which the construction of explanations can
become the construction of the best way of dissimulating, of making a
paradox or a fasci nating mystery out of what goes without saying. There
is noth ing mysterious, nothing paradoxical a bout what is ultimate. Its
designation corresponds to the d ifference between the problem of what
Whitehead calls " metaphysics," which must imply both what is percei ved
and what perceives, and that of a philosophy of nature or of science.
When it comes to science, a l l metaphysica l questions must be excl uded .
  The recourse to metaphysics is like throwing a match into the powder
magazine. It blows up the whole arena ( eN, 2 9 ) .
  Yet t o limit oneself t o na ture itself, as Whitehead dema nds o f scientists
but as he a lso demands with rega rd to the construction of his "concept of
nature," does not at a l l mean to ta ke the first step towa rd reducing na
ture to the question of knowledge, as it would, for i nsta nce, in a phi
losophy of the cri tica l type. It is the mind that is bracketed, not the mind,
always identica l to itself, that brackets nature, qua a function of its own
operations.
   No perplexity concerning the ob;ect of knowledge can be solved by
saying that there is a mind knowing it ( eN, 2 8 ) [ . . . I In making this
demand I conceive myself as adopting our immediate instinctive attitude
towards perceptual knowledge which is only abandoned under the influ
ence of theory. We are instinctively willing to believe that by due atten
tion, more can be found in nature than that which is observed at first
sight. But we will not be content with less (eN, 2 9 ) .
    The true problem that confronts the concept o f nature, the cha l lenge
that constrains us to invention, is thus not the " bad behavior" attested by
certai n explana tory pretensions. The point is to succeed in ma intaining
oneself at the level of what we are insti nctively willing to believe, to resist
the theories that do violence to what we ca nnot help but believe. Nature
is by no means nature insofar as we know it, in the sense of any kind of a
theory of knowledge; it is the nature we dea l with, with which we esta b
l ish many relations, and it is therefore also all that is presupposed, as fa r
as "it" is concerned, by these multiple relations.
    Later on, in Science and the Modern World, Whitehead was to speak
of " i nstinctive fa ith," and, in Process and Reality, he would use the ex
pression " a nimal fa ith" of the philosopher Santayana, his contemporary
(diverti ng it from its origi nal meaning ) . Yet the reference will always be
to the sa me movement, the same demand: to recognize that our " i mmedi-
                               T H E   M A T H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   3 7




ate instinctive a ttitude" irresisti bly exceeds the limits assigned by such
and-such a critical theory, and to adopt what this attitude presupposes as
a constraint to be satisfied .
   When empiricist philosophy undertakes to fixate its reader on the state
ment " this stone is grey," it does violence to this i nstinctive attitude. If this
stone really does attract our attention, for one reason or another, we know
that we can go look at it more closely, pick it up, weigh it, feel its rough
ness, try to break it into p ieces. In sum, we can multiply " what" we are
aware of in perception . And a ttribute all of it to nature, instinctively.
   In contrast, when scientists express their trust in the experimenta l ap
proach and proclaim its lack of limits, they prolong our " i nstinctive atti
tude " according to which, if we pay what is " d ue," that is, the appropriate
attention to it, we will find more in nature than what we observe at first
glance. And it is not empiricist prohibitions that will force them to give
up introducing unobservable entities, if the latter enable them to a rticu
late their q uestions and hypotheses, nor, in case of success, will they pre
vent them from affirming that these entities do indeed belong to nature
rather than to the knowing mind .
   It is only when scientists u nderta ke to j udge, in the name o f these un
observable entities, what we a re awa re of in perception, when they try
to convince us that electromagnetic rad iation constitutes the only kind
of entity that belongs to nature, that they contradict our i nstincti ve at
titude: they have found " more" in nature, but they propose to red uce it
to " less."
   What men say with words has no importance as long as their activities
are controlled by well-established instincts. Words can ultimately destroy
instincts. But until that happens, words do not matter (SMW, 4 ) .
   The concept of nature that Whitehead undertakes t o construct thus
does not have the vocation of ta king its place in a process of purification,
whether existential or epistemologica l . As long a s a human activity exhib
its its trust i n the possibi lity of finding " more " i n nature than what is ob
served in it at first glance, what it finds wi l l be pa rt of the constra ints that
the concept of nature must satisfy, not of what is to be judged in the name
of any kind of norm . In contrast, the words that will be mobilized by the
concept of nature have the vocation of resisting the power of words that
either contrad ict this trust, convicting it before the tribunal of criticism,
or promoting an a symmetrical version of it, a trust in this agai nst that.
   The vocation Whitehead assigns to his concept of nature is situated his
tor ically. It is primordially associated with " modern thought," haunted as
it is by the distinction between " primary " qual ities, those that one thinks
legitimate to attribute to nature, and " secondary " qualities, those that a re
3 8   F R O M   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




referred to the mind (tastes and colors, about which one is not supposed to
argue, precisely because they are the subjects of endless discussions) .
   To the positive definition o f the problem-the construction o f a con
cept of nature such that everything we a re aware of in perception belongs
to it-there thus corresponds a negative definition, the determined rejec
tion of any theory that makes " nature bifurcate." And nature " bifurcates"
as soon as, in one way or another, the mind is called to the rescue, qua
responsible for " psychic a d d i tions," to exp l a i n the d ifference between
what we are aware of and what is supposed to belong to nature.
   The theory of psychic additions would treat the greenness [of grass] as
a psychic addition furnished by the perceiving mind, and would leave to
nature merely the molecules and the radiant energy which influence the
mind towards that perception [ . . . I
    What I am essentially protesting against is the bifurcation of nature
into two systems of reality, which, in so far as they are real, are real in
different senses [ . . I Thus there would be two natures, one is the con
                           .



jecture and the other is the dream. Another way of phrasing this theory
[ . . . I is to bifurcate nature into two divisions, namely into the nature
apprehended in awareness and the nature which is the cause of aware
ness. The nature which is the fact apprehended in awareness holds within
it the greenness of the trees, the song of the birds, the warmth of the sun,
the hardness of the chairs, and the feel of the velvet. The nature which is
the cause of awareness is the conjectured system of molecules and elec
trons which so affects the mind as to produce the awareness of apparent
nature ( eN, 29-3 1 ) .
   To resist a l l those theories which, i n one w a y or another, make nature
bifurcate: such is the cha llenge Whitehead imposed upon himself when
he provided himself with his initial definition, " nature is what we are aware
of in perception." The value of this definition by no means depends on
its neutrality or its plausibil ity, its precision, or its consensual character.
It depends on the commitment to which it constrains whomever accepts
it, a nd on the definition of what will then constitute failure or achieve
ment for that person. Every statement that makes nature bifurcate will be
a defeat.
    In other words, Whitehead does not in the slightest propose to " prove "
that we should abandon the great modern divide between primary quali
ties, attributed to the entities that constitute nature, and secondary qualities,
relative to our perception. He does not even bother to name those who
prolong and repeat this d ivision even today: he knows that is it you and
I, the philosopher or the scientist, all those who have accepted th is d ivi
sion as importa nt or as an unquestioned matter of fact. He defines this
division as the absurd ity that his concept will have to escape.
                             T H E   M AT H E M A T I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   3 9




   The a bsurdity here does not resemble the one util ized by a mathemati
cal demonstration. Mathematical absurdity is defined by the fact that at
the end of a process of reasoning, one is obl iged to conclude that 1 3, or              =



else that a number is both odd and even. These are obvious contradictions,
to wh ich no hesitation or possibility of negotiation corresponds: the rea
soning must be abandoned . Except, of course, when the feeling of the
absurd ity of mathematics invades a student to such a point that he or she
is ready to accept anyth ing . . . Wh itehead, as a philosopher, k nows that
the power of mathematics, exh ibited by the possibil ity of end ing up i n a
contradiction, and of organizing a demonstration around this fixed point,
has l ittle to do with philosophy. Philosoph ical a bsurdity is not consensual:
it commits philosophers but does not enable them to constrai n a l l beings
who respect logic to adhere to their commitment. This is why Whitehead
does not base his refusa l on an argument intended to be authoritative for
all . He will not undertake to criticize the theories that make nature bifur
ca te , nor wi l l he demonstrate that the trad itional opposition between
primary and secondary qual ities leads to a contrad iction that would be
recognized by a ny being of good sense. He knows that it is precisely the
slope of good sense that he must climb, that he is faced by what contem
porary good sense suggests that we accept without blinking, and even to
celebrate it as a decisive progress of thought. He wil l limit himself, with
out add ing anything, to exhibiting the consequences of bifurcation, what
it imposes upon us to a ffirm.
  Thus, nature sees itself credited with that which, in fact, should be re
served for ourselves: the rose for its smell, the nightingale for its song,
and the sun for its brilliance. The poets are entirely wrong. They should
address their songs to themselves, and should turn them into odes of self
congratulation for the splendor of the human mind. Nature is a stupid
business, bereft of sounds, odors and colors; it is only matter in a hurry,
without end and without meaning ( SMW, 54 ) .
    If this consequence, that the poets must be said to be m istaken when
they celebra te the smell of the rose, does not ma ke the absurdity of the
theory that imposes it perceptible, then, for Whitehead, noth ing will do
so. And if, today, some scientists and some philosophers identify without
the least hesitation any questioning of this " stupid nature " with a worri
some manifestation of irrationality, a return of ancient beliefs, a denial of
the universal value of physical laws, a nd so on, no argument will make
them change their minds. Later, in Science and the Modern World, Wh ite
head was to ask the question of the history we inherit, which has turned
the absurdity in question into a k ind of consensua l self-evidence, the rejec
ti on of which enta ils the greatest risks. For the moment, as in every dem
onstration by the a bsurd, the rejection of the theories of the bifurcation
4 0     F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H YS I C S




of nature is a principle of construction. The problem is not to polemicize
but to accept the risk, to try the adventure, to explore what the rejection
of a bifurcation of nature obliges us to think.
      A ll we know of nature is in the same boat, to sink or swim together
( CN, 1 4 8 ) .
    The fact that the statement o f the problem raised b y Whitehead can be
understood as a veritable cry attests to the convergence, in this cry, of all
the registers usually distinguished by argumentation. It is not a matter of
negotiating in a finer way what will be " saved," attributed to nature. Every
thing is going to have to be saved together, at the same time, and by the
same means. What engages Whitehead may be stated just as well in terms
of intel lectual obl igation, as in terms of one that is aesthetic or ethica l.
Every line of division, whatever its plausi bility, will refer to misbehavior:
it will translate the transformation of a defeat, for which the phi losopher
bears responsibi lity, into a disqualification of what has resisted the invita
tion to take its place in the boat this philosopher formulated.
    Correlatively, the concept Whitehead i s going to try to construct will
be neither true nor false. For truth and falsity, when they are attributable to
a statement-no, that's not Oliver's car-imply a hesitation that refers to
the demands of a particular mode of knowledge-I was sure I recognized
it. But the poi nt here is to construct a concept that satisfies the most arti
ficial demand, that is, the one that requires the highest power of invention:
not to privi lege any particular mode of knowledge. This is why, in White
head's vocabulary, the terms "general " and "general ity " will never have
the meaning given to them by logic. They will never provide the power to
forget pa rticularities, but, on the contrary, will point to the ambition to
affirm all of them together.
  Sense-awareness is an awareness of something. What then is the general
character of that something of which we are aware? (CN, 2 8-2 9 ) .
   All m e n are morta l . Socrates is a ma n . Therefore . . . T h i s " therefore "
means: whether you like it or not, Socrates, I have here the power to tal k
about you, even i f I have never met you, even i f I know nothing a bout
you except th is general property: " you a re part of the set of human be
ings." The power of defining sets, of choosing them in a way that ena bles
one to decide what wi l l be i ncluded or excluded, is the best-shared thing
in the world. Whitehead does not denounce this power, a ny more than he
denounces specialized languages. Phi losophy, for him, is not denunciation.
Yet it can indeed be said to be resistance, internal resistance to the properly
philosophical temptation to found this de facto power in iure.
   Neither true nor false, Whitehead ian genera li ties expose their a uthor
to a wholly di fferent risk: thei r success or their fa i lure wi l l always depend
                            T H E   M AT H E M AT I C I A N   A N D   T H E   S U N S E T   4 1




on whether or not they succeed in not giving any power to the person
who constructs them, in not founding any j udgment that will enable him
or her to transcend the multiplicity of experiences, or to tame this multi
plicity by defining the norms to which all experience must respond.
   The Concept of Nature, however, does not yet deal with experience in
general, but with what we a re aware of in perception. This choice of the
question indicates that Whitehead takes his place within the Engl ish Em
piricist trad ition, and this is indeed the challenge he will try to take up,
that haunts this tradition since Berkeley, Locke, and Hume: the cha l lenge
of an articulation to be made explicit between perceptions and that para
digmatic knowledge called mathematical physics, which has been focused
since Newton on the questions of space and time.
   When Wh itehead comes to ask other questions, when he becomes in
terested no longer in what scientists perceive but in what they seek, when
he no longer recognizes " Cleopatra 's need le," standing i n the center of
London, every time he sees i t, but asks himself how to understand the
story that insists through it, that of ancient Egypt or that of the rapine of
colonial England, he will have moved from the question of " what" we
are aware of in perception to the " how" of this awareness. From the explo
ration of what we a re commi tted to by the refusal to make nature bifur
cate between percepts, on the one hand, and a reality that is essentially
spatio-temporal a nd functional on the other, to the exploration of what
is req uired by the way we relate to experience. He wil l not mod i fy the
concept of nature then, but will abandon it, for it is no longer adapted to
the problem, since the problem must henceforth include what the concept
of nature designates as ulti mate: knowledge.
                                                                C H A P T E R TWO




E vents and Passage




           E KNOW LI TTLE A BOUT Whitehead 's life i n the sense that ex
               cites the curiosity of historians of philosophy: what did he read,
               and when ? What is more, Whitehead by no means respects the
academic rule according to which one cites the authors by whom one is
i nspired . There a re not many footnotes i n The Concept of Nature, nor
any precise d iscussion of the way he introduces concepts that come from
elsewhere without warning. We can, however, already hear genuine " cries "
i n it, in which what can be negotiated only gradually, in the close struggle
with what is demanded by a concept once it is posited, and what may
force the concept to be reworked or even abandoned, is concentrated and
explodes a l l at once. Cries that have not been smothered by the construc
tion of concepts, and that a re remembered by those who have heard
them, whether students or visitors.
    Thus, on December 1 5, 1 939, when he was quietly discussing the Bible
with Lucien Price, Whi tehead
    [ . . . I suddenly [ . . . I stood and spoke, with passionate intensity,
" Here we are, with our finite beings and physical senses in the presence
of a universe whose possibilities are infinite, and even though we may not
apprehend them, those infinite possibilities are actualities " ( DANW, 1 1 1 ) .
    How can one address experience in the sense in wh ich it resonates in
this exclamation, that is, before it is invaded by the words that judge a nd
d istribute what belongs to the subject and what belongs to the object ?
How can one bring to l i fe the difference between ( a l l ) we a re awa re of
i n perception and the object eventually perceived, associated with the
ready-made words that designate it? Whitehead shares the question of
                                                 E V E N TS   A N D   PASSAG E   4 3




the " return to experience itself " with a multitude of other modern philos
ophers. And it is obviously possible to attempt pa ra l lels, and even com
parisons, with some of them, and in particular with the phenomenologi
cal approach of his contemporary Husser\. Yet there is a risk of losing the
movement and neglecting what philosophers seek to bring to life, thanks
to their concepts, and especially what they are trying not to lose, what they
are afraid to lose, that which, as the case may be, they cry out. Whitehead
wi l l not ask, wi l l never ask of experience that it admit its finitude. Any
resemblance between one Whitehead ia n statement a nd a nother coming
from elsewhere wi l l be declared null a nd void if the latter orients thought,
in one way or another, toward a mode of judgment that turns the infinite
possi bil ities that haunt our experience into a temptation that must be
resisted .
   If thought must ca rry out a j udgment, it is not about experience but
about itsel f, about the power it can assume of j udging that experience in
terms of what it captures of it i n a way proper to explanation. But nei
ther does j udgment mean contrition, or the sel f-critique of a thought that
betrays the experience from which it proceeds. Whitehead will not, will
never ask thought to condemn itsel f. Any resemblance between one White
headian statement a nd another coming from elsewhere will be null a nd
void if it orients thought, in one way or a nother, toward a nostalgic relation
with what escapes it, with that to which, through origi nal sin or wander
ing, it has lost access. Wh i tehead 's philosophy has nothing to do with a
culture of dereliction. It simply brings into existence the importance of not
confusing the " what" of thought, or its terminus, a nd " what we a re aware
of in perception ."
   To sum up: the termini for thought are entities, primarily with bare
individuality, secondarily with properties and relations ascribed to them
in the procedure of thought; the termini for sense-awareness are factors in
the fact of nature, primarily relata and only secondarily discriminated as
distinct individualities.
   [ . . 1 The transition from the "red " of awareness to the "red " of
    .



thought is accompanied by a definite loss of content, namely by the tran
sition from the factor "red " to the entity "red. " This loss in the transition
to thought is compensated by the fact that thought is communicable
whereas sense-awareness is incommunicable (eN, 1 2-1 3 ) .
  Wh itehead's ambition i s not to oppose but to d istinguish, i n a way that
confirms what we know i nstinctively. The goa l is not to define a nature
that is " k nowable " in the philosophers' sense, that is, where the point
would be to define nature and the legiti mate mode of knowledge, in one
Way or another, but always correlatively. Instead, the goa l is to confirm
4 4   F R O M T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that it is indeed nature that is at sta ke in knowledge, the multiple modes
of knowledge, whereas as soon as we state " what" we perceive, a transi
tion occurs for which " na ture" cannot account. In other words, the point
will be to approach " what we a re aware of" simulta neously a s what
awareness "offers " to the transition, as that a bout which the transition
takes place, and as that which must be characterized in such a way that
" what" we perceive does indeed designate nature rather than the perceiv
ing mind. In sti l l other words, whatever relations may be between " words"
and " things," no theory can make Whitehead change his mind : we are not
the pri soners of a closed circuit between perception and denomination . As
soon as we pay " d ue attention " to it, we are gra ppling with " nature."
   To construct the concept that a nswers this ambition obviously req u i res
words, or, more precisely, names. From the names Whitehead will a ssoci
ate with " what we a re aware of," one will not expect anything other than
a dyna mics of evocation, creating an experience of contrast, consti tuting
the contrast as an experience for thought. This was already the case when
Whitehead " na med " the transition from factor to entity: denomination
functions not as the starti ng point for a process of reasoning but rather
as a point of accumulation around which other na mes w i l l come to be
added . Like a proper na me uttered when we meet a person who is dear to
us, the function of the Whitehead ian name is to celebrate, and in this case
to celebra te a factor that belongs to what we a re aware of, in a way that
prevents us from confusing it with an object of thought.
   " Event " is the fi rst of the names Whitehead a ssociates with what we
are aware of in perception.
   What we discern is the specific character of a place through a period of
time. This is what I mean by an "event." We discern some specific character
of an event. But in discerning an event we are also aware of its signifi
cance as a relatum in the structure of events ( eN, 52 ) .
   The verb " to discern " is interesting, because it is indeterminate. It can
be used in an active sense, which refers it to the discerning subject. Yet
Whitehead thwa rts this usage. The factor discerned is a part of what I am
aware of in perception. Activity begins when, for one reason or another, I
become interested in what is then selected as " what" I have perceived . In
addition, what I am aware of is not defined by the character " that is d is
cerned ." We discern a character qua factor of something, which Whitehead
names event. What is more, this event itself does not present itself in an
isolated mode. What I have auditory experience of testifies to the fact that
other events, although they are not discerned , include the event of which
the sound is a factor, while this event itself incl udes others. The name
"event" celebrates the " fact" that what we discern always has a beyond .
                                                  EVENTS   A N D   PAS S A G E   4 5




   It is very important, even a t this early stage, not to block the move
ment that Whitehead invites us to experience by questions that are overly
hurried . Above all, not to demand a more precise definition of the event.
What Whitehead meant is what he said, however d isappointing his an
swer may seem to be: the event is that of wh ich we discern a specific char
acter, whereas, "as we know instinctively," this event is linked to other
events . The cry of a bird . The refrigerator motor starting up. A laughing
exchange between two passersby beneath my window. All this took place
while I wrote these l ines: specific cha racters, tend ing to be auditory since
my visual attention was fixed upon my screen, but which cannot be re
duced to a sound. I did not d iscern a sound but a specific character, sono
rous, of events whose meaning I am " well aware " is not exhausted by this
cha racter. I know that if I go to my window, I will see the laughing people
continue their conversation or go away, and I know that if I had been at
my window two moments earl ier, I would have witnessed their meeting.
I have awareness of all that in the perception of their laughter, wh ich is
why, moreover, I do not j ump as I would if I heard a desperate screeching
of brakes: some day one of these idiots is going to kill a child instead of
a cat.
   Whitehead thus affi rms that a d iscerned event is connected to other
events within a structure. Yet structure, here, must also function as a name,
celebrating, of course, as one might guess, what will be required by the
definitions of space and time, but not being confused with them . In con
trast, the term "extension " will be a primary term for characterizing the
event qua connected. A discerned event a lways has an extension because
it includes or comprises others, and it testifies to the extension of other
events that include or comprise it. This is part of its meaning, as we a re
awa re of it in perception.
  A discerned event is known as related in this structure to other events
whose specific characters are otherwise not disclosed in that immedi
ate awareness except so far as that they are relata within the structure
(CN, 5 2 ) .
  This complete general fact is the discernible and it comprises the dis
cerned. The discernible is all nature as disclosed in that sense-awareness,
and extends beyond and comprises all of nature as actually discriminated
or discerned in that sense-awareness (CN, 5 0 ) .
   O n e c a n speak of the noise of the city, b u t where does the city end ?
Whitehead was a mathematician. If what is discerned has no power to
define what is discernible, to assign l i mits to it, there a re no li mits. That
which, in the mode of the d iscerni ble, is disclosed or is signified in a sen
sible experience is then " a l l of nature."
4 6   F R O M T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H YS I C S




   The need to translate the verb disclose into French raised a problem for
me that was all the more acute because the word is important for White
head. Was he not to write later, much later, that " The a i m of philosophy
is sheer d isclosure " ( MT, 4 9 ) ? The most usual French translations for " is
disclosed " are "est devoile" or "est revele," or "est rendu manifeste," which
might give the impression that the philosopher's goal is to experience
someth i ng hidden, latent, and implicit, which woul d be more " true," in
one way or another, than our usual perceptions . French translations of
Whitehead have yielded to this temptation all the more easily in that the
influence of Heidegger and of phenomenology are strong in France. I had
to counteract this influence, that is, affi rm the fact that Whitehead belongs
to the Empiricist tradition, in which the goal is never to go " beyond "
usual experience but rather to transform it, to make what usually " goes
without saying " matter. Consulting Harrap's dictionary, I found " declarer "
among all the possible translations of " disclose," and I adopted it, because
it can be placed in communication with a situation that has nothing phe
nomenological a bout it: when a customs officer asks a traveler, " Have
you anyth ing to decla re ? "
   The officer would be surprised if, i n response to his question, the traveler
bega n to spout an i nterm inable l ist of everything he might be l ia ble to
decla re . . . To declare, here, refers to a special ized situation, stable enough
for a ny deviation to be surprising. Of course, the custom officer's surprise
would not bear upon the discovery that a traveler is indeed capable of
declari ng something other than the merchandise he or she is transport
i ng, but only on the fact that in these ci rcumsta nces, th is traveler should
undertake to demonstrate such a capacity. The customs officer discerns
that's his job-the traveler qua potential bearer of merchandise lia ble to
be taxed , but he a lso knows, when he asks his q uestion, that the declara
tion he anticipates does not define the traveler. What he is charged with
discerni ng could, moreover-and will be, when the fraudulent and re
lieved traveler returns to his family or his accomplices-be declared in a
very di fferent modal ity: " Whew ! "
   The event that constitutes the traveler's arrival, d iscerned in the experi
ence of the customs-officer-who-sees-a-traveler-arriving-who-might-have
something-to-declare, is thus known by the customs officer qua connected
to other events which, for their part, a re only declared/disclosed in the
mode of the discernible. He does not know these other events, but he knows
that, if he gave himself the means to pay due attention to them, he could
discern many other things. The customs officer's experience can no more
be reduced to the purity of what such an officer has as his mandate to
discern than the event " traveler's arriva l " can be reduced to the purity of
                                                  E V E NTS   A N D   PA S S A G E   4 7




the specific character that discerns it. In other words, the experience of the
meaning of the event qua connected to other events which are " signified "
is not a " psychic addition " to the event. It is the event that, in the customs
officer's experience, declares itself to be linked to other events: it is the
traveler's answer " no, nothing " that declares itself as passing over in si
lence an indefinite number of possible decla rations.
   What such and such a traveler might say, how the event is l i nked to
others, is an entirely different problem. Thus, a t its simplest, the event of
the " traveler's arriva l " may engage other modes of discernment, in the
specia lized sense of the term, and in particular that of the policema n who
might appear beside the customs officer and d rag the traveler, suddenly
tra nsformed into a suspect, away to a n office where he will have to
answer a few q uestions. In this case, perhaps, the traveler's face, which the
customs officer had not inspected, was the specific characteristic of the
event, unless it was his " facies," the fact he did not look Ca ucasian
enough, or his bearing.
   Of course, the event of the " traveler's a rriva l " lends itself rather poorly
to the type of specialized knowledge that the physicist sets in motion in
the quite different context of a laboratory. The physicist's goal is to ex
plain the meaning of an event-this ura nium salt has left an impression
on a photographic plate-and in this case the q uestion of the structure to
which this event must belong will be explicitly raised . If a policeman is
lying in wait behind the customs officer, it is not in order to explain, but
to spot. This difference is not, however, the starti ng point of a hierarchy.
In general, " structure " in Whitehead 's sense neither promises nor guaran
tees any explanation, although it is exhibited by any explanation that suc
ceeds in the experimenta l sense, that is, by any experimental staging that
succeeds in making the event a relia ble witness with regard to relations
more general than i tself.
   In other words, what Whitehead names has nothing to do with truth,
whether it is objective, vei led, or transcendent, a truth toward which one
would have to turn, in one way or another. We a re not invited to j udge
the customs officer or the policeman in the name of the truth of the trav
eler. Nor, above all, are we urged to return to the condition of all possible
knowledge, the traditiona l approach of philosophers when they under
take to separate the problem of knowledge as such, " the problem," from the
teeming multiplicity of ways of knowing. To speak of meaning does not
authorize us to define anything, does not found any j udgment, does not call
for a ny purification. It will never be a matter of access to the intel ligible
beyond confusion. O r else, such access will have to be understood in
its irredeemably selective and partia l dimension: on the basis of what is
4 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




"offered," this rather than that, by taking advantage of the possi bi l i ty,
never warra nted by any principle, of abstracting from this. To speak of
meaning, however, commits us. Insofa r as the meaning of an event, qua
linked to other events, is a factor belonging to what we a re aware of in
perception, the q uestion of meaning engages the way in which the q ues
tion of knowledge will be raised, that is, of the meanings that each type
of knowledge will select, privilege, and render explicit.
   There is obviously nothing neutral about Whitehead's strategy, but this
is to be expected, since the concept he is trying to construct is not neutral
but has as its vocation to resist the bifurcation of nature. This is what is
indicated by the importance of the term " to exhibit," which is and remains
crucial in Whitehead 's thought. This term must be understood in the sense
of mathematics: according to the language used in the course of the adven
ture of mathematics, the circle has exhibited in di fferent ways what makes
it a circle, and has thus been an ingredient of distinct adventures. A philos
opher's description is not neutral, any more than that of a circle is for a
mathematician. It starts out, of course, from what is concrete, and for White
head concrete experience will always be its touchstone, what puts it to the
test, that whose test it must accept. Yet philosophers are responsible for
the way they describe or define what a concrete fact "exhibits," that is, also
which obl igations it entails. In the present case, the adventure Whitehead is
attempting in The Concept of Nature commits him to ask the concrete fact
to exhibit the way it allows the proscribed maneuver, the recourse to psy
chic addition, to be avoided . If the " mind " is to be responsible for some
thing, it is in terms of selection and simplification, not of addition, that this
responsibility must be defined, and if "what we know instinctively" is to
be confirmed, selection and simplification-in short, abstraction-must
not define "knowledge," but always such-and-such a way of knowing,
which may be modified if we choose to try to explore how to pay d ue at
tention to what we are dealing with.
   In somewhat more technica l terms, this commitment i mpl ies that what
Whitehead asks sense awareness to exhibit m ust be stated in terms of
" requisites." The concept of nature will have to be such that what we
instinctively know is j ustified, as well as what is presupposed by the ex
planations attempted, at their own risks and perils, by our special ized
branches of knowledge. It must therefore satisfy what knowledge re
quires: that by d ue attention more can be found, that is, learned .
   It is important to distinguish " requisites " and "cond itions." To this
disti nction corresponds the question of the plural nature of the special
ized branches of knowledge that we can produce with regard to nature,
and the lack of a guarantee with rega rd to their respective achievement,
                                                EVE NTS   A N D   PASS A G E   4 9




as is, moreover, indicated by Whitehea d 's formulation " due attention."
The kind of attention we must pay is a q uestion, as scientists a re wel l
aware, tha t gives its interest to the adventure of science.
   In fact, when philosophers spea k of " conditions," the point is emphati
cally not to relate knowledge and a dventure, but instead to define the
cond itions that must be answered by a description that is purified of a l l
interpretative overload . The conditions a re thus the vehicle of the ambi
tion to move from fact to j ustification, from a description that is more or
less arbitrary to a description exhibiting guarantees of its rel iable charac
ter. And the satisfaction of this ambition wil l enable the selection of the
kind of knowledge that best satisfies the conditions that have been made
expl icit. The conditions thus enable us to sort branches of knowledge, to
determine which of them are illusory, which of them a re " subjective,"
and which a re worthy of defin ing an " object."
   Correlati vely, conditions are supposed to answer a fundamentally anon
ymous problem, which anyone cou l d ra i se, the answer to which will
therefore be valid in principle for anyone. This is where the crucial d is
tinction between conditions and req uisites l ies: req uisites, for their part,
are immanent to the problem raised; they are " what this problem needs
for a solution to be given to it." In this case, the point will be to name
what is req uired from nature i f " a l l that we are aware of in perception "
is to be able to be " placed in the same boat," instead of being judged and
sorted i n the name of "additions" for which the perceivi ng mind a lone is
held responsible.
   We have already encountered this kind of distinction with regard to
" mind." If mind is what is ultimate a s soon as the problem of the concept
of nature is raised, it is, for Whitehead, the ultimate that corresponds to
this problem, and not the ultimate that dominates this problem, with re
gard to which this problem would be a simple path. Both the requisites
and the position of the ulti mate thus engage the responsibility of the
person who formulates the problem .
   In addition, the disti nction between condition and requisite is obvi
ously parallel to the d istinction between " knowa ble" nature and the na
ture which we instinctively think is " worth knowing," but of which we do
not by a ny means demand that it declare how it m ust be known, or that it
be subject to any principle that would gua rantee the wel l-foundedness of
a particular bra nch of knowledge. What is req uired by our instinctive
kn o wledge, far from leading to a foundation of knowledge, a s condi
tio ns would do, instea d refers each mode of knowledge to its opera
tio ns, its choices, its a mbitions and priorities. Without a beyond. At its
o wn risk.
5 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Of course, the distinction between condition and requisite is relevant
only insofar as there a re candidates for the function of " cond ition," that
is, a privileged mode of knowledge, j udged to be capable of transcending
all the others and raising the q uestion of its conditions. Here, we must
a bandon the customs officer, the pol iceman, and the noises in my street
to confront the physico-mathematical characterization of space and time
that appears as such a candidate since Newton and, in Whitehead's time,
with Einstein. If a theory of space-time, whichever it may be, Newton's
or Einstein's, were to be recogn ized as rendering explicit the conditions
of sense-awareness, these conditions would " found " this theory, which,
reciproca lly, could boast of transmitting, in a finally purified way, what
every experience has to decla re.
   The classification into discerned and discerni ble events is not enough
to confront this question, for, as we have seen, it designates an event as
linked to " a l l of nature." Other cha racteristic features of what we a re
aware of a re necessary, which enable us to name other factors in the fact
of nature. First of all, the point will be to exhibit what is declared by
these events that happen " a t the same time," that is, "now."
   These are the events which share the immediacy of the immediately pres 
ent discerned events. These are the events whose characters together with
those of the discerned events comprise all nature present for discernment.
They form the complete general fact which is all nature now present as
disclosed in that sense-awareness. It is in this second classification of events
that the differentiation of space from time takes its origin. The germ of
space is to be found in the mutual relations of events within the immediate
general fact which is all nature now discernible, namely within the one
event which is the totality of present nature. The relations of other events
to this totality of nature form the texture of time. The unity of this general
present fact is expressed by the concept of simultaneity ( eN, 52-5 3 ) .
  The differentiation o f space a n d time. The germ o f space. The texture
of time. Si multaneity. The key terms are here, which do indeed seem to
promise a theory of space-time. Yet the point, quite the contra ry, will be
to exhibit the labor of ela boration necessary for such a theory, that is, the
contrast between what this theory puts on stage and the " complete gen
eral fact," "nature that is now d iscernible," which is required if our knowl
edge is not to be illusory. In particular, the point will be the contrast be
tween the unity of " now present " and the tempora l identification
supposed by " in the same instant."
   It is important to distinguish simultaneity from instantaneousness. I
lay no stress on the mere current usage of the two terms. There are two
concepts which I want to distinguish. and one I call simultaneity and the
other instantaneousness ( CN, 5 6 ) .
                                                  E V E N TS   A N D   PAS S A G E   5 1




   The notion of an instant communicates with that of continuous time,
that can be decomposed into an infinite succession of instants. Mathemati
cal physics gave this time the status of a condition for its definitions. From
Galileo and Newton, the point was to describe the state of a system in a
given instant. Since Einstein, the situation has become compl icated because
the point henceforth has been to avoid characterizing two distant events as
occurring " i n the same instant," independently of the person characterizing
them. There is nothing to criticize about all that, unless this mode of defini
tion is presented as a simple explication, the production of a purified defini
tion, of the " now " proclaimed by experience. For the knowledge elaborated
by mathematical physics would then have the privileged status of being
directly a uthorized by experience, even if it means that this knowledge
then turns against the experience that authorizes it and declares it to be
relative.
   There is no such thing as nature at an instant posited by sense-awareness.
What sense-awareness delivers over for knowledge is nature through a pe
riod. Accordingly nature at an instant, since it is not itself a natural entity,
must be defined in terms of genuine natural entities (CN, 5 7 ) .
   What experience declares, what must belong t o nature, is not what con
ditions the definitions of the physico-mathematical sciences. A new name
is required, evoki ng the contrast between the instant, which conditions an
exact definition of simultaneity, and what we a re aware of in the percep
tion of the nature that is " now" discernible. This name is " duration."
  A duration is a concrete slab of nature limited by simultaneity which is
an essential factor disclosed in sense-awareness ( CN, 5 3 ) .
   We can therefore return to the customs officer. A traveler a pproaches, his
gaze crosses that of the customs officer, a negative, scarcely perceptible nod
of the head, the traveler goes away. If nothing i nterrupts the routine, i f no
educated or wild guess has made the customs officer decide to do what he
knows he can do, direct upon the traveler the attention that will turn him
into something more than an anonymous baggage-carrier, this customs of
ficer may have experienced this interaction as similar to a thousand others,
the opposite of an event. And it is precisely because nothing has disturbed
his routine, because nothing has distracted his attention toward other ad
ventures, that the traveler's passing before his eyes can be sa id to be l imited
by simultaneity. If he is later asked to describe this passage in detail, the
customs officer could probably break it down, but only by appealing to his
knowledge of the fact that the traveler must have approached, slowed
down or stopped, and gone away, hastening his pace but not by too m uch.
But the concrete event, the " that of which " there has been awareness, the
"now " that it declares, if they can be broken down, have not in fact been
bro ken down: a-traveler-passes. A concrete slice of nature, such that all the
5 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




components of the customs officer's experience, his aching foot, the low
roar of the ai rport, the movements of travelers in the background, must be
said to occur "at the same time," " simultaneous to this duration."
   Once the traveler has passed, he has passed, and will not return. Or
else, if he returns, for one reason or another, it will be a whole other ex
perience. Duration, as a concrete fact, can be cha racterized by this state
ment of the highest generality: it happens a nd passes.
  It is an exhibition of the process of nature that each duration happens
and passes. The process of nature can also be termed the passage of na
ture (CN, 54 ) .
   Insofar as i t happens and passes, each duration exhibits the passage of
nature, but no duration provides a pri vi leged testimony with regard to
this passage. Every Whitehead ian passage is qualified insofa r as it contains
other durations and is contained in other durations. Thus, the duration of
the experience of the customs-officer-in-front-of-whom-a-traveler-passes
could have been broken down into shorter durations. In fact, it was not,
and if it had been, it would no longer be the same, routine, experience but
a series of distinct experiences, whose " that of which " would have mutated
several times. Yet we know it " i nstinctively," and this is what is designated
by "would have," the fact that there was an experience that was not bro
ken down, a-traveler-passes, qualifies a particular experience, that of the
customs-officer. The traveler's passage could, quite obviously, have been
broken down by someone else who, for one reason or another, observed
the scene: a policeman or a manager of human traffic, on the lookout for
unnecessa ry slowdowns. Even a gesture positi vely experienced as non
decomposable by the person accomplishing it can be broken down into
smaller units, as, for instance, when experts in ergonomics discreetly time a
worker's activity. The duration of the customs officer's experience thus
discloses other distinct durations, which are part of its meaning.
   In contrast, what no duration discloses is the fact that it is made up of
durations without thickness, or instants that happen and pass. Every
duration has a thickness. The passage to the l i mit of this thickness to
ward the instant, which has none, is therefore not the passage from an
imperfect, approximate knowledge to an exact knowledge. It is an ab
straction that is constructed, and that is constructed only when it can be
constructed. For this abstraction presupposes the choice of the properties
that make this passage to the limit possible. It therefore imposes the ac
tive selection of what will be retained, the eli mination of what, in what
we are aware of, is lost when we take the path of the ever-mare-exact.
  Exactness is an ideal of thought. and is only realised in experience by
the selection of a route of approximation ( CN, 5 9 ) .
                                                  EVE NTS   A N D   PASSAGE   5 3




   The insta nt responds to an ideal of thought. Whether it is Newton's
time, a ffirming a bsol ute simultaneity, or Einstei n's time, which makes it
relative to the observer, what physicists take a s the sta rti ng point of thei r
reasoning, a moving obj ect, or a dyna mical system, or an event, each time
in an i nstant, corresponds to a dema nd for exactness that does not be
long to the concept of nature because it does not correspond to any expe
rience. The same holds true for the point, corresponding to the definition
of an exact posi tion in space, and Whitehead will show tha t its construc
tion is very much more complex than that of the instant, si nce it presup
poses the i dea l of an i nsta ntaneous space.
   This is obviously not a matter of denunciation: the ideal of exactness
to which the instant and the point respond conditions the specific risks of
physics, but the condition must not be confused with what is requi red by
every process of knowledge, including this specialized knowledge.
   Whitehead will devote long pages to analyzing the proced u re of
" extensive abstraction," which ena bles the characterization of the " paths
of approximation " leading from a uthentic natural entities, " what we have
perceptual experience of," to physico-mathematica l determi nations, spa
tial and temporal . The definiti on of i nstants, of mea surable space, of
lines, and of the spatio-tempora l metric includes its own risks, which a re
those of ax ioma tics. It entails defining a starti ng point such that no stage
of the reasoning may be convicted of having given an i mplicit role to a
property that has not yet been demonstrated . Here, we are at the thresh
old of Whitehea d 's great work in the phi losophy of the natural sciences.
   Whitehead was never to a bandon this work . Some cha pters are sti ll
devoted to it in Process and Reality ( Part IV, " The Theory of Exten
sion " ) , which take up the work carried out in The Concept of Nature
(and in An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge),
but with a renewed sta rting point. For, as he explains,
   [ . . . 1 the "method of extensive abstraction " developed in those works
was unable to define a "point " without the intervention of the theory of
"duration." Thus what should have been a property of " durations " be
came the definition of a point. By this mode of approach the extensive
relations of actual entities mutually external to each other were pushed
into the background; though they are equally fundamental.
   Since that date Professor T. de Laguna has shown that the somewhat
more general notion of "extensive connection " can be adopted as the
starting-point for the investigation of extension; and that the more limited
not ion of "whole and part " can be defined in terms of it. In this way, as
Professor de Laguna has shown, my difficulty in the definition of a point,
with out recourse to other considerations, can be overcome ( PR, 2 8 7 ) .
5 4   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   It is not beca use Whitehead will soon j udge unsatisfactory the method
of extensive a bstraction set forth in The Concept of Nature, a path of
approximation based on the part-whole relation, that I have chosen not
to venture further i n this question. It is simply beca use this proj ect per
tains to what Whitehead himself calls the " phi losophy of the natural
sciences," which he someti mes, as i n The Concept of Nature, treats as
equivalent to the " phi losophy of nature " or " natural philosophy," but
which seems to me to be distinct from the construction of the concept of
nature as " that of which " we have awareness.
   To carry out a sepa ration, as I am in the process of doi ng, between two
components of a work or of a book is always debatable. It might, more
over, give rise to the only objection that would rea lly matter to me: the
objection that would produce the "sheer disclosure " of the actual insepa
ra bility of the two components, thus modifying the way I understand
them. My choice thus conveys a wager that I would be glad to lose: that
of a possibil ity of distinguishing two regimes i n Whitehead, of i ntellec
tual and affective functioning. When Whitehead prolongs or undertakes
the la bor of axiomatization that was, if not the first of his passions, at
least the one that nourished his mai n professional work, he worked as a
mathematician in a worl d inhabited by his col leagues, such as Professor
Laguna , who were perfectly capable of sharing, evaluating, and question
ing his method and his choice. In contrast, the construction of the concept
of nature subjects the a uthor (and the reader) to a very different test, for
the question does not concern methodology fi rst and foremost. Here,
Whitehead may have friends, students, successors, but he no longer has
colleagues who share with him a terra in that exists prior to all of them.
He is a philosopher.
   It is difficult for a philosopher to realise that anyone really is confining
his discussion within the limits that I have set before you ( CN, 4 8 ) .
   Indeed, the questions that many philosophers would ask a genuine phi
losophy of nature, if not to solve, then at least to approach, a re excl uded,
for instance, the question of values in nature, that of its historicity, that of
its sel f-constructive activity or its dynamics of emergence . Whitehead does
not reject any of these questions, but for him they pertain to what must be
called " metaphysics," since they point in a direction where, i n one way or
another, the mind will no longer be defined as " ultimate " but as that
which may eventually and peri lously "emerge from nature." This is a dif
ferent problem, and it implies other concepts.
   Duration, which has a thickness and which exhibits the passage of
nature, i nsofar as it happens and passes, and nature, as that which is al
ways passing ( a lways moving on ) : these are what Whitehead limits him-
                                                E V E N TS   A N D   PA S S A G E   S 5




sel f to. Not without conseq uences, for it allows him to affirm at the same
time that the ideals of exactness conveyed by our measures do not belong
to the concept of nature, and that physics can nevertheless find within
nature what its specialized operations require.
  I definitely refrain at this stage from using the word "time," since the
measurable time of science and of civilised life generally merely exhibits
some aspects of the more fundamental fact of the passage of nature. I
believe that in this doctrine I am in full accord with Bergson, though he
uses "time " for the fundamental fact which I call the "passage of na
ture " ( eN, 54).
   It is rather seldom that Whitehead expl icitly names a philosopher, and
when he declares himself to agree with a philosopher, one must always
pay " due attention " to this agreement.
   In this case, it is fairly obvious tha t Bergsonian time is metaphysical in
Whi tehead's sense. This, moreover, is why Bergson fights with, or agai nst,
the definition of measura ble or " spatial ized " ti me, whereas Whitehead
wishes to construct a meaning of it that renders explicit the way in which
it i s extracted or a bstracted from sense-awa reness. The d i fference is
i mportant: it does not merely convey what some call Bergsonian " a nti
intel lect u alism," but a bove all a d ivergence with regard to the articula
tion between concepts and the experience that these concepts must be
able to thi nk. What is foreign to Bergson, "what is hard for a philosopher
to understand," is that Whitehead's concepts respond to what is req uired
by the problem he raised, and that none of them has meaning indepen
dently of such a problem (any more than complex numbers have mean
ing independently of mathematical problems ) .
   " Everything must b e in the same boat." Bergson wants the boat to
change captains, wa nts us to recognize that our true experience is an ex
perience in d ura tion. This is why he m ust oppose busy experience, con
sisting entirely of projects and disconti nuities, to this experience of true
duration, a duration that is continuous and indivisible l ike a melody
whose notes may succeed one another, but without it being possible to
break it down into a before and an after. Whitehead, for his part, does
not priv ilege any experience, for all of them a ffirm j ust as m uch the pas
sage of nature, from the most unremarkable to the most extended, from
the most special ized to the most purified of any practical interest, to " the
one most deeply embedded in rea l duration," as Bergson would say.
   Whitehead therefore does not oppose to intel lectual knowledge the
profound truth of d uration, whose experience the Bergsonian texts try to
ind uce in their readers. For him, the experience of a duration is the most
widely shared thing in the world, and the most " democratic." What
5 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO P H Y   O F   NATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




matters is not to confuse "what" we are aware of in perception and " what"
we percei ve. Whitehead by no mea ns criticizes the fact that we pay to
certain relations the attention appropriate for actively interpreting their
signification . . . that is, for prod ucing specialized knowledge. As long a s
w e a re not mista ken a bout wha t belongs t o nature a n d wha t perta ins to
human approximation. As l ong as we keep in mind that it is the definition
of measurable time and the notion of an insta nt that, as tra nslations of
an ideal of exactness, a re obta ined by approximation. The d urations that
happen and pass a re the concrete fact, the " terminus" of sense-awa reness
(it is what I am aware of), what awa reness offers to knowledge, and what
knowledge requires.
   However, the allusion to Bergson also conveys the risk to which White
head's enterprise is exposed here: to restrict oneself to nature alone, or
to what we are aware of in perception. For Bergson would certainly agree
that " the immed iate data " of awareness itself matter, but he would ask
Whitehead how he disti nguishes between awareness and " what we are
aware of," knowing that as soon as we try to thi nk of awareness, the mind
is no longer ultimate, but it is the problem.
   Thus not only is the passage of nature an essential character of nature
in its role of the terminus of sense-awareness, but it is also essential for
sense-awareness in itself. It is this truth which makes time appear to ex
tend beyond nature. But what extends beyond nature to mind is not the
serial and measurable time, which exhibits merely the character of pas
sage in nature, but the quality of passage itself which is in no way mea
surable except so far as it obtains in 1Iature [ . . . 1 In passage we reach a
connexion of nature with the ultimate metaphysical reality. The quality
of passage in durations is a particular exhibition in nature of a quality
which extends beyond nature ( eN, 5 5 ) .
   The passage of nature thus leads Whitehead t o a zone o f indecision, i n
which the mea ning o f the initial problem-the cha racterization o f " tha t
of which " we have sense-awa reness-is indeed at risk . It ca nnot be de
nied that the mea ning of the " now " belongs to experience itself, not only
to its " that of which." Although Whitehead does not think in terms of
time but of d urations, he has j ust red iscovered the " big q uestion," where
the maximal divergence between philosophers is played out: is time the
" number of motion," that is, a relation between motions belonging to the
world, or does it not rather refer to the subject who " relates" things?
Kant took this step, a ffirming time to be an interna l sense. For Whitehea d,
this is the most complete exa mple of the bifurca tion of nature: time owes
its passage to the human mind! As fa r as Bergson is concerned, he did not
refuse dura tion to thi ngs, but he accorded it to them cautiously. Insofar
                                                 EVENTS    A N D   PA S S A G E   S 7




as he opposes the melody i n multiple continuities, i ntertwi ned and indi
visible, that is our awareness, to the practica l i nterest that carries us to
ward things and leads us to conceive them from the viewpoint of action,
the awareness we have of things is always suspect. Of course, the world
itself must be understood as " in the ma king " as our life is, a nd this is the
project of the metaphysics to which he appea ls. To do so, however, mind
wi l l have to install itself definitively within the mobile rea lity of this
world, become capable of fol lowing it in its curves, i n short, adopt " the
very movement of the i nner life of things " (1M, 1 422 ) .
   For Whitehead, busy knowledge does not betray, but takes its own kind
of risks. Nevertheless, for him, too, the question arises on which the very
project of constructing a concept of natu re outside of metaphysics de
pends. How can one limit oneself to this problem ? How can one celebrate
the fact that the passage extends " toward " the mind, without, however,
including the mind in the passage of nature, without ending up by confus
ing nature and thought in the same " fact," which would henceforth be
metaphysical ?
                                                             C H A PT E R T H R E E




The Foothold of the M i nd




           E M U S T LI M I T O U RSELVE S   to the problem that has been
             raised, and trust our problem: such is the ethics of a mathema
             tician. The passage of nature is exhibited by what we are aware
of, and is required by our i nstinctive attitude. The problem to be solved
does not concern the " mi nd," but the theories that make nature bifurcate
and disqua lify this i nstinctive attitude, and the concepts that will consti
tute its solution are not neutral, but they respond to the problem, convey
i ng the imperative from which the problem proceeds. It is necessary and
sufficient to characterize " that of which" we have awareness in the mode
req uired by our instinctive attitude. We must confirm the " trust" that is
actually presupposed by any dema nding i nvestiga tion, a ny specialized
k nowledge, even those that claim to disqualify this " trust." And all this
without exaggerating the risk: critical consciousness admits so many
things without criticizi ng them! Whether this is a pipe or this is not a pipe,
the adopted stance ignores with the greatest of ease the abysses of presup
position that logicians discover with terror when they try to " clarify " it.
"Animal faith" in a presence of things, emotion, and trust can be hunted
down by radical doubt, examination, or tests of legitimacy. In fact, the
logical process that i ntends to hunt them down still testifies, by its self
assurance, to this faith, like the movement of a cat chasing its own tail
testifies to the unity of a body from which its pursuit makes abstraction.
For if what words appeal to really does turn out not to answer, if the mis
erable cat, driven mad by the sufferings we are liable to inflict upon him,
chews on his ta il in his cage, this is no longer a game, whether logical or
fel ine, nor is it a laughing ma tter.
                                        T H E   F O OT H O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   5 9




   Com mitment to an experi mentation capable of freeing the question of
nature from its habitual formulations associated with our specia lized
branches of knowledge, and of succeed i ng i n creating a plan able to wel
come, without privilege or hierarchy, the plura l ity of what we are aware
of, presupposes a trust that needs neither guarantee nor foundation. On
the contrary, it conveys the d ifference between two modes of " trusting " ;
the implicit one presupposed b y o u r certainties a n d habits, a n d the risk
ier one, which exposes the thi nker to adventure.
    Unlike habit, which is carried out in a determinate world, trust is para
doxically exercised in a world of indeterminacy, what James calls the
"plastic zone, the transmission belt of the uncertain, the meeting point of
the past and the future." It is indeterminacy that makes us need trust, but
it is also because we have trust that we take the risk of the indeterminate
[•   • J The feeling of trust makes experience a field of experimentation. It
         •



is therefore the condition for every form of creation (WJEP, 8 7 ) .
    Bergson is cited only once i n The Concept o f Nature, but William
James is never cited, although terms appear unexpectedly, without com
mentary, which point out that Whitehead is thinking " with James ." Ter
minus is one of these terms, stream is another. But the term that will
emerge i n this moment of del icate negotiation imposed by the passage
of nature, between the concept of nature and the metaphysical question,
this moment when it comes to escaping the temptation, designa ted by
Bergsonian thought, of a psychology leading to metaphysics, in order to
take the risk of the indeterminate, is specious present.
   A duration retains within itself the passage of nature. There are within
it antecedents and consequents which are also durations which may be
the complete specious presents of quicker consciousnesses ( CN, 5 6 ) .
   William james's specious present designates the extension of the dura
tion that we experience as " present." Here, extension does not designate
an externa l, clocked measure, but a concrete range, thick with the num
ber of events i t i ncludes in a way that is divisible but undivided.
   [ . . . J The practically cognized present is no k nife-edge, but a saddle
back, with a certain breadth of its own on which we sit perched, and from
which we look in two directions into time. The unit of composition of our
perception of time is a duration, with a bow and a stern, as it were-a
rearward-and a forward-looking end. It is only as parts of this duration
block that the relation of succession of one end to the other is perceived.
We do not first feel one end and then feel the other after it, and from the
perception of the succession infer an interval of time between, but we
seem to feel the interval of time as a whole, with its two ends embedded in
it ( PP, I, 609-6 1 0 ) .
6 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Specious present is often translated i nto French as " present apparent,"
which i ndicates how much the notion of appearance is a powerful attrac
tor, dangerous in this case since it induces a stereotyped confronta tion
between two possibil ities. Either the experience of the present is j udged to
be purely relative to consciousness, and hence a decepti ve appearance
which it is the psychologist's task to describe in the wel l-known mode
of "you think that x . . . but experimental psychology shows that y . . . "
or else consciousness qua what bestows the present confers upon appear
a nce the status of ulti mate reality. For whoever tries to " think with White
head," both possi bilities are equally catastrophic, since the first one makes
nature bifurcate, and the second one eliminates nature in favor of " what
appears." It is therefore important to recall that specious, like " specieux"
in French, first signified "of beautiful appearance," about which there is
nothing negati ve i n and of itself. The suspicion that " this beautiful ap
pearance" is only apparent, intended only to deceive, took hold of the term
at the beginning of the eighteenth century. Such an etymological itinerary,
which bri ngs a bout the triumph of suspicion, discloses the worry that
may be inspired by what, for Wi lliam Ja mes, was of the order of radical
indeterminacy.
   Wha t, for i nsta nce, does it mean to be " captivated " by the bea uty of
an i mage ? If we a re moved , is it the situation that is movi ng, or our emo
tion that ma kes it so ? And i f we say that an idea is " s uggestive," does this
come from it, or from the way we have appropriated it? William James
made this hesitation the very thing tha t experience forces us to think . Of
course, the responsibility for such experiences can be attri buted either to
the world or to the subject, but this wi ll always be an attribution after
the fact, when we ask ourselves, after the fact, the q uestion of what hap
pened . The specious present, that block of duration upon which experi
ence is " perched " a nd which testifies to a quality of the passage that ex
tends " beyond nature to mind," could be the subject of the same rad ical
hesitation, whereas we can, of course, lea rn more about it by paying it
d ue attention.
   Wi lliam Ja mes i ntroduced the " specious present" i n the context of a
"psychologica l " a na lysis, but he took ca re not to relate this present to
consciousness as its producer. In fact, it is rather consciousness that will
be qualified, related, shown to be dependent on what one might call "ce
rebra l i ty." The specious present cannot be defined directly, i n the sense
that one would " become aware of" it, but it may be subject to varia tion,
both ethological and pharmacological : the variety of a nimal species or the
variety of human experiences, as they can be modified, for instance, by
ta king drugs .
                                        T H E   FOOTHOLD   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 1




  In hashish-intoxication there is a curious increase in the apparent time
perspective. We utter a sentence, and ere the end is reached the beginning
seems already to date from indefinitely long ago. We enter a short street,
and it is as if we should never get to the end of it (PP, I, 6 39-640) .
   Wi lliam James interprets this kind o f disturbing sensation o n the basis
of a twofold hypothesis. On the one hand, hashish intoxication gives rise
to a finer discrimination of events, that is, a ugments the quantity of events
of which we have experience qua liable to be distinguished . On the other
hand, whether intoxicated or not, we ( human beings) preserve the same
subjective sensation of time, with the specious present always including i n
an undivided w a y about as many successive events that are liable t o be
distinguished . Everything thus seems to be normal, except that the " ra nge"
of the present is more reduced, which entai ls, for one and " the same" epi
sode (coming to the end of a sentence, crossing a street), an increase in the
number of successive " presents." This is why the hashish-smoker must
often del i berately remember the begi nning of the phrase begun: not only
is this beginning not included in the present, but it is " very far away,"
separa ted from the present by a completely incongruous number of shifts
from the present to the past.
   It is i mportant to emphasize that, according to James, the experience of
hashish intoxication is not abnormal but strange, a vector of strangeness,
because it includes a contrast. The modification of the specious present is
only perceptible, or knowable, when the intoxicated experience is accom
panied by the contrast with similar habitual experience: But this is a short
street! But I usually know without effort how I began a sentence!
   From this viewpoint, there is a big di fference between the characteriza
tion of the specious present and the study of optical illusions, which also
perta ins to experimental psychology. I n the case of optica l illusions, what
is studied is " what" the subject perceives, the interpretative part of per
ception, and psychologists have the means to j udge and know that, what
ever their subject may say, the para l lel lines are " really" parallel, and the
line segments are " really" of equal length: this is why they can speak of
an ill usion. In the case of the specious present, we have to do not with
knowi ng interpretation, but rather with what experience offers to knowl
edge, and the reference to " really" cannot work: no one can objectively
measure what I testi fy to when I say, "This street seems to have no end!"
   Thus, if " specious" means "of deceptive appearance," those who a re de
ceived are those who have gone so far as to define experience in terms of a
succession of instants without thickness. And it is indeed in this sense that
the specious present can be involved in Whitehead's problem, enabling him
to negotiate the connection between nature and " ultimate metaphysical
6 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




reality " without, however, slipping into metaphysics. The specious present,
which happens and passes, which can be subjected to variation by drugs
and can be the subject of speculations with regard to the animal variety of
experiences, does not designate the perceiving mind qua creator or respon
sible for experience. It designates what experience delivers to perception,
whether animal or human. It ca n only be defined if we pay due attention to
variety, and it therefore perta ins to the concept of nature, that is, to what
must be restored to nature if it is not to bifurcate.
   Such a restitution is not, however, without consequences, for it intro
duces William James's indeterminacy into the heart of wha t we are aware
of as " passage." "There is a passage," but this passage henceforth includes
the passage of awareness, wha t we are aware of as " passage of the pres
ent " : it has passed.
   Are we really so far from Bergson? No longer quite that far, for the " in
determinacy " of what we a re aware of as passage coincides, if not with the
vocation of Bergson's text, at least with the means th is text sets in motion
in order to transform its reader. It has often been noted how hard it is to
"summarize" Bergson, to present his theses, and to discuss his positions.
One may be tempted to abstract from the highly meticulous, critical de
scription his text offers of the ways in which our la nguages define the self,
the will, freedom, in order to go stra ight to his concl usions, to wha t he
" wanted to demonstrate," for instance, his definition of intuition, mem
ory, or duration . And one rea lizes that the definitions in q uestion are then
so many betraya ls. Bergsonian concepts are not made to enter into a rela
tion of force with others, which they oppose. They a re inseparable from a
practice of writing and from the practice of reading to which writing ap
peals. If Bergson's meticulous descriptions cannot be eliminated, it is be
cause they produce what they describe. The Bergsonian text first functions
as an operator for i nducing va riation, a modification of experience, and
the truth of the duration to which he refers is " specious," for it captivates
his reader.
   Bergsonian inner life may well refer to music, to the melodic quality of
the descriptions tha t succeed one another in a mode that is deliberately
resistant to division, but the experience inspired by Bergson 's text, for its
part, makes one th ink of Wi lliam James's hashish intoxica tion: the cre
ation of contrasts tha t induce indeterminacy. Bergson fashions a " trance
reading," a nd asks the reader what all hypnotizers ask their subject: to
agree to slow down, to let oneself be penetrated by the words, to release
the grip that ma kes us th ink we know wha t they mea n. Bergson na mes
and descri bes duration, but his text induces the experience of it, induces
the trust that transforms experience into experi mentation on duration .
                                        T H E   FOOTHOLD   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 3




And it is precisely at this point that he coincides with Whitehead, for the
concept of na ture a lso depends on a " l iterary " apparatus liable to ind uce
a perception of what we a re aware of in the mode that this concept has
the task of exhibiting.
  The purpose of a discussion of such factors may be described as being to
make obvious things look odd. We cannot envisage them unless we man
age to invest them with some of the freshness which is due to strangeness
(eN, 1 07- 1 0 8 ) .
   O n e of the ways of conferring a biza rre a ppeara nce upon any k i nd
of experience, without recourse to the pa rticular experience provided by
hashish, l isten ing to music, hypnotic induction, or the philosopher's me
ticulous description, is to ca ll attention to the " constant factors," those
we neglect because they inevitably belong to all experience, but which no
experience exh ibits in pa rticular. The point is thus to crea te a contrast
between what I say I perceive and wha t is a lways exhibited by wha t I am
aware of.
   It is because of this habit of letting constant factors slip from con
sciousness that we constantly fall into the error of thinking of the sense
awareness of a particular factor in nature as being a two-termed relation
between the mind and the factor. For example, I perceive a green leaf.
Language in this statement suppresses all reference to any factors other
than the percipient mind and the green leaf and the relation of sense
awareness. It discards the obvious inevitable factors which are essential
elements in the perception. I am here, the leaf is there; and the event here
and the event which is the life of the leaf there are both embedded in a
totality of nature which is now, and within this totality there are other
discriminated factors which it is irrelevant to mention (eN, 1 0 8 ) .
   Not only does experience incl ude the " now" as a constant factor, but
also the " here." And this " here" ra ises the same problem as the " now " : it
is an aspect of experience tha t q uestions the d ifference between na ture
and mind, and therefore includes the threat of mak ing the phi losophy of
nature slide into metaphysics.
   Here we are touching on that character of the passage of nature which
issues in the spatial relations of simultaneous bodies r . . . I Passage in this
aspect of it also seems to extend beyond nature to mind ( eN, 5 6 ) .
   Like the specious present, the " here" must therefore b e pl unged into
indeterminacy. To do this, it is no longer the ideal ization of insta nta neous
ness tha t must be surmounted, but tha t of reversibility. When we think of
" here" and " there," we may be tempted to affirm the intercha ngeabil ity of
the terms: I am here and you a re there, but the relation is reversible, and
you might j ust as well be here, and I might be there; to define " here,"
6 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




moreover, any kind of body would do j ust as well instead of me. What
then counts are spatial relations, measured by distances.
   Once again, the point is not to denounce or to deny that the notion of
distance may derive from what we are aware of, and be made expl icit as
" what" we perceive. The point is to attri bute to nature not what we per
ceive, but what we are aware of in perception. The apparent simpl icity of
a space in which " si multaneou'l" bod ies would be located, i ncluding the
one that perceives, conveys the specious character of what we a re aware
of. It is not those who have relied on their instinctive knowledge who
have been deceived, but those who have sought to pass from the contrast
between " here" and " there " to a more precise definition. This contrast must
not be stated in terms of space or in terms of distance.
   Against the abstract ideal of a reversibility guaranteeing that what is
" here " could have been " there," we can appeal to a cat, when he has not
been driven mad by our mistreatment, but offers himself to us as a mar
vel of perceptive experience. A cat on the hunt, ma king perceptible the
vibration of what is not a distance but the release that will cross an inter
va l, or else a contemplative cat, never situated j ust anywhere in a room,
a lways in a location a round which the room seems to be arranged . Expe
rience, for Whitehead, is always situated and always incl udes a locus
standi, or a perspective, or v iewpoint. And he is bold enough to ca l l this
point of view " event here," included in what we a re aware of.
   This locus standi in nature is what is represented in thought by the con
cept of "here " namely of an "event here." This is the concept of a definite
factor in nature. This factor is an event in nature which is the focus in
nature for that act of awareness, and the other events are perceived as re
ferred to it. This event is part of the associated duration. I call it the "per
cipient event." This event is not the mind, that is to say, not the percipient.
It is that in nature from which the mind perceives (eN, 1 07).
   That this locus standi, perspective, or " focus for that act of awareness,"
is an event in nature, a factor belonging to what we are aware of, not a
condition for awareness or a subjective principle of all possible awa re
ness, is vital for Whitehead 's construction . If, in one way or another, the
perspective had been that of the percipient mind rather than " for" the per
cipient mind, the door would have been left open for the bifurcation of
nature. " How " one perceives would have referred to the mind, which
would then be a command post, constructing according to its categories
" that of which " it has experience in perception. The fact that this perspec
tive must be understood as an " event," in contrast, impl ies that the neutral
and impersonal statement " there is a passage" will constitute an ultimate
genera lity belonging to the concept of nature, which thus includes the
percipient event as a factor of experience offered to knowledge.
                                          T H E   FOOTH O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 5




   Like a l l events, the percipient event happens and leaves, and when it is
gone, it is gone. It is rela ti ve, of course, since every event declares itsel f to
be rela ted to other events, a part of some and made up of others . But i t is
not relative to a nyth ing, and especially not to a subject. And i t refers the
delights of i ntrospection-by which the subject declares itsel f to be able
to explore its own perceptions, place them in doubt, explore their mean
i ng, go back to thei r eventual principle-to i ndeterminacy, that is, to the
passage of na ture, which the transformation of points of view is the first
to testify to. You think you a re free to explore your experience, like one
explores a given landscape, to vary points of view and meanings, to ren
der i mplicit mea ni ngs explicit. But you are not the a uthor of this varia
tion. The passage is neutra l, and the standpoint does not belong to you
unless it is i n your quality as occupa nt, but it is what occupies you, much
more tha n you occupy it. The variation of standpoints is not what you
decide but what ha ppens, and you interpret it i n one way or another, and,
for insta nce, in the way that puts you i n cha rge. The event that provides
you with a point of view belongs to the great i mpersonal web of events.
Your standpoint testifies to the whole of nature, is connected to the whole
of nature, even if it takes on the pa rticular mea ning that is required by the
interpretation of perception as yours . This interpretation may be spe
cious, but that does not ma ke it illusory. But what we " know instinc
tively" is not that our consciousness possesses a point of view, but rather
that the " here " of this viewpoint is ours.
   Our "percipient event " is that event included in our observational
present which we distinguish as being in some peculiar way our stand
point for perception. It is roughly speak ing that event which is our bodily
life within the present duration [ . . . 1 The distant situation of a perceived
obiect is merely k nown to us as signified by our bodily state, i.e., by our
percipient event [ . . . l In the course of evolution those animals have sur
vived whose sense-awareness is concentrated on those significations of
their bodily states which are on the average important for their welfare.
The whole world of events is signified, but there are some which exact
the death penalty for inattention (eN, 1 8 7-1 8 8 ) .
   Like the specious present, the declared sign ification o f the percipient
event offered to knowledge does not have to be explained, since it is of the
order of the fact. The fact is that, most often, what sense experience deliv
ers to knowledge al lows itsel f to be interpreted i n a way that lets me d is
sociate the permanence of my body, " here," from a world in which thi ngs
happen, " there." The point is to pay attention to these thi ngs, the k ind of
attention they are due, on pai n of death. But the " death penalty," through
which the question of biological evolution now emerges, does not explain
the " here " of perception, any more than the tests to which scientists submit
6 6   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




their statements explain what these statements say. Just as resistance to
such tests is what is requi red for a scientific statement to survive, attention
to certain events " there" is required on pai n of death, but the relation be
tween the " here" of attention and the body does not have the status of a
general fact. We can therefore, without fear of denying " what we know
i nstinctively," take into account experiences that subject our routines to
adventure.
   Thus, those who testi fy to the well-known out-of-body experiences
testi fy that the " here" of the percipient event is not always defined by a
coincidence between standpoi nt and the body, since, in this experience,
th is body is suddenly signified as distant. The distinction then imposes
itsel f between the permanence of the body and what Whitehead calls
" roughly speaking " bod i ly life. These unusual experiences are associated
not with the mind's decisions but with the adventure of this bodily l i fe,
since they occur at the onset of death, or on the occasion of taking drugs,
or else thanks to the culti vation of that bodily life implied by spiritual
techniques. All are situations in which " survival " and its pragmatic ur
gencies do not play a dominant role.
    Biologica l evolution would thus only explain a habitual correlation,
also attested by the pla usibil ity of the ( metaphysica l ) temptation to which
we yield when we affirm that our mind percei ves " on the basis of our
body," or that this body, as it is localized by biology, would be its " seat,"
its " prison," or its " production site." Likewise, biological evolution would
explain not the specious present as such but perhaps the type of conserva
tion that James hypothesizes, which could well extend to all animal expe
riences (including huma n ) . The fact that flies seem to experience the mo
tion of my hand, fast as it is, as a slow arrival that allows them plenty of
time to fly away cannot be assimilated to the experience of an i ntoxicated
person si nce the fly has actually had the time to fly away. Is the fly aware ?
Does it have a percipient experience in the present ? In a n y case, whatever
may be the way in which the approach of my hand affects it, its experi
ence probably integrates, as does our " specious present," a correlation with
events that exact a death penalty if its reactions are too slow.
   Whitehead has thus succeeded in avoiding a twofold da nger: he has
ta ken away from the mind its responsibil ity for the " here" and the " now"
of all experience without referring this explanation to biology, that is,
without subjecti ng the concrete fact of passage to special ized knowledge.
What seems to extend from nature to the mind has been referred to the
register that no one can claim to appropriate: the event.
  The complete foothold of the mind in nature is represented by the pair
of events, namely, the present duration which marks the "when " of aware-
                                        T H E   FOOTH O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 7




ness and the percipient event which marks the "where " of awareness and
the "how " of awareness ( eN, 1 07 ) .
   Here, " foothold " does not designate the act of taking hold but what the
mind, or knowledge, requires from nature, what it needs to be offered by
nature if its operations are not to be illusory, if the trust that leads us to
speak of a knowledge about nature is to be confirmed. And i nsofar as what
nature "offers" a rticulates a pair of events as "constant" factors, the mind's
foothold in nature does not found any j udgment that goes beyond the con
crete fact: " there has been a foothold ." Hence the image of the mountai n
climber evoked by the term Whitehead chooses: " foothold." The mountain
eer's climb depends, and counts, on a ledge found by her hand or foot. If the
vertical wall were completely smooth, there would be no mountain-climber:
the mountain-climber's mode of existence requires that of the ledge that of
fers her a foothold . It is not the job of the mountain-climber, who takes
adva ntage of the foothold to exist qua mounta in-cl imber, to j usti fy that
foothold's existence . Nor, moreover, is it up to her to turn this existence
into that which, in one way or another, could j ustify the mounta i n . The
" nature that offers a foothold to the mind " i ndeed designates the percipi
ent mind as ultimate, for its concept is relative to the mind 's mode of tak
ing hold. A perfectly smooth wall, giving the mountain-climber no foot
hold, poses no problem for a fly, and could be ascended ( but not cli mbed )
by someone who obtains an adequate system of suction disks. The possi
bility of a foothold is the requirement immanent to the problem to which
the term " mountain-climber" constitutes a set of risky solutions. Li kewise,
the present event and the percipient event are the " footholds" required by
the problem of " d ue attention," a problem designated by the term "aware
ness," and to which all perceptual special ization, whether it refers to bio
logical evolution or to practical life, brings a risky solution.
   What I now want to discuss is the special relation of the percipient
event which is "here " to the duration which is "now " [ . I Within the
                                                                    .   .



short present duration the "here " of the percipient event has a definite
meaning of some sort. This meaning of "here " is the content of the spe
cial relation of the percipient event to its associated duration. I will call
this relation "cogredience " ( eN, 1 0 8 ) .
   What I want to bring out is that the preservation of a peculiar relation
to a duration is a necessary condition for the function of that duration as
a present duration for sense-awareness ( eN, 1 09 ) .
   The present snaps into a past and a present when the "here' " of cogre
dience loses its single determinate meaning. There has been a passage of
nature from the "here " of perception within the past duration to the dif
fere nt "here " of perception within the present duration ( eN, 1 08-1 0 9 ) .
6 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NAT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   For Whitehead, then, the preservation of cogredience has the status of
a "condition," and this condition designates a duration, " a concrete slab
of nature limited by simultaneity " ( CN, 5 3 ) . Conditions and limits can
play a role i n this case because they do not dea l with experience but with
the way knowledge ca n appeal to experience, not, this ti me, with rega rd
to the " here " and the " now" but to the simultaneity "I and my world at
the same time," to the " here and now" that designates the present.
   Once again, the point is to resist the theories that presuppose that we
can base oursel ves on what we perceive. In this case, what Whitehead has
in view is the specious character of the " here and now" that proposes itself
as a stable, reliable starting point from which it seems possi ble to i nterro
gate all possible experience. To make the preservation of cogredience a
condition evokes what the specious character of experience may make
us forget: the " here and now " is not that which, belonging to all possible
experience, also enables us to " think of experience." It creates neither right
nor access, because it is itself conditioned by " it holds together." What
counts in the " here and now " is the " a nd," and this "and " conveys a fact:
the preservation of a relation of which we can only observe, once it has
" passed," that it has ceased to hold true. And it certainly ceases to hold
true as soon as the mind seizes hold of experience to call it as a witness.
   The duration may comprise change within itself, but cannot-so far as it
is one present duration-comprise change in the quality of its peculiar rela
tion to the contained percipient event. In other words, perception is always
"here," and a duration can only be posited as present for sense-awareness
on condition that it affords one unbroken meaning of " here " in its relation
to the percipient event. It is only in the past that you can have been "there "
with a standpoint distinct from your present "here " ( CN, 1 1 0 ) .
   Whereas the usual " here a n d now " treats space a n d time symmetrically,
the "and" of the relation of cogredience breaks this symmetry. The thick
ness of the present, that indivisible compound of multiple durations that
constitutes " nature now," has as its condition and limit the duration of the
percipient event that it includes. The experience of the passage, the shift of
the present into the past, is primordially the passage of the percipient
event, the passage of the " here," but also, and perhaps above all, of the
" how." For the perci pient event not only marks the " where" of experi
ence but also its " how," and whereas the " here " can refer in a somewhat
specious way to the body's permanence, the " how" raises the question of
the " bodily life i nside present duration" constituted by this percipient
event. A sudden noise attracts my attention: it is the " how " of the experi
ence that has changed when an event " there" is suddenly discerned . The
cat's ears stand up. It is utterly approximate to say " I am where I am while
                                         T H E   FOOTHOLD   O F   T H E   M I N D   6 9




time passes," but the specious character of the approximation is interest
ing. It designates an " I " that is first and foremost " bodily life," a set of
multiple correla tions unified by the series of " here-how " that pass in such
a way tha t " the sta ndpoint is always here."
   Events there and events here are facts of nature [ . . I cogredience has
                                                            .



nothing to do with any biological character of the [percipient] event
wh ich is related by it to the associated duration (eN, 1 1 0 ) .
   The relation of cogredience belongs to what is required . It is crucial
that it cannot be explained by specia l ized knowledge such as biology, for
it is what is required by a l l our expla nations, whether biologica l or other.
One will therefore certa inly not say that it is " subject" to bodily l i fe, but
perhaps one can say that it is what makes bodily life crucial for percep
tion. Every l iving being the biologist can compare with other living be
ings would thus consti tute a specia l ized response to the questions orga
nized around the preserva tion of the relation of cogredience, a n answer
that presupposes this relation itsel f as a fact belonging to the concept of
nature. It is qua stratified, stabilized answer, proper to a l iving species,
that the sense organs in particular should be described, and that we
should characterize the way these organs discern, sift, and capture what,
for them, " makes an event," that is, brea ks the rela tion of cogredience.
   All the descri ptions produced by neurophysiology, all the experiments
of experi menta l psychology aiming to mea sure the extent of the " spe
cious present," a l l the compari sons between living beings of d i fferent
species, all the body's adventures, whether i ntoxicated or spiritualized,
then begi n to si ng in harmony with the positive definition that White
head has given of nature: we know that if we pay it due attention, we will
find more i n it than wha t we observe at first glance. The sense orga ns
testi fy to the importa nce of paying due attention to nature, on pain of
death. Each one proceeds from a wager on what is due. And the body is
therefore not wha t explains but what testifies.
   Attention itself would thus be that aspect of bodily l i fe that testifies to
a risky sol ution, to the choice of the events capable of " attracting atten
tion," or breaking the relation of cogredience. For survival depends on the
relevance of what this choice offers to knowledge, and especially on the
irrelevance of all that is signified without thereby ma king the present slip
into the past. The cat lying in wait for its prey, immobi le and vibra nt, is
proba bly living through an experience such that what for her prey has the
quality of an undivided " here and now" is for her a succession of presents
that happen and pass . Attention explains nothing: the testi mony con
ce r ns the solution by which the problem exhibits itself but does not ex
plain the problem.
70   FROM    T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Wi lliam james's " specious present" belonged to psychology, beca use
James was trying to characterize it. But the relation of cogredience, in its
factua lity, refers instead to what James, in his Essays on Radical Empiri
cism, calls " pure experience."
   The instant field of the present is always experienced in its "pure " state,
a plain unqualified actuality, a simple "that," as yet undifferentiated into
thing and thought, and only virtually classifiable as objective fact or as some
one's opinion about fact [ . . . I Only in the later experience that supersedes
the present one is this "naif" immediacy retrospectively split into two parts,
a "consciousness " and its " content " and the content corrected or confirmed.
While still pure, or present, any experience-mine, for example, of what I
write about in these very lines-passes for "truth " (WPE, 74-75 ).
    james's pure experience is " true," but unlike Descartes' " I am think
ing," its truth does not authorize anything. It is up to the experience that
follows and supersedes it to give this truth its consequences, perhaps to
j udge it, always to restore it in a different way, according to the different
" hows " associated with a d i fferent standpoint. What William James pro
poses is nothing other, and nothing less, than to betray every " and there
fore " that would undertake to transcend the facts: it is in this way, and in
no other, that this present has appropriated this past. Pure experience is
" pla in," that is, mute with regard to what it will signify retroactively. The
experience that sl ips into the past may well be appropriated by an experi
ence dominated by reflexivity: " I " have this experience. But that means
that the experience has changed . The new " reflexive" experience is a
" reflection on" the one that has slipped into the past, in the sense of a
resumption rather than of an outcome or an elucidation. James thus pro
poses a version of experience, i ncluding the experience dominated by the
" I " of reflection, which exhibits that this " I " always comes later, included
in a new experience. And the experience of the " I " appropriating the
past, ma king this past " its " experience, is again plain, mute with rega rd
to the consequences that will be produced concerning it. The continuity
of the " I " is one construction among others, which only holds as long as
the resumption in the mode of reflexive appropriation is continued .
    Wi lliam James's pure experience functions as a proposition that read
ers must accept to inhabit, that they must take the time to i nhabit. And
Whitehead certainly took the ti me to inhabit it, for his characterization of
the perci pient event operates in the same way as that of pure experience:
it induces an experience in which the event is always " this" event, which
happens and passes . Nevertheless, we should reca ll that for Whitehead
the " mind," bracketed in The Concept of Nature, must stay that way:
experience itself is not in q uestion, and the percipient event is not experi-
                                         T H E   FOOTH O L D   O F   T H E   M I N D   7 1




ence, only that factor of experience that testifies to the " passage " that is
the ultimate concrete fact.
   Already at this point, however, Whitehead a nd James agree at lea st on
one thing: all the reasons we can give with regard to the passage, with
rega rd to experience insofar as it passes, come later. My attention was d is
tracted by that birdsong; 1 suddenly thought of the chicken in the oven; in
spite of your glance, 1 did end my phrase, to be sure, but without believ
i ng in it a ny more, and so on. We attribute responsibil ities to elements of
experience that we can name, we construct reasons, and these reasons are
not fa lse. They are simply a bstracted from what ( specious ) experience
offers to consciousness, and a re presented in a ma nner that tra nslates the
way it has seized hold of them: in this case, by inverting them, by confus
i ng the interpretation that has come a fterward with the reason why the
present has sl ipped into the past a nd has become a past signified by the
present. This must not be denounced, for it is one way of paying due at
tention to certain factors of our experience.
   Even today, ma ny readers of Whitehead encounter this difficulty: he
seems to deny " self-consciousness," or the possi bil ity of an immediate rela
tion such that we ca n feel and feel ourselves feel at the same time. Likewise,
he seems to deny the possibil ity of saying, "I see my child there, smi l i ng at
me," two bei ngs in direct contact. Yet, the person who mobil izes this ex
ample will protest, it is i ndeed at me that my child is sm iling, 1 feel it at
the same time that 1 see her, that her smile is di rected at me, a nd this smile
testifies to a genuine contact between us a nd therefore testifies for me, for
the ultimate truth of my awa reness of bei ng me. Any way of compl icat
i ng the description of this situation would be a form of cheating with
regard to the truth of this experience.
   We must take this protest seriously, beca use there can be no question,
there can never be any question, either for James or for Whitehead , of
transforming experience that is indeterminate with regard to the way it
will eventually be appropriated into a n i nstrument of judgment or dis
qualification of a n experience. What the statement "I see my child there,
smil i ng at me " i ntends is an experience. Yet a sl ight variation may ma ke
us feel that it is neither the same experience as " my-child-is-smiling-at-me "
nor its truth. Let us imagine that this smile is fi xed, that the child's gaze is
suddenly turned away, or that she suddenly winces. The " I " that was mo
bil ized to turn the smiling child into a privileged case of " i nterpersona l "
relations ( for instance) will then have little chance o f appearing, o r com
ing to reinforce the initial experience, giving it an i nterpretation that
transforms it into an argument or an objection. What happens does not
place the veracity of the experience " my-child- is-smil ing-at-me " i n doubt,
7 2   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




but the capacity of this experience to play the role of a foundation, which
the argument had assigned to it. What happens " passes for truth," but the
content of this truth does not belong to it.
   To attribute to William James the inauguration of a new period in phi
losophy would make us neglect other contemporary influences. In any
case, however, it is still relevant to compare his essay, Does Consciousness
Exist ? , published in 1 904, with The Discourse on Method, published in
1 63 7. James clears the scene of the accessories of the past: more precisely,
he gives the scene a completely new illumination (SMW, 1 4 3 ) .
   I t remains, o f course, t o explore this renewed scene, to construct what
it obl iges us to, and Whitehead will do so later when he will ask not Wi l
liam James but the problem created by Ja mes how to construct the con
cepts imposed by a succession of experiences, each one of which takes
the preceding one for an ingred ient while conferring a meaning upon it.
In no case, however, will the point be to transcend the scene ill uminated
by James toward a higher truth . When Whitehead beca me a metaphysi
cian, conscious experience became a creature of passage, which itself has
become creativity.
                                                               C H A P T ER   FOUR




There It Is Agai n




         AVE WE SUCCEED E D in escaping the bifurcation of nature ? One
           might think so, a nd take the experience induced by Whitehead's
           proposition as a sign of this success .
   The experience of passage, always composite, ceaselessly decomposed ,
in an infinite spectrum of modal ities, exhi biting other characters accord
ing to other standpoints on each occasion. Even a mystic in prayer, whose
experience should exhi bit the most focal ized continuity, is, it is said, unable
to recite a Pater to the end without experiencing a non-negl igible number
of incongruous, parasitical thoughts.
   The experience of letting go, of suspendi ng the a utomatic i nterpreta
tion that makes me attri bute either to an external cause or to a reason of
mine the fact that an experience has passed, that it has de {acto slipped
into the past of a new experience. The passage is neutral, and the slippage
of the present into the past always comes first, ready to be mobi lized in
terms of a ca use or a reason.
   The experience of placing all continuity i n a series, with no term i n the
series having the power to explain this continuity to which it belongs,
even if each one can " explain itself," that is, interpret what it proceeds from
as expl aining what it is.
   An experience with no fixed authority, essentially pathic. It happens, of
fering, if need be, to the activity of knowledge what it req uires to explain
that it happens, the specific character that d i scerns the event perceived
" now." Yet this now must already be said in the past tense, for its mobil i
zation for purposes of explanation conveys a change in standpoint. Inter
pretation prolongs the series.
74   F R O M   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   An experience tha t may have become disconcerti ng, no doubt, but not
opaque, for it does not act as a screen for anything. It has proba bly be
come indeterminate, but it does not lack anything except, of course, for
what is dema nded by its mobi lization in an argument in which it is to act
as proof or foundation.
   In the letting go to which nature incites us, i n its pure, shimmeri ng
mobility, how could one fa i l to experience the sign that we a re indeed
upstrea m of the bifurcation that presented nature to us as colorless, odor
less, and mute ?
  You cannot recognise an event; because when it is gone, it is gone
(eN, 1 6 9 ) .
    A bruta l stoppage. Pure, shi mmering mobility is not enough . The pos
sible seduction of letti ng go which I have j ust del iberately tried to induce,
sought to render percepti ble, for whomever has experienced it and has
been tempted to adhere to it, the ease with which we adhere to what j udges
us. A stra nge hosti lity, so often attested, if only by the history of philoso
phy, towa rd everything that can be suspected of instrumenta l izing the
truth, of staining wha t is pure by interests that are thought to sully it. In
cluding the vile interest of survival, something tha t is hard to conceive in
the pure mobility evoked by the passage of nature.
   Whitehead's project by no means incl udes condemning our multiple
interests or judging our busy, mobilized, greedy consciousnesses in the
name of the nonmobi lizable character of what they nevertheless never cease
to mobil ize. He does not have the project of ma king us forget the mean
ings we never cease a ffi rming with rega rd to nature, in terms of which we
stratify it, but of constructing what they require, wha t is requi red by the
" trust" they presuppose and declare.
   Wh itehead demands that the redness of the sunset find its respondent
in nature, but so must the sun as descri bed by the astronomers and astro
physicists. His concept of nature is not constructed in order to condemn
the possi bility of identifica tion, for this is indeed a part of experience. Of
course, to name the event, duration, the now, he has recourse to the evoca
tive power of language, to the induction of an experience capa ble of turn
ing us away from the strange i dea that words have the power to define
what they designate. Yet to ca ll this power into question does not justify
li miting onesel f to the celebration of a nature that is a lways d i fferent,
from which words di stance us further. Such a celebration, to which the
poetic exa ltation of the event seems at first to invite us, an event that is
never the same, new and ineffa ble each ti me, may satisfy Roma ntic th ink
ers, or those who assign the first priority to defending Being against thei r
busy inspection; but for mathematicians, whose problem is preventing na-
                                                     T H E R E   I T   I S   AGA I N   7 S




ture from bifurcating, it would be a sign of defeat. For the mind would find
itself at the command post, even if this command is mendacious. It would
be responsi ble for the fact that we recognize " the same," whereas one
event is essentially d isti nct from every other event. It would be responsible
for any stability that stratifies the pure mobi lity of nature, the one that
arbitrarily, because nature does not offer it any respondent�arves, fash
ions, distinguishes, categorizes, compa res, and recognizes.
   I use recognition for the non-intellectual relation of sense-awareness
which connects the mind with a factor of nature without passage [ . . . I
I am quite willing to believe [ . . . I that there is in fact no recognition
without intellectual accompaniments of comparison and judgment. But
recognition is that relation of the mind to nature which provides the ma
terial for the intellectual activity ( CN, 1 42 ) .
   Things which we thus recognise I call objects (CN, 1 6 9 ) .
   Objects are the elements i n nature which can "be again " ( CN, 1 44 ) .
   "Say, there it is again." Cleopatra 's Needle, for i nstance, which rises i n
downtown London. What w e are aware of in the perception o f the Nee
dle, a fortiori beca use we can designate it by a name, certainly i mplies
those intellectual faculties k nown as memory and j udgment. No matter
what those terms refer to, moreover, knowledge is ulti mate, that which
the concept of nature must refrain from expla i ning. But if nature is not to
bi furcate, with the mind then being held responsible for everything that
"is again," for everything that acts as a landmark, it must offer a foothold
for memory and j udgment. The concept of nature must include what is
required by the experience of " recognizing Cleopatra's Needle." " O bject"
is the name Whitehead gives to this requisite, which is presupposed by
knowledge but does not explain it.
   The object is a requisite immanent to Whitehead's problem of avoiding
the bifurcation of nature, a nd therefore has nothing to do with a condi
tion guaranteeing the objectivity of knowledge. It is required by compari
son, j udgment, definition, but it ca nnot give anyone the power to estab
lish a hierarchy, a foundation, or a discrimination, and it also takes away
the power to interpret these operations on the basis of a psychological
type of analysis. The Whiteheadian object is neither j udge of our produc
tions nor the product of our j udgments. It thus calls for evocative state
ments, i nd ucing the experience of the contrast between the requi red ob
ject and any objecti ve definition of what is perceived . This ti me, however,
the contrast invol ves the multiplicity of definitions, that is, the diversity
of abstractions exhibited by all definitions.
  Day by day and hour by hour we can find a certain chunk in the transi
tory life of nature and of that chunk we say, "There is Cleopatra 's
76   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




Needle." If we define the Needle in a sufficiently abstract manner we can
say that it never changes. But a physicist who looks on that part of the
life of nature as a dance of electrons, will tell you that daily it has lost
some molecules and gained others, and even the plain man can see that
it gets dirtier and is occasionally washed [ . . . 1 The more abstract your
definition, the more permanent the Needle ( eN, 1 66-1 6 7 ) .
    For the passerby, the Needle is always there, every morning. For the
person in cha rge of London monuments, it is also always there but needs
ma ny more words to be cha racterized , beca use the point is to ensure
i ts good conserva tion a nd decide when it should next be clea ned . Yet
the Needle does not pass, nor do any cracks it may have, nor the soot
whose accumulation is evaluated by the official in charge, any more tha n
do the electrons or molecules of which the physicist knows that the Nee
dle consists. As fa r as the event itself is concerned, or the most concrete
fact that could be attested, for instance, by an artist who a ffirms that the
Needle is never the sa me-that the experience of it is di fferent at each
hour of the day and in every season, escaping words, a pure sensation,
constantly renewed, light, the great noise of the city, the intensive depth of
space-it does not allow the denunciation of the abstraction of the refer
ence to that which does not pass. This abstraction is presupposed by the
testimony, for the artist knows that she is bearing witness as an artist, in
contrast to her own daily experience: it happens to her, too, when she is
passing by, to " recognize the Needle."
    Between the most concrete experience and the various abstractions,
there is no hierarchy for Whi tehead. The artist's perception is not more
a uthentic, it is different; and, what is more, it testifies to a tra ined eye. Nor
is there a nything pa infully paradoxica l about the very fact that, when
testifying that " it" is never the same, she must say " it," implying the stabil
ity that she nevertheless denies. The artist's testimony concerns the experi
ence of a contrast but does not provide weapons to a contrad iction.
    Similarly, it is quite possible that the description of certa in modes of
experience deriving from spiritual techniques may evoke the " pure" pas
sage of nature, and that the way these techniques present themselves may
evoke their own success in terms of purification, or access to a truth which,
i n one way or a nother, transcends the experience of " recognizing." Yet
these very techniques, it should be noted, presuppose the del iberately cul
tivated a nd labored aba ndonment of what they transcend . " Purification,"
a s a demand ing technica l practice, does not give us the power to de
nounce the pa rasites of daily experience. Rather, it incites us to think
a bout the way we experience the event, the multipl icity of these ways and
their possi ble variation.
                                                      T H E R E   I T   I S   A G A I N   7 7




   In fact the character of an event is nothing but the objects which are
ingredient in it and the ways in which those objects make their ingression
into the event. Thus the theory of objects is the theory of the comparison
of events. Events are only comparable because they body forth perma
nences. We are comparing objects in events whenever we can say, " There
it is again " ( CN, 1 43-1 44 ) .
    What w e discern is the character of an event, that birdsong, for in
stance, whereas, of course, other events, and even all of nature, are signi
fied in experience. The event, or the most concrete fact, can be named; but
as soon as we tal k about i t, we are referring to something much more
abstract. Of this song, I can say, "There it is aga i n " ; I can recognize it even
i f I have no words to describe it. But the possibility of recognizing must
belong to the concept of nature; otherwise, the latter would immediately
bifurcate. Knowledge and words do not create a bstraction, but they re
quire the abstraction constituted by the discerned character.
  Recognition and abstraction essentially involve each other. Each of
them exhibits an entity for knowledge which is less than the concrete fact,
but is a real factor in that fact. The most concrete fact capable of separate
discrimination is the event. We cannot abstract without recognition, and
we cannot recognise without abstraction ( CN, 1 8 9-1 90 ) .
   How c a n a concrete fact exhibit entities that a re a bstract compared
to it and nevertheless belong to it? We cannot really say that the object
solves this problem in The Concept of Nature. Instead, it a ffirms i t i n its
genera l i ty, exposing it in the radical cha racter conferred upon i t by the
rejection of the bifurcation of nature. If nature is not to bifurcate, the ques
tion of the object, and therefore of a bstraction, belongs not to knowledge
alone, but to nature. Knowledge can be made responsible for many
things, and in particular for theories that give primacy to a bstraction or
explain it in abstract terms. But it is not responsible for the fact of ab
straction. The latter m ust find its respondent in the concept of nature.
   In The Concept of Nature, knowledge is what is ultimate, and the q ues
tion of the a bstract is therefore merged with that of the object as the req
uisite of knowledge as recognition. Later on, the category of the ultimate
will mutate a long with the problem, and the object we a re aware of will
then d isappear correlatively a s a requisite. Yet the question of abstraction,
for its part, will not disappear. For Whitehead, it cannot d isappear.
   The explanatory purpose of philosophy is often misunderstood. Its
business is to explain the emergence of the more abstract things from the
more concrete things. It is a complete mistake to ask how concrete par
ticu lar fact can be built up out of universals. The answer is, "In no way."
Th e true philosophic question is, How can concrete fact exhibit entities
78   FROM    THE   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




abstract from itself and yet participated in by its own nature? In other
words, philosophy is explanatory of abstraction, and not of concreteness
( PR, 20).
   Could Wh itehead have been unaware that by defining the work of
philosophy i n this way, he was taking his place i n the heritage of what
historians of philosophy have called the " quarrel of universals " ? Was he
familiar with those medieval a uthors who took up again and again, cease
lessly repeating and reinventing it, what imposed itself on some of them
as a d ramatic a lternative bequeathed by their Greek masters ? Those be
ings that we all recognize as " horses," for i nstance: do we recognize them
because they all exhibit a universal , such as horseness ? Is the universal
that which, while remaining i dentical to itself, is i n many things ? Or else,
is it only what is said of many things, thus relative to our utterances and
to the generalizations i n which we i nd ulge ? Does " the Horse," distinct
from every particular horse, refer to being or to our k nowledge ?
   Whitehead never announced any explicit interest in the medieval think
ers. When he cites phi losophical lineages , he often j umps d i rectly from
Plato and Aristotle to Descartes. But this proves nothi ng, for nothing is
more alien to Whitehead than the profession of historian of philosophy.
When he cites a philosopher, it is not at all to d iscuss the correct i nterpre
tation, but, most often, to point out a con nection that he will, as the case
may be, tra nsform i nto a surprising contrast. What is more, he is liable to
shower praise upon the lucidity of an utterance which, withi n the work
in which he captures it, has the status of a semi-i nvolunta ry regret: the
greatness of Descartes, Hume, or Locke may consist i n the fact that, de
spite thei r systems, they were u nable, i n this specific paragraph, to avoid
affirming that . . .
   O nce again, Whitehead is a mathematician: it is the problems that
count, not the a uthors. Nevertheless, it is not poor taste to recall the
Middle Ages here. Although Whitehead does not cite med ieval a uthors
explicitly, he does i nsist amply, in contrast, on the fact that the modern
faith in an ulti mate material reality, bl i nd and bereft of meani ng, agai nst
which he struggles, is i ndicative not of a " progress of reason " but of a n
anti-rational ist movement, playi ng facts agai nst reasons.
   Of course, the historical revolt was fully ;ustified. It answered a need.
More than a need, an absolute necessity for healthy progress. For several
centuries, the world asked to contemplate irreducible and obstinate facts.
It is hard for man to do more than one thing at a time, and that is what they
had to do after the rationalist orgy of the Middle Ages. It was a most normal
reaction, but it was not a protest in the name of reason (SMW, 1 6 ) .
   For Whitehead, the struggle against the bifurcation o f nature is an i n
tegra l part of a new era that closed this revolt, which may have been
                                                       T H E R E   I T   I S   A G A I N   7 9




healthy but was heavy with consequences. For the contemplation of obsti
nate facts will a lso mean that " science repudiates philosophy," and re
mains superbly indifferent to the demonstrations of the philosophers
who have followed one another since Berkeley and Hume, each of them
esta blishing to their own satisfaction the i mpossibility of what science
cla i ms to accomplish-to shed light on the order of nature, on the basis
of obstinate facts. How could one rise back up to an order of things from
particular facts, however numerous they may be? One can only rise back
up to generalizations, which are never a uthorized by the facts and al
ways refer to operations of consciousness ! In other words, the medieval
quarrel is not dead, and it still continues today, particularly with the
quarrel between physicists and sociologists of science. Yet it now opposes
only the proponents of two rival slogans: the " nominalist" slogan gathers
together those for whom all knowledge exceed ing the individual descrip
tion of cases must be assimilated to a more or less convenient, more or less
fruitful convention, always mendacious if it claims " to have made the
facts spea k " ; while the " realist" slogan gathers together those for whom
scientific knowledge, however abstract it may be, must convey what " re
al ity is in itself," on pain of being a vulgar fiction .
    Whether or not Whitehead cites them, the medieval thinkers are i ndeed
present in his work, in the sense that philosophy, as he defines it, must
once again go through the q uestions a bout which they indulged in a " ra 
tionalistic orgy," those questions that the modern period h a d decided to
avoid, only to find them again in the form of watchwords. Indeed , i n The
Concept of Nature, Whitehead seems to me to come close to the man his
contempora ries named the "doctor subtilis," Duns Scotus.
    Subtle indeed was the position of D uns Scotus, who, faced by the alter
native that either " universa l s " are relative to knowledge or else they be
long to real ity, refused to choose. For Scotus, all abstract features that fit
a mul titude of d i fferent i ndividuals, a l l the distinct " quiddities " that al
low me to describe them at di fferent levels of abstraction, do i ndeed
belong to what is descri bed . Yet when I enumerate them and define them
qua attri butes of this individual, I treat them as i f they were actually, that
is, numerically, d istinct ( a horse is an animal, a mammal, a herbivore, an
ungulate . . . ) whereas ontologically they a re only " formally" distinct,
composing the individual as a unique, concrete being. The same is true of
Whiteheadian objects: like the subtle doctor's plurality of " forms," they
a re the " respon dents " of " that wh ich " we recognize, na me, j udge, and
compare: that is, what these operations answer to and also what can even
tua l l y a nswer for them. Yet a lthough they exhibit themsel ves as a bstract
or permanent, they cannot be isolated from the concrete event, which, for
its part, passes without return.
8 0   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The Whitehead ian object may a lso make one think of the signs of
Cha rles Saunders Pei rce, which is rather appropriate since Peirce placed
his underta k ing under the banner of Duns Scotus. Indeed, Peirce's sign is
rea l , although its mea ning requires an interpreter to make it signify. It
i s rea l because the person who interprets does not fashion signs in a mute
or " insign ificant" world : she requires signs in the way Whiteheadian rec
ognition requires objects. Signification is ours, no do ubt, but the fact that
there is a sign liable to signify is not the product of a " psychic add ition "
al ien to what we ca ll reality.
    Nevertheless, Whitehead did not take as his sta rting point either Peirce's
signs or the formally distinct attri butes of D uns Scotus, but what we are
aware of under the name of the " passage of nature." The concrete fact no
longer bea rs the name of an individual, as it did in the Middle Ages, nor
does it evoke the situation of interpretation. It is evoked by the name
"event." In other word s, what ra ises problems is not the contrast between
"this" individua l horse and the abstract composition of attributes that
make a horse in genera l . What is problematic is what we are aware of
while perceiving this individual horse itself: " Say! There it is again! "
    One might think that the question has been ra dica lized , since i t places
the very permanence of the individual i n doubt. But it has also ( appar
ently) become more modest: Whitehead is not seeking either to found or
to oppose a bstract knowledge on the basis of what an individual allows
us to know. He asks that nature, what we a re aware of, be conceived as
liable to deliver to the mind what the possibility of a bstraction requi res,
what is required by the indefinite set of abstractions already required when
we recognize this horse. Or when we recognize ourselves in the bathroom
mirror every morning.
   Our body itself is the palmary instance of the ambiguous. Sometimes I
treat my body purely as a part of outer nature. Sometimes, again, I think
of it as " mine," I sort it with the " me," and then certain local changes and
determinations in it pass for spiritual happenings ( PAf� 1 5 3 ) .
  Whitehead would retranslate this uttera nce b y Wi lliam James by d istin
guishing the body I recognize- " There it is again, what bags under the
eyes this morning! "-and bodily life as a factor of experience, that is, in
sofar as the percipient event is " bod ily l i fe within the present d uration."
I will never exclaim " Say, there I am again " with regard to the percipient
event, and if an event must be said to be spiritual , it is not in the sense that
the spi rit is said to be opposed to the body, but in the sense in which the
event is opposed to any confusion between the bodily life that passes and
what is there once again as an object. Whitehead would thus adopt the
ambiguity underlined by James, to tra nsform it into a "generality " : every
                                                     T H E R E   I T   I S   AG A I N   8 1




experience is ambiguous, and if the body wins the palm of ambiguity, it is
because it brings a bout the coexistence, with the same intensity, of two
moda lities of experience which, when it comes to nature, a re cultivated in
divergent specialized ways. On the one hand, there is objecti ve nature,
stratified into objects about which we ask ourselves " a bstract" questions,
and on the other " spi ritua l " nature, multiple pa ssages in unison .
   What could be more "spiritua l " than the expression of a face ? You avoid
my gaze, and I become disillusion and bitterness, a plaintive cry to the pos
sible as it fades away. But we are a lso genuine prodigies, acrobats in the
field of recognizing faces: "It's him, it really is him, I recognize him." The
way the technique of robot-portraits has evolved, seeking to capture in an
analytic way the " what" of recognition, gives a good indication that a face
is not the sum of a nose, a mouth, a chin, on so on, but a set of stable rela
tions " between " these features. All these relations imply this face, to whose
description the features seem to lead. Unlike our body, the face of the other
wins the prize not for ambiguity but for the most extreme twofold special
ization: it is the paradigmatic object, and it is a lso the expression of a pos
sible world, a world with which we become in unison.
   How can we articulate these disti nct components of what we are aware
of in perception, without opposing them or placing them in a hierarchy?
For Whitehead, every question begins with a name, the name of the prob
lem that is to be constructed . We have already encountered the name of
our problem at the turn of a phrase: " i ngression ."
  The ingression of an ob;ect into an event is the way the character of the
event shapes itself in virtue of the being of the ob;ect. Namely the event is
what it is, because the ob;ect is what it is; and when I am thinking of this
modification of the event by the ob;ect, I call the relation between the
two "the ingression of the object into the event." It is equally true to say
that ob;ects are what they are because events are what they are. Nature is
such that there can be no events and no ob;ects without the ingression of
ob;ects into events ( eN, 1 44 ) .
   A pseudo-definition, if ever there was one: the event i s what it i s because
the object is what it is, and objects are what they are because events are
what they are. Yet this pseudo-definition simultaneously prohi bits and
incites.
   It prohi bits us from waiting, hoping for, or anticipating conditions that
expl a i n why and how an object can perform ingression into a n event.
Objects and events are i n strict reciproca l presupposition, and one cannot,
in a l l generality, ask for more. It is not because the event is more concrete
that it has the power to explain the object. To attribute this power to it
would be to suppose that one can start out from the " pure" event or from
8 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




the "pure passage of nature " to then ask how, from what is never re
peated , there ca n emerge what, in one way or another, we are aware of i n
the mode o f "once again." A t the risk-and nature would obviously take
advantage of the opportunity to bifurcate-{)f usi ng the answer to this
question to sort between what truly belongs to nature and everything else,
the prod uct of psychic additions.
  In contrast, we are incited to pay attention to the diversity of the objects
gathered together by this common feature, "There it is again. "
  Ingression is a relation which has various modes. There are obviously
very various kinds of ob;ects; and no 011e kind of ob;ect can have the same
sort of relations to events as ob;ects of another kind can have ( eN, 1 4 5 ) .
    That birdsong I recognize, even i f I have n o words t o describe i t , has
carried out a n i ngression. I don't k now where the bird is, I don't even
k now if there is a bird-it could be a human i mitator or else a recordi ng.
I don't ask myself the question, because I am busy writi ng a text, not on
the watch, living a n adventure i n which the bird 's song might mean the
presence of all ies or of menacing intruders . If I had been an ornithologist
lying in wait, able to relate the bird's song to the songbi rd I a m trying to
locate, if I had had the experience not of a birdsong but of the i mmedi
a tely recognizable cooing of a dove, my experience would have been
d i fferent. " What I would have been aware of" would have exhibited the
song as a characteristic feature, signaling the presence of such a bird,
whether rare or unexceptiona l . The event would have declared the bird's
permanence, it would have signified the physical presence of that dove,
there, somewhere in tha t tree. Perhaps I would have approached the tree
to carry out a verification and a comparison. Here, I have continued to
type on the machine, without the song making my experience of writing
shift into another one, dominated by the " there" of the bird, by its localiza
tion in the la ndscape.
    The song has made ingression as a sense-object, i n this case a sound .
The bird can be there, on the branch, but the bird 's song, as a sound, is not
" there " in the same sense. One can say "there it is " ( aga i n ) of any object,
but when it comes to a birdsong, to say "there it is " does not at all mean
it is " out there." The respecti ve ways i n which the song and the bird make
i ngression a re thus d i fferent.
    The contrast upon which my exa mple is intended to attract attention
deals with what Whitehead calls " relation of situation," and more precisely
with the plurality of relations of situations. What we are aware of in the
respecti ve perception of the song as a sound, and of the song as indicat
ing the bird's presence, "situates " these two types of object differently
with regard to the event that is their situation, the event in which they
                                                      T H E R E   I T   I S   A G A I N   8 3




make ingression. And this d ifference matters, for it opposes the general
ideal of " loca l ization." In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead was
to speak of loca lization in terms of misplaced concreteness. Local ization
responds to an " abstract " question, demanding the a bstraction consti
tuted by space, and this question may of course be fruitful, but it cannot
under any ci rcumstances relegate to appeara nces the concrete plural ity of
the " theres " designated by the " situation."
   In discussing the relations of situation in particular and of ingression
in general, the first requisite is to note that objects are of radically different
types. For each type " situation " and " ingression " have their own special
meanings which are different from their meanings for other types, though
connexions can be pointed out ( eN, 1 48 ) .
   A plurality of objects, such i s the fi rst requisite i mmanent to White
head 's problem , to the imperative of avoiding the bifurcation of nature,
and in this case, avoiding the kind of opposition on which the i ntel lectual
activities represented by discrimi nation, comparison, or j udgment under
take to base their pretensions. Sound, color, odor, in short, what White
head ca lls " sense-objects," would then be opposed to " scientific objects,"
for i nstance, those molecules whose overall behavior explains the propa
gation of what we perceive as sound (at least in principle, for the matter
is not simple ) . At the risk that this opposition between "secondary " quali
ties, referred to the inti mate experience of the percipient subject, and
"objecti ve nature " may be complicated by the question of what White
head was to call " perceptual objects," for instance, that singing bird, there,
on its branch.
   To affirm " sense," " perceptual," and " scientific" objects at the same time
is to refuse any principle of sorting. I know it is this bi rd that is singing:
what I am aware of not only declares itself as a succession of sounds but
as a " song," and this song is produced by a living being, not by a material
bod y vi brati ng, and this bei ng also i nha bits this worl d in which I am;
I perceive it qua declaring that I am not alone i n it. I am a part of the
world of this being, as it is a part of mine. The poet who celebrates the
bi rd 's song, and the world this song celebrates, are not wrong. And
ethologists testify aga inst the bifurcation of nature when they trust their
experience and seek to exhibit the meaning of the song for the bird, a call
to its female or a territorial announcement " this is my tree. "
   There are, I think, an indefinite number of types of objects. Happily
we need not think of them all. The idea of situation has its peculiar im
p ortance in reference to three types of objects which I call sense-objects,
perceptual objects and scientific objects [ . . . J These three types form an
ascending hierarchy, of which each member presupposes the type below.
8 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




The base of the hierarchy is formed by the sense-ob;ects. These ob;ects do
not presuppose any other type of ob;ects ( CN, 1 4 9 ) .
   Plurality as the " ultimate fact" o f nature, o f what are aware of in per
ception, might thus communicate with a hierarchy. Yet could this be so
without making nature bifurcate ? Certainly, as long as this hierarchy is
of a " logical " type, that is, is pragmatic as wel l . If it is appropriate to dif
ferentiate and articulate sense, perceptual, and scientific objects in a hier
archical way, it will be in the biased and partia l way suggested by the
very different ways in which we have to do with them from the viewpoint
of the situation, that is, the very different ways in which objects can be said
to be " there." In other words, the hierarchy does not concern " what we are
aware of in perception," but it answers the logical question of the di ffer
ent, and abstract, meanings presupposed by our modes of characterizing
what we discern . This hierarchy will have to enable the articulation of
what every critical doctrine leads us to oppose, beginning with the doc
trine according to which everything that " really exists " is localized in
space and time. It will therefore constitute the a rena i n which the plural
ity of requisites will accept the risk of a d i rect confrontation with critical
thought, both the one that summons us to recognize that the singing bird
is never anything but a n inference constructed from perceptual " facts,"
and the one that summons us to forget the bird, the sound, and the color
in favor of "scientific " molecules in their stupid interaction. Nor should
this confrontation itself result in a critique of criticism, but in a new con
struction of requisites. What every form of critical thought privi leges uni
laterally must also have a " respondent " i n nature, i f the plurality of signi
fications and a nticipations we associate with an object is not to be the
result of psychic additions. Critical thought, when it succeeds i n paying
due attention to nature, can also find " more" in it.
                                                                   C H A P TE R   FI VE




Attention to Objects




              H IT E H E A D NE VE R T I RE S of emphasizing that a sense-object is
              not an attribute or a property. We cannot solve the problem
              by returning, short of bifurcation, to the quiet world of utter
ances of an Aristotelian type, a ffi rm ing a plural ity of existents endowed
with properties: the bird " is " a songbi rd, song is attri buted to the bird .
Yet neither must w e disqualify the operations of the attributive i ntel lect,
defendi ng the " pure" sonorous song against the busy activity of the per
son seeking to identify the bird that is responsible for it. Nor, moreover,
are we to defend the bird as a living source, actively conditioning the
song, against questions addressed to the modes of vibration of the air and
their propagation. The point is, first, for us to remember that the song,
like everything we are aware of, signifies the totality of nature into which
it makes i ngression. Even when we are aware of a vibrating sound in its
haughty, sol itary singularity, this sound is situated , is in a relation of situ
ation . Nor is it enough to say that hearing a birdsong pres upposes a rela
tive situation between the " there" where it is emitted and the " here" of the
percipient event, a two-term relation. If the sonorous object has a singu
larity, it is precisely the i rred ucibil ity of its situation to a ny local ization.
This is wel l known to those who build concert halls. Whatever the hall,
the musician will be inside it, but the sound , for its part, will testify to a
sonorous quality that is nowhere in particular.
   It is not, therefore, because of a fundamental simplicity that Whitehead
places the sense-object at the base of his hierarchy, but because the way
th is object makes ingression into nature does not req uire us to identify its
source, or its function, or what it relates to. It is an obj ect-there it is
8 6   F R O M   THE   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NATURE   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




again-it does not, as such, take part in the passage of nature, and it is
not itself-unl i ke the blackbird there on that branch, who is singing, a
sma ll black sil houette with a yellow bea k and a shining eye-a relation
among other factors of nature.
  [ . . . 1 A particular sort of colour, say Cambridge blue, or a particular
sort of sound, or a particular sort of smell, or a particular sort of feeling.
I am not talking of a particular patch of blue as seen during a particular
second of time at a definite date. Such a patch is an event where Cam
bridge blue is situated. Similarly I am not talking of any particular
concert-room as filled with the note. I mean the note itself and not the
patch of volume filled by the sound for a tenth of a second. It is natural
for us to think of the note in itself, but in the case of colour we are apt to
think of it merely as a property of the patch. No one thinks of the note as
a property of the concert-room ( CN, 1 4 9 ) .
   Why is the mention of a musical note o r of a birdsong more effective
in slowing down the al most automatic movement that lea ds us, when it
comes to color, to make it the property, for instance, of a piece of cloth?
We shall attribute to the a rtist's interest and training the possibil ity of
seeing " bl ue" where others see a flannel coat that happens to be blue. But
we shall also attri bute to the piano tuner's interest and training the pos
sibility of turning a specific sound into the property of a chord that is
more or less tightly stretched. Or to the interest and training of the con
noisseur in architecture the abil ity to turn it into a property of the room
in which the note resounds. For Whitehea d, the q uestion cannot concern
a difference between sense-objects. This d ifference designates our prac
tices, including those that are stabil ized by what we ca ll " sense orga ns."
And in fact, while the literature is filled with cases of " optica l illusions,"
exhibiting the deceptive d ifferences between " what" one sees and " what
is there to be seen," one spea ks rather of " sound effects," as if the possi
ble unrel iability of " what" one hears, as compa red to " what is emitted "
or produced in a n identifiable way, caused us fewer problems.
   Correlatively, i f objects a s d i fferent as a bird, Cleopatra 's Needle, or a
" Cambridge-blue" -colored flannel coat are gathered under the common
category of perceptua l object, it is beca use they ra ise, for their part, a
common problem that is not raised by the sense-object: the pragmatic
problem conveyed by the q uestion of whether a given perceptual object
is " i ll usory," for instance, as a reflection in a mi rror, or whether it is an
" active condition " i n the ingression of the sense-obj ects we perceive.
   In general the situation is an active conditioning event; namely the coat
itself, when there is no mirror or other such contrivance to produce ab
normal effects. But the example of the mirror shows us that the situation
                                               ATT E N T I O N   TO   OBJE CTS   8 7




may be one of the passive conditioning events. We are then apt to say
that our senses have been cheated because we demand as a right that the
situation should be an active condition in the ingression ( CN, 1 5 3 ) .
   Once again, the hierarchy among events has nothing to d o with a ques
tion of value, whether aesthetic or epistemological . It exhibits the diver
sity of materials required by our j udgments, our compa risons, a nd our
discernments i f the practices to which they respond a re to confirm the
trust that by paying due attention we will find more in nature than what
we observe at first glance. In this case, whereas the empiricist tribunal
has the vocation of pursuing all claims to find i n nature anything other
than " what " we perceive-that is, aga i n and aga i n sense-objects-the
concept of nature constructed by Whi tehead is not to found or to guar
antee this claim but to provide it with a respondent that constitutes it as
a legitimate ri sk. As legitimate as the risk taken by a mountain-climber
whose foot seeks the foothold it needs on the rock-face.
   It is a law of nature that in general the situation of a sense-object is not
only the situation of that sense-object for one definite percipient event,
but is the situation of a variety of sense-objects for a variety of percipient
events [ . . . 1 Furthermore this concurrence in the situations of sense
objects has led to the body-i.e., the percipient event-so adapting itself
that the perception of one sense-object in a certain situation leads to a
subconscious sense-awareness of other sense-objects in the same situa
tion. This interplay is especially the case between touch and sight. There
is a certain correlation between the ingressions of sense-objects of touch
and sense-objects of sight into nature [ . . . 1 I call this sort of correla
tion the " conveyance " of one sense-object by another. When you see the
blue flannel coat you subconsciously feel yourself wearing it or other
wise touching it [ . . . 1 The perceptual object is not primarily the issue
of a judgment. It is a factor of nature directly posited in sense-awareness
( CN, 1 54-1 5 5 ) .
    I see this " Cambridge-blue" coat, but the words that make blue an at
tri bute of the flannel do not state what I am aware of. They make my
perception communicate with a judgment about which q uestions of exac
titude could be raised-no, it's a jacket-or of legitimacy-what you call
a coat is only a blue patch; it could, moreover, be a hologram. It may be a
jacket, and nothing guarantees that it is not a hologram, but what I am
aware of in my perception of this blue fla nnel coat did not have m uch to
do with these q uestions, except for pa rticular circumstances. The blue
conveyed the touch of the cloth, a gentle sensation of flannel, the supple
fluidity of the d raping on my body, the comfortable warmth of the wool.
Not the a bstract possi bility of touching it, feeling it, wearing it, in case my
8 8     F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




j udgment is legitimate, but the very sensation of touching it, wearing it,
feel ing the folds of the wool accompany the motion of my body. And i f
m y trusting fingers encountered only the void, my shocked surprise would
testify to the fact that the point was not to veri fy, but to prolong. A brutal
interruption: the hologram was perfect, and the trust that was declared i n
the correlations conveyed b y the visual object has been disappoi nted.
   One may be tempted to j udge that this correlation, which Whitehead
na mes conveyance, is quite incapable of j ustifying the coat's " objective "
existence. However, the experience of worry, admiration, or amusement,
according to the situation, that occurs if my hand encounters the voi d
where I had seen a blue coat bea rs witness: the mode of ingression of the
" blue flannel coat" into the event declares itself to be di fferent from that
of blue. The perceptual object is what is requi red by this difference, what
is demanded by this experience whose declared meaning is cal led seeing
a-bl ue-coat, the experience exhibiting the coat as a n object.
   Yet one ca n still insist: would nature bifurcate if we made conveyance
a " psychic addition " ? Whitehead himsel f, moreover, writes as follows:
      The perceptual object is the outcome of the habit of experience
( eN, 1 55 ) .
   That the blue coat results from a habit seems to bring u s straight back
to the empi ricist tribuna l : conveyance is a mere habit, what we add, as a
result of past associations, to visua l perception. Shocked surprise is merely
disappointed habit.
   But why shou ld we say " merely," as if habit did not need a respondent,
as if it did not itsel f exhi bit a " fact of nature," its existence testifying to
its usual veri fication ? Habit presupposes a world in which a sense-object
often signifies a perceptual object: it indicates a wager concerning such
a world, and is not added to it like a fiction for which the mind alone
would be responsible. At the limit, the problem is reversed : why are there
sense organs if what is discerned has as its respondent only the shimmer
ing, noisemaking, a nd odor-emission of a nature in which no situation is
an active condition for anything at all ? Even if we speak of an " aggres
sive bl ue," no one dies from it, but the l ittle match girl, for her part, fed
only by the fumes of the Christmas feast, died of hunger.
   Habit thus testifies to nature, j ust as the existence of a mountain climber
testifies to the fact that in general, the side of a mountain offers reliable
footholds. Of course, habit corresponds to a risk with no guarantee, to a
" law of nature " that is only valid " i n general," but it cannot be questioned
by an intellectual judgment that makes it " merely a habit." Quite the con
trary, it is the fact that the habit does, most often, pay off that must be
affirmed by the concept of nature. And it is this fact that is the requisite of
the intel lectual j udgment providing it with its materi al: after all, when
                                               ATTE N T I O N   TO   O BJ E C TS   89




j udgment is not transformed i nto a tri bunal, demanding i n a maniacal
and systematic way guara ntees that habit is quite unable to provide, it
typically intervenes when habit is disappointed, together with what we
call " interpreti ng," " trying to understand," or " taking a closer look." Cor
relatively, one can descri be disappoi ntment but not a satisfied habit. The
maniacal tri bunal is always a simulation, tacitly accepting an entire tissue
of trusts a nd habits to stage an eventual disappoi ntment, which it would
not even have words to designate without the tissue itself.
    Some wo rks dea l i ng with the etho logy of newborns provide quite
a ppropriate nourishment for Whitehead 's thesis, more precisely the dis
ti nction between " habits of experience " and their empiricist translation
" habits constructed by the s ubject on the basis of her experience." D aniel
Stern claims that a newborn's sense-experience may be tra nsmodal or
amodal, with one " sense-object " always conveying another, whereas the
experience of the senses as distinct ( seeing is not touchi ng, touching is
not tasting, etc . ) does not come unti l later. Indeed, among other objects
of various forms, a newborn visually " recognizes " ( preferentially fixes her
gaze upo n ) an object she has felt without having seen it. In other words,
i f there is a habit when we sense the possibility of a " soft touch " at the
sight of a " blue flannel coat," this habit is not constructed on the basis of
experience, but is i ndeed a habit of experience.
    The conveyance of some sense-objects by others might one day, of
course, be given neurophysiological descriptions. It would be miraculous
i f it did not, and if the neuronal processes that accompany " seeing blue"
were not themsel ves accompanied by activities " elsewhere " i n the bra i n,
perhaps a k i n to the experience of " touching" or even " tasting." The cru
cial point is that conveyance does not explain the perceptual object, but
celebrates it as a " factor of nature." The fact that the situations of disti nct
sense-objects concur, or co-occur in a regular way, which relates them to
the same object as their active condition, is the ultimate fact that the
habit of experience i ndicates and exploits.
    Whereas the sense-object can only be a term i n a relation, the perceptual
object is that which exhibits a relation whose terms a re sense-objects. It is
this ultimate fact of nature that is ratified by the attri butive j udgment,
which makes every sense-object the property or attribute of a perceptual
object. A ratification which, because it transforms what is a requisite i nto a
right, takes on a certain exaggeration. It is as if the fact that the slopes of a
mountain usually provide rel iable footholds were established as a property
defini ng the mountain. Whitehead often comments on i ntel lectual ab
stractions i n this way: it is not that they are false, but they a re somewhat
exaggerated in thei r claims. Even the i dentification of sense-objects with
the terms of a relation is a bit exaggerated . This leaf is green: so be it. But
9 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO P H Y   OF   N ATU R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




at the same time as my experience exhibits the materials of this intel lec
tual judgment, a mass of disti nct or indistinct sounds, odors, and varia
tions in ambient luminosi ty ha unt my concrete experience. A sudden si
lence, and " nature falls silent " : it is terri fying, even i f the thousand noises
of nature that have j ust fa l len silent did not declare their source. But I
also know that multiple smells that I do not recognize, whose active
cond ition I cannot loca lize, are the ma teri a l required by the dog's pas
siona te activi ty, without which he would be a poor, bewi ldered thing.
And I a l so know that the rhythm impressed upon the female spider's
web by the ma le spider who ventures upon i t to copulate corresponds
to a crucial sense-object, which must turn the mode of exi stence of she
who experiences i t u pside down, ma king her change from predator to
fema le: a trust that constitutes the male, and is most often legitimate, but
only most often.
   Sense-objects, in their i ndefinite multi plicity, are so many signs, a lim
ited number of which exhibit a meaning for a living being, a l ways a spe
cific living being, and a mong these, some, in an even more limited num
ber, exhibit themselves as condi tioned by an object of another type, by a
perceptual object. Are they rea lly such ? Whereas many li ving bei ngs are
incapa ble of not letti ng themselves be fooled by appeara nces, as is at
tested by the ease with which ethologists can identify the habits of their
specific experiences by setti ng lures for them, humans know they can be
wrong. To this knowledge corresponds the possibi l i ty of doubting, bei ng
wary, that is, the trust that by experi menting, by taking a closer look, one
wi ll know whether one ca n trust: in particular, one will know whether
the object is illusory or not. Whitehead calls what has emerged victorious
from this trial a " physical object." The si tuation, the " there " of the sense
object, has been confirmed as the situation of a physical object: the situ
ation of the sense-obj ect was indeed indicative of the active condition for
the ingression of this sense-obj ect. It was indeed a coat, it is blue, and not
white but bathed i n a blue light, I can touch it, I can mani pulate it, my
suspicions are a ppeased, and my criteria are sati sfied . " Substantialist"
philosophers rati fy this with some exaggeration when they make sense
objects the attributes or properties of physical objects.
  There is a great difference in the roles of the situations of sense-objects
and physical objects. The situations of a physical object are conditioned
by uniqueness and continuity (eN, 1 5 7 ) .
   To recognize a coat, placed immobile o n a chair, a leaping tiger, o r an iri
descent, precarious soap bubble . . . in three seconds, the coat wil l sti ll be
there, the tiger may have killed me, and there wil l-be no more soap bubble.
And yet there exists a duration short enough for the tiger to be said to be
" there where it is " : the uniqueness of the situation. And there exists a
                                                 ATTE N T I O N   TO   OBJECTS   9 1




passage of events, a passage of nature, such that I recognize the same
bubble situated in distinct events, such that the bubble belongs simultane
ously to my past and to the experience that has j ust slipped into the past:
continuity in passage.
   Uniqueness and conti nuity are what is usually attributed to a " sub
stance," or to that which, as soon as nature bifurcates, is assigned to what
is " really there," " local izable," as opposed to what depends on the subject.
Uniqueness and continuity are also what is required by the extremely so
phisticated operation that leads us to " locate " an object, to define it by
assigning to it a posi tion in an insta nt. The relative confidence we can
have in our attributions and our definitions bea rs witness to uniqueness
and continuity as factors of nature, but these are prerequisites, what these
operations take advantage of, at their risks and perils, as mountain cli mb
ers take advantage of wha t offers them a foothold. As for the notions of
space a nd time, on the basis of which we transform into a right the pos
sibility of locating an obj ect i n reality, since we demand of an object " if it
really belongs to nature" that ideally it should be at a determinate point at
each i nstant, they do not by a ny means render explicit what we are aware
of, but only what conditions our definitions. They testi fy, first, to the fact
that science and philosophy take their abstractions too seriously. In par
ticular, they reduce the question of ingression to that of si tuation.
   Science and philosophy have been apt to entangle themselves in a simple
minded theory that an object is at one place at any definite time, and is
in no sense anywhere else. This is in fact the attitude of common sense
thought, though it is not the attitude of language which is naively express
ing the facts of experience. Every other sentence in a work of literature
which is endeavouring truly to interpret the facts of experience expresses
differences in surrounding events due to the presence of some object. An
object is ingredient throughout its neighbourhood, and its neighbourhood
is indefinite [ . . . 1 we are driven to admit that each object is in some sense
ingredient throughout nature; though its ingression may be quantitatively
irrelevant in the expression of our individual experiences (eN, 1 4 5 ) .
   In The Concept o f Nature, Whi tehead w i l l m a k e n o other a l l usion to
literature as a testi mony that is at least as rel ia ble as science, as fa r as the
general problem of ingression is concerned . Here, however, the a l l usion
suffices. It evokes what we could so easily forget when we limit ourselves
to the situations that have i nspi red the bifurcation of nature. When we
deal with bi rdsongs, or with birds perched on branches, we forget that
what we are aware of i n perception can also be ca lled "presence."
   Who could ever define i n l i mitative terms the multiple ways in which
the sudden presence of my neighbor in this room, where I was working
alone wi th Whitehead, modi fies my experience ? In any case, the ingression
9 2   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




transforms my experience, which is no longer primarily in this room, alone
in front of this screen . Correlatively, far from being there in the doorway,
and therefore located relative to me, my neighbor, smiling or annoyed,
friend ly or hurried, is first of all a presence that de-localizes me and signi
fies a world from which I have suddenly ceased to be protected .
   Presence is not a simple matter of psychology, making the mind inter
vene as a responsible promoter. Quite the contrary, if we can believe stud ies
of the ethology of newborns, it is what we call " psychology " that requires
this experience of presence. According to Daniel Stern, a newborn, wel l
before memory or operations of intel lectual judgment can be attri buted
to her, " reacts " in differentiated affective modes to the facial features pre
sented to her. As if the features of faceness were the pri mord ial requisite
for human young to construct the twofold correlative emergence that
will make them human bei ngs, endowed with what we call a " psychol
ogy " : that of a sense of sel f, and that of a sense of others, not as " there "
but as " present." Of course, " presence," like perceptual objects, might then
result from a habit of experience, but there would be nothing " merely
psychological " about this habit, which would define what is requi red by
what we call psychology : what must become an important factor of ex
perience for human young, on pain of death, if not biological then at
least affective.
   " Presence," of which we cannot give an abstract definition, woul d thus
be the requisite for sophisticated intel lectual operations, which, as the
case may be, will end up denying what they take advantage of: what pro
vides a foothold for the mind in nature.
   This kind of hypothesis would have i nterested Whitehead all the more
in that the infant's testimony with respect to what, for her, as early as her
first weeks, constitutes a smiling-human-face, seems to exhibit what he
ca lls an "object in the complete sense." In the infant's experience, the
i ngression of a smil i ng face must no doubt be said to be "a specific set of
correlated mod ifications of the characters of all events," whose center is
designated by the situated smile.
   An object of one of these types has relations to events other than those
belonging to the stream of its situations. The fact of its situations within
this stream has impressed on all other events certain modifications of their
characters. In truth the object in its completeness may be conceived as a
specific set of correlated modifications of the characters of all events, with
the property that these modifications attain to a certain focal property for
those events which belong to the stream of its situations [ . . . 1 The con
ventional limitation of the object to the focal stream of e vents in which it
is said to be "situated " is convenient for some purposes, but it obscures
                                                 ATT E N T I O N   TO   O BJ E CTS   9 3




the ultimate fact of nature. From this point of view the antithesis between
action at a distance and action by transmission is meaningless. The doc
trine of this paragraph is nothing else than another way of expressing the
unresolvable multiple relation of an object to events ( eN, 1 8 9-1 90 ) .
   Soon, i n Science and the Modern World, Whitehead was t o listen to the
poets testifying to the somber a nd heavy presence of the a ncient hills. Of
the hill, the poet does not say " there it is agai n," but " it's sti ll there." The
continuity of the perceptual object will then have become endurance, an
end urance we can be aware of in a way that exhibits the communication
between perception and a ffect, that gives meaning to a "complete fact "
exceed ing the definition of the hill as a geographical or geological entity.
    In The Concept of Nature, however, Whitehead will ask so-cal led scien
tific objects to testi fy to the ultimate fact of nature, which is obscured by
the conventional construction of a well-defined identity of the situated
object. No doubt we can see in this a reflection of the li mits of the prob
lem that Whitehead has set for himself in this book: to construct the "con
cept of nature " against the threat of a bifurcation of that nature. For a
mathematician, the limit of a problem is neither a weakness nor a defect.
What is a weakness or a defect is to forget that limit: to forget that a prob
lem has a price, to forget that the concepts created respond to a question,
not to a vision.
                                                                C H A P TER   S I X




The I ngress ion of Scientific Objects




         E RE , THE CONSTRUCT I ON of the concept of nature must con
           front the risk of bifurcation, for nature, " what we are aware of
           i n perception," wi l l become populated by " objects " that declare
themselves to be " independent of the perci pient event " ; those very ones
that, as the case may be, will be evoked to " explai n perception." El ectro
magnetic radiation would constitute the objective explanation for what
you are subjectively awa re of as " red ." To dea l sepa rately with the ques
tion of the mode of i ngression of scientific objects does not mean to con
fer upon them a " fundamenta l " character: the singing bird or the leaping
tiger are j ust as important. Once again, what is at sta ke is not to explain
everyth i ng we are aware of. In this case, a s we remember Whitehead has
emphasized , i ngression should be decli ned according to a n i ndefinite
number of disti nct modes, all of which exhibit multiple relations . The
discrimi nation between the three types of mode, correspond i ng to sense
objects, perceptual, and scientific obj ects, responds to the need to prevent
nature from bifurcating. The goal will be to show that " scientific ob
j ects," far from designating a nature that is " i ndependent of perception,"
imply, like sense-objects and perceptual objects, that nature has "given a
foothol d " to the mind. They too thus belong to nature, as respondents to
this foothold that refer to the mind, which is what is ultimate.
    By the time Whitehead undertook to think of " scientific objects," the
point was no longer merely to articulate with the concept of nature state
ments expl icating the regula rities proper to observable phenomena.
Physics and chemistry have succeeded i n transgressing the li mits that tied
them to the genera l izations articulating measurable factors ( pressure,
                          T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E NT I F I C   O BJ E CTS   9 S




temperature, and so on) in various roles. These sciences actual ly identi
fied, beyond the phenomena, the " ti ny bod ies " supposed for centuries
by the bi furcators of nature, but which others denounced as the perfect
exa mple of d ubious speculative constructions, menaci ng the rationa l
identity of the scientific enterprise. But Whitehead is happy to accept this
event. He who was trying to construct a concept of nature a ffirming what
we a re awa re of i n perception did not ha rbor a ny nosta lgia toward what
rema ined possible until the end of the ni neteenth century : to assign l i mits
to scientific descri ptions that a ffirm the i ndisputable pri macy of what we
are directly aware of, what we can observe and measure.
    Physicists and chemists, it is said, have succeeded in " going beyond the
phenomena," but this expression has many meanings. There is one that
Whitehead would rej ect: identifying the phenomenon with what is i llu
sory. Thus, when astronomers ma ke fun of astrologers, they oppose the
constellations, " appearances " on which the astrologers have relied, to their
knowledge that constel lations designa te groups of stars tha t a re com
pletely unconnected, some of them close, others very far away. The group
exists only for inhabitants of the ea rth, for only the terrestrial viewpoint
can thus unite stars that do not have the least privileged relationship
among themselves. However, this opposition is polemical, in that it rests
enti rely on an abstract resemblance: astronomers, like astrologers, con
template the heavens. But the astronomers' heaven is " scientific," insofar
as they are interested in the luminous points they observe in a mode that
defines them as " physical obj ects," that is, playing the role of active condi
tions for the emission of light. The astronomical tradition has d iverged
from astrological practice, insofar as it has devoted itself to discovering
what attention is d ue to these physical objects, how one " finds more" in a
sky which, by this very fact, finds itself practically defined as bereft of any
other meaning.
    It is also on the basis of the attention devoted to what has a role, to
what actually plays the role of active condition for the ingression of ( mea
surable) sense-objects, that the difference can be stated between the elec
trons, atoms, and molecules that henceforth populate physics, and the
atoms of ancient hypotheses. Physicists and chemists have thought of the
atom, and other unobservable entities, as actors, that is, on the basis of
their roles in " events " (collisions, chemical a ssocia tions, emissions, de
compositions, and so on), and they have conferred upon these events the
hypothetical role of "situations," the active conditions of certain experimen
ta l observations. Their success means that these hypotheses have allowed
them to " find more," that is, to produce specific experimental situations in
which a precise and " falsifiable" reference to those unobservable actors is
9 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




necessary to explain what can be observed . This is the pa rad igmatic ex
peri mental achievement. The experimenter is now in a position to affirm
that atoms are not a mere interpretative hypothesis, since no one can in
terpret what she has observed without recourse to them: they are the re
spondents to which the di fference between an interpretative hypothesis
and a fruitful hypothesis refers.
   Whi tehead can thus serenely celebrate the atoms of the physicists a nd
chemists because they have nothing to do with the " tiny bodies " associ
ated with the bifurcation of na ture. These a toms are by no means active
participants in an operation of distribution between what pertains to " us "
a n d what pertains t o nature. They a r e a response t o the kind of attention
associated with the experimental effort. " Going beyond the phenomena,"
here, does not at all mean going " beyond " secondary qua l i ties towa rd a
nature " i ndependent" of our perceptions; it is to prolong the test al ready
pointed out by the d istinction between perceptual object and physical
object. It is not merely a matter of verifying, like a ra bbit turning its head
in the di rection of a noise, the conveyance " noise-movement of a preda
tor," but of explaining the multi ple signi fications that can be assumed by
the term " active condition." Nor is it a matter of l i miting onesel f to mul
tiplying experi mental regularities and to defining the d istinct roles of
each measurable factor that plays a part in the corresponding situations
as active cond itions for observation. The scientific object responds to an
additional achievement: these " roles " no longer respond only to the first
experimental question " What 's going on? " They can a lso be related to
the presence of " objects " which, for their part, do not pass.
   The origin of scientific knowledge is the endeavour to express in terms
of physical objects the various roles of events as active conditions in the
ingression of sense-objects into nature. It is in the progress of this investi
gation that scientific objects emerge. They embody those aspects of the
character of the situations of the physical objects which are most perma
nent and are expressible without reference to a multiple relation including
a percipient event [ . . . I In fact the whole point of the search for scientific
objects is the endeavour to obtain this simple expression of the charac
ters of events. These scientific objects are not themselves merely formu
lae for calculation; because formulae must refer to things in nature, and
the scientific objects are the things in nature to which the formulae refer
( eN, 1 5 8 ) .
   The question o f the active condition is central, both for the scientific
undertaking and for living beings. If nature were made up only of sense
objects, ghostly contacts, floating odors, sounds, luminous shimmerings,
all without an identifiable source, the scientific enterprise would not have
                           T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   9 7




been possible. But neither would there have been any physical object nor
any living beings, for living beings testify to a world where, like the little
match girl, we die if the odor does not announce, at least sometimes, a
nourishing encounter with what is its active condition. This is true whether
the living beings are aware or not. Thus, we may think that a butterfly
does not real ly have the perceptual experience " of a world," and that its
flight responds to what we would call " detection," not to the experience
of the signs of the world that sense-objects represent for us. Yet when its
flight is oriented in the direction in which what is detected increases in
intensity, there most often occurs, fortunately for it, an encounter with
what we cal l a flower, what we, for our part, identify as an active condi
tion for the ingression of the odor, and what, for it, will be a concrete,
delectable experience, the eventuality of which was presupposed by its life
as a butterfly.
   To cite the exa mple of the butterfly as an experience involving detection
rather than perception does not mean to designate it as an a utomaton, but
to cal l it to witness to understand a " scientific object " that declares itself
to be i ndependent of the percipient event. The butterfly, whatever its own
experience may be, testifies to the flower a s a physical object. A specific
flower, i n the sense in which we recognize it as an object-say, there's that
rose again!-may wel l be illusory-another hologram! And what attracts
the butterfly may be a l ure set by an entomologist. Yet the butterfly, hu
man disappointment, and the very notion of a l ure celebrate the trust that,
" by going to take a closer look," we will most often discover what plays
the role of an active condition in the ingression, both of what the butterfly
detects and of what we perceive as odor and color.
   The scientific enterprise, l i ke l iving beings themselves, l ike common
sense itself, requires a world in which sensible signs signify in a generally
rel ia ble way; in which, when discerning a sense-object, we can anticipate,
without being wrong too often, certai n features of what only declares itself
in experience as discernible. The butterfly's mode of existence requires that
the detection of what is for us a specific color or odor a uthorize anticipa
tion that is often enough confirmed and verified by its consequences, by
what we can characterize as a satisfying "nectar! " encounter. Human be
ings, gardeners, naturalists, perfume makers, a nd creators of new, fragrant
floral species, have addressed themselves to flowers as physical objects
with some success, and have studied the various roles of the events that
contribute to the active cond itions of the ingression of the object " odor."
They have confirmed the well-founded nature of what is presupposed by
the distinction between the flower, as a physical object, and the flower as a
habit of percipient experience: the flower responds for the habit, and, by
9 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




paying it due attention, we can find even more in it that what it offers to an
insect. Yet it is the ambition proper to chemists to succeed in defining, and
then to synthesize an "object " common to h uman beings and butterflies,
a molecule whose presence plays a determi na nt role both for what we
call " odor" and for the detection attested by the butterfly's flight.
    Such an achievement would have no mea n i ng i ndependent of the
physical object, " fragrant flower," from which perfume makers have long
since learned under what conditions the " principle" could be extracted i n
a w a y t h a t could conserve it a s a n active condition for t h e ingression
of the sense-object " odor." Nor would it have a meaning independent of
that organ we baptize " nose," or else of i nsects that could be assimilated
to "detectors." Scientific objects presuppose physica l objects, at the same
time as they decla re themselves to be independent of the percipient event.
They are indeed at the summit of the logica l ascending hierarchy, in which
each member presupposes the lower type, and whose base designates
sense-objects. However, this hierarchy can be stated in another way, and
this is where the risk of the bifurcation of nature resides.
    Quite obviously, there is a relation of contemporaneity between the
scientific enterprise and the great theme of bifurcation: both confer a cru
cial importance upon entities that declare themselves i ndependent of the
percipient event. For Whitehead, however, this feature is not the privilege
of a truth that would finally be " objective," naked, beyond the motley
trappings of sense-experience. It is because it reflects an achievement, a
" reliable foothold " of the mind in nature, that the scientific object is i m
portant, and as such this object may revea l its usual association with the
general theme of the bifurcation of nature, and be together with, or placed
" i n the same boat" as, other objects, particularly sense- and physical ob
jects. Just as " sense-objects " testify to a world in which their ingression
signifies, in a way that is sufficiently regular to be rel iable, a physical ob
ject that is worth paying attention to, certain physica l objects testi fy to
a world in which it is worthwhile to vary their situations, to extract the
factors that play a role in this situation as " active conditions," in order to
set the spotl ight on them. This is not always the case, far from it: a chirp
ing bird can be descri bed as a function of the various roles played by the
events that contri bute to its chi rping, but it wil l always be events (night
fall, the approach of a female or of an i ntruder) that presuppose a bird
that is quite alive and involved in its business. No experimenter has suc
ceeded i n "extracting " from the bird the " active principle " of the i ngres
sion of the sonorous objects for which its situation is the active condition,
but only in identi fying and i mitating these objects, in descri bing their roles
for other birds.
                           T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E N TI F I C   OBJECTS   99




   The great theme of the bifurcation of nature is thus not the statement of
a general truth that could be confirmed by experimentation. It marks the
forgetting of what constitutes the val ue of experimental achievement:
" here," nature has offered a new kind of reliable foothold to the " mind."
It is this forgetting that al lows it to be said that scientific objects "explain"
sense-appearances or constitute thei r hidden objective truth. The scientific
object is then no longer the respondent required by the experimental foot
hold, but explains what we perceive in general, in a way that claims to be
independent of all perception.
   For Whitehead, then, the molecule obviously does not expla i n the
event " smelling that odor " which it accompanies. Yet its privi lege is two
fold. On the one hand, it has a permanence that the event i n question
lacks. Each time I uncork a jar contai ning a solution of synthetic vanilla,
I will smel l once again that odor that resembles that of vanil la. O n the
other, unlike " natural " vanilla, extracted from pods, synthetic vanilla can
be described and produced without reference to the sense-object " odor,"
and therefore imposes itself as associated with a vast multipl icity of
events and objects to which the type of attention designated by our sense
orga ns is not appropriate. The privilege of synthetic vanilla is not that of
explanation but of a bstraction; and unl ike the a bstraction of perfume
makers, which succeeds i n extracti ng a n active principle from vanilla
pods, this is not a n a bstraction with regard to the physica l object.
When I note, " Yes, that's about the same smell," I celebrate the relative
success of the set of risky a bstractions employed by the practice of syn
thetic chemistry, which presupposes the ingression, in these events we
call "chemical reactions," of those actors with d i fferentiated roles we call
" molecules."
   The molecule of synthetic vanilla is " really " i n nature, but it does not
expl a i n nature: what is a bstract can never expl ain what is concrete. It is
abstraction that must be explained . The molecule has no meaning inde
pendent of nature, i ndependent of the various types of events in which it
makes i ngression. Precisely because it seems self-sufficient, its definition
exhibits its a bstraction, exhibits the ra re achievement constituted by the
definition of scientific objects, the possibility of relating to them what
we a re aware of, of bracketing or leaving aside the percipient event.
   Undoubtedly molecules and electrons are abstractions. But then so is
Cleopatra 's Needle. The concrete facts are the events themselves [ . . . 1
to be an abstraction does not mean that an entity is nothing. It merely
means that its existence is only one factor of a more concrete element of
nature. So an electron is abstract because you cannot wipe out the whole
structure of events and yet retain the electron in existence. In the same
1 0 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




way the grin on the cat is abstract; and the molecule is really in the event
in the same sense as the grin is really on the eat's face ( CN, 1 7 1 ) .
   Sense-objects, a s soon a s they are defined a s " what" we perceive, " that
sound," " that smel l," which we recognize "quite a part" from the passage
of nature, a re a bstractions. Here, a bstraction i mplies what are cal led the
sense-organs, but it refers to the ultimate authority constituted by the
mind, in its guise of the extraction of what is perceived, separated from
the event we are aware of in perception. And a bstraction is, of course,
not a rbitrary: it ind icates a foothold that is generally rel ia ble, and in this
sense its respondent must be a " fact " of nature. To be sure, both the dis
cernible a nd the discerned differ from animal species to animal species,
but each ti me they constitute a wager with regard to what matters, with
regard to that whose neglect entails the death penalty. And the modes of
abstraction, the conveyance of certain sense-objects by others, testify to the
importance of the abstraction constituted by the perceptual object, that
Cleopatra 's Need le, for instance, with which I would collide, to my prej u
d ice, if I reduced i t to a simple visual i mage.
   Likewise, the successful a bstraction constituted by molecules implies
the modes of detection made possible by laboratory instruments, a nd
refers to an experimenta l tradition, which may be as rich in presupposi
tions, i magination, and technica l, economic, and intel lectual ingredients
as we may wish, but in a way that defines as what really matters the pro
duction of a mode of abstraction independent of the percipient event. Yet
abstraction is not arbitrary in this case, either. It has nothing to do with
the abstraction proposed by metaphysical statements that seize upon sci
entific a bstractions as if they were achievements due to them, generalizing
them in a way that testifies to their indifference to the risk of failure. What
matters is the vocation of the experimental apparatus, that independently
of which it would not exist: to produce a testimony to the role of scientific
objects that must accept and resist the risks of controversy, to be recog
nized as benefiting from a " reliable foothold," authorizing the abstraction
which, in return, will make scientific objects in nature its respondents .
   In a way, the one that is proper to experimental innovation, the defini
tion of scientific objects is thus situated i n the tradition of the definition of
physical objects, verifying the reliable character of perceptual objects. And
the latter, deriving from the habits of experience, designate in turn the trials
associated with biological evolution. The only difference is that the risk
and importance at stake do not concern the wel l-foundedness of a percep
tion or the survival of a living being. What is at stake is the survival of the
"mind's " new " foothold," and of what is supposed to be that foothold's
respondent in nature, that is, the twofold passage 'to exi stence of the ex-
                         T H E   I N G R E SS I O N   O F   S C I E N TI F I C   OBJE CTS   1 0 1




perimental apparatus qua rel iable, and of the object to which it refers qua
belonging to nature, or to what we have to do with in awareness.
   Some scientific objects exist, however, whose importa nce for the con
cept of nature is of a different type. In their case, the work of mathematical
physics, which organizes a nd a rticulates a set of different experimental
testi monies to relate them to an object, winds up a pproaching the prop
erly conceptual problem of what Wh itehead has called " i ngression." The
point is then no longer to identify a molecule a s a function of the " role"
it plays, but to describe this role itself i n terms of activity. When " laws of
nature" are enunciated, exhi biting the " passage of nature " in a n explicit
way, objects are defined as insepara ble from the events in which they
make ingression, whereas events are defined as " being what they a re,"
beca use molecu les, atoms, and electrons " a re what they a re."
   But in science we have found out that when we k now all about the ad
ventures amid events of material physical objects and of scientific objects
we have most of the relevant information which will enable us to predict
the conditions under which we shall perceive sense-objects in specific situ
ations [ . . . 1 The analysis of these adventures makes us aware of another
character of events, namely their characters as fields of activity which de
termine the subsequent events to which they will pass on the objects situ
ated in them. We express these fields of activity in terms of gravitational,
electromagnetic, or chemical forces and attractions (CN, 1 70 ) .
   The gravitational force proposed b y Newton created a scandal because
it "acted at a distance." It might, perhaps, have sufficed to impose the aban
donment of loca lization, of the idea that the primordial scientific character
ization of the sun, and of the earth as well, is to be where they are. The his
torical fact is that physicists have instead made do with a mathematical
formulation that a ffirms, at the same time, that a massive body is defined
by precise spatial coordinates, and that nevertheless other bodies, defined
by their mass and their distance, intervene in the calculation of its motion,
a double definition that does without the notions of adventure or activity.
As far as "chemical forces " a re concerned, they, in contrast, were deduced
from the activity of a mixture of reagents as such. Yet their activity is at
tributed not to a scientific object, a particular molecule, but to a global
mixture. Chemical forces say nothing a bout the molecule's adventures;
they qualify " relations" specific to two chemical reagents, but this qualifi
cation, since it is i ndependent of the local ization of the molecules, does
not al low this local ization to be questioned . Since Faraday, however, the
electromagnetic field has exhibited properties i rreducible to those of a
force " between " two charged and l ocal ized bodies. And, as a secon d sur
prise, this field has, since the end of the nineteenth century, been associated
1 0 2   F R O M T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




with the presence of electrons in motion, capable of being localized and
endowed with a charge. In this case, the problem is fully deployed at last.
The mode of ingression of the scientific object "electron" questions local
ization as a primordial, " objective " property.
   A scientific object such as a definite electron is a systematic correlation
of the characters of all events throughout all nature [ . . . J The electron is
not merely where its charge is. The charge is the quantitative character of
certain events due to the ingression of the electron into nature [ . . . J the
electron is the systematic way in which all events are modified as the
expression of its ingression [ . . . J We may if we please term the mere
charge the electron. But then another name is required for the scientific
object which is the full entity which concerns science, and which I have
called the electron ( CN, 1 5 8-1 5 9 ) .
  Unlike i t s charge, t h e electron does not let itself b e local ized, a n y more
that the cat whose Carroll ian grin I can see. Not only does mathematical
physics thus testify against the ideal of simple localization associated with
the theme of the bifurcation of nature, but it confirms what ingression
obliges us to think: the event is what it is because the object is what it is,
and objects are what they a re because events are what they a re.
  The conception which most fully expresses the character of nature is
that of each event as modified hy the ingression of each electron into
nature ( CN, 1 60 ) .
   To b e sure, the d ream o f some physicists woul d have been, a n d still i s
today, to deduce the particle from the field, a n d t o make it a local expres
sion of the field . Why, for i nstance, cou ld we not th ink of the particle in
the manner of a wave wrinkling the ocea n ? It woul d of course have a
behavior a l l its own, but we would also know that it is nothing other
than a local expression of the ocean, than this aspect " here " of the ocean
"everywhere." Many physicists have tried their hand at this, and field
theory today is inha bited by this hypothesis when it suggests turning
particles into " excited modes " of a field that is, in principle, coextensive
with the universe. At the risk of making the possibil ity of ta lking a bout
an electron depend on the existence of the detector that is to local ize it.
Just as the wave a ffects us, the particles woul d a ffect our detectors . But
the only "objective real ity " would be the ocean or the fiel d, which ex
plains without being explained.
   I f Whitehead were a mong us today, perhaps he would have objected:
the wave is what it is because the ocean is what it is, to be sure, but
doesn't this meta phor i ncite us to formulate the question of ingress ion in
a way that is too unilateral ? Perhaps the ocean is expressed in the wa ve,
but how does the presence of the wa ve a ffect the ocea n ? The challenge
                          T H E   I N G R E S S I O N   O F   S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ ECTS   1 0 3




associated with the concept of ingression would thus be to succeed i n
formulati ng the idea that t h e ocean, too, is w h a t it is because t h e wave is
what it is. This is the kind of objection some physicists oppose to con
temporary field theory: the adventure of the particle in a field should not
be red uci ble to a mode of expression of that fiel d .
    In other words, the question of how t o represent the electron's i ngres
sion i nto its field, favored by Wh itehead, has indeed become general ized,
but the only sure point i n this experimental and intel lectual adventure
today is the a ba ndonment of the master idea of the bifurcation of nature:
the identification of the relation of situation with that of local ization. For
the rest, the least one can say is that this representation is still under con
struction, trying to take i nto consideration a nd order the multiple a nd
ever-prol iferating aspects of the " field of activity " in an attempt to define
the type of attention that is due to them.
    The fact that mathematical physics i ntervenes to deprive the doctrines
of the bifurcation of nature of their most prestigious support is, of course,
utterly crucial. The fact that, for a century, physicists have been confronted
by the question of how to articulate local a nd delocalized, particle a nd
field, a re j ust as i mportant. Yet it would be catastrophic to transform the
testi mony contributed by mathematical physics today into an a uthority.
This is so whether it be to " rectify " the Whiteheadian notion of i ngres
sion, that is, to a ffirm triumphantly that the particle is indeed what it is
beca use the field is what it is, but that, contra ry to what Wh itehead
thought, the converse is not true; or whether it is to acknowledge that he
was right. Even if mathematical physics one day came to confirm what
ingression a ffirms, i f some day a theory should be formulated that really
does articulate particles and fields, that is, redefines these two physico
mathematical notions on the basis of the problem of thei r articulation,
this would be a matter of science, not of the general ity Whitehead called
" i ngression." For this new theory, whatever may be its interest, would
deal exclusively with situations where the ideal of the exactness of math
ematical physics is relevant, i n particular the ideal definitions of point and
instant. Such a theory woul d still be an a bstraction: there is no such thing
as nature at an i nstant, all events have a duration, and all d urations have
a thickness.
    The temptation to i dentify the Whiteheadian event with the
mathematico-physical notion of a field must therefore be resisted, even if
they both share certain features, precisely those features that have pre
vailed against good sense, first with the scanda lous notion of forces
" acti ng at a di stance," then of a field that is i rreducible to these forces.
Correlatively, the genera l concept of ingression cannot by a ny means be
1 0 4   F R O M T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




assimilated to the problem ra ised by the insepara bil ity between electron
and field. However complicated it may be, for physicists, to construct
what nature obliges them to accept, the very possibility of defining this
compl ication reveals the a bstraction of the definitions whose relations
are to be articulated .
   The aim of science is to seek the simplest explanations of complex
facts. We are apt to fall into the error of thinking that the facts are simple
because simplicity is the goal of our quest. The guiding motto in the life
of every natural philosopher should be, Seek simplicity and distrust it
( eN, 1 63 ) .
                                                                C H A P T ER   S E V EN




I nterlude

      A Pragmatics of Concepts




            H I TE HEAD H A D WA RNED US :         perhaps what is hardest to
              understand in The Concept of Nature is the limits assigned to
              this concept, and more precisely wha t these l i mits exclude. For
what is excluded are all questions capable of exciting philosophers of a
metaphysical bent, but also-and today, perhaps, above a ll-the cohort of
those who define as the final frontier for science the question of the emer
gence of conscious experience as such from neuronal mechanisms. To
the questions raised by the thinkers who call themselves " Natura l i sts" in
the United States-those who present themselves as modestly, or even
pragmatical ly, a dopting the path opened up by the " natural sciences "
Whitehead would not only answer " that's beside the point, for it would be
metaphysics." He would spea k of badly framed questions, to which there
is no possible answer. Of course, neural mechanisms belong to nature, in
the sense that they are part of what we have lea rned by paying it due at
tention. They are really in nature, in the sense that the grin of Lewis Car
roll's cat is really on the cat's face. Yet they are successful, relevant a bstrac
tions, or " scientific objects," and as such they presuppose what naturalist
phi losophy wou ld have them expla i n : " mi n d " qua " knowing." When it
comes to nature, knowledge is the ultimate.
   Framing the problem in this way will meet with the assent of phenom
enological philosophers, and there is certainly a kinship between phe
nomenology and the Whiteheadian genera l ities known as the p assage
of nature a nd the object " that is there once again." And yet Whitehead
was no phenomenologist, for these general ities have nothing in common
with a "phenomenological red uction," with the ambition of thinking of
1 0 6   F R O M T H E   PH I LOSOPH Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




pure phenomenality, the donation presupposed by everything given . The
threat of confusion, very present in France where phenomenology is ex
tremely influential, concerns the meaning of this word " ultimate." The
ultimate in the phenomenologica l sense is both what is to be thought and
what imposes upon thought a distortion that has something to do with a
conversion, since the point is no longer to think " a bout something " but
to address an experience purified from any particular i nterest in any par
ticular object. The Whiteheadian ultimate, for its part, i s only ulti mate
with regard to the p roblem raised, a nd it is defined by its function-to
avoid fa lse problems-not by an order of truth that transcends our ha
bitua l modes of thought. It does not demand the suspension of what tes
tifies to the certitudes of common sense. On the contrary, the distinction
Whitehead proposes between " factors," belonging to sense experience,
and "entities," implying the transition toward thought, has as its first ef
fect to vindicate common sense, our habits in the world, and everything we
" know," even if our theories of knowledge do not give us the right to know
it. Although the ultimate is " mind," when it comes to the concept of na
ture, this is so not in the sense that everything refers to it or proceeds from
it, but in the sense that nature is to be thought as capable of "giving a
foothol d " to k nowledge.

Nature is th us neither knowa ble-definable, for instance, as a system of
relations between entities-nor unknowable, the famous " m ute rea lity"
upon which we proj ect h uman, linguistic, or social categories. This bi
nary alternative, which nourishes so many philosophical discussions, is
fata l for common sense. Nature is that a bout which relevant knowledge
may be produced . If we pay d ue attention to it, we can learn, discern rela
tions, and multiply entities a nd ratios. Contemplative subjects wondering
whether they are the a uthors of what they see, or whether their vision
gives them access to a rea lity i ndependent of them, is a d i sa strous philo
sophical fiction. To ask such a question, one must already have eliminated,
as unworthy of being thought, all those who bustle a bout, inquire, a nd
carry out tests a nd experiments: from those who, in the darkness of ti me,
learned how to track an animal or discern plants with curative virtues, to
scientific experimenters in their laboratories. And one must ignore that
one is oneself part of all those who learn, every day, what attention must
be paid to in a world that ceaselessly demands attention. " Pay attention,"
says the parent to the incautious chi l d .
   Knowledge a s ulti mate does not designate a " knowing subject," but
corresponds to a problem of a pragmatic kind: the concept of nature
must give meaning to the world with wh ich we dea l, a world we can
                                                            I N T E R L U D E   1 0 7




learn a bout, but which is a lso capa ble of trick i ng us a nd placing us in
danger. In short, a world that demands our attention. It is to this prag
matics that the " hierarchy" of objects responds, as does the i ntermodality
of our senses, for each type of object corresponds to a type of demand
and a possi bility of verification, that is, also a way of paying attention.
From this viewpoi nt, experimenta l science, as a producer of " scientific
objects," by no means carries out a brea k with common sense. It desig
nates the surprising discovery that it is possible, in some cases, to "ask
even more." In this case, the object, which is always " situated " and can
not be a bstracted from the events i n which it makes i ngression and that
actively condition it, provides a foothold for q uestions addressed to an
entity whose behavior is a function of determinate interactions with other
entities. The signature of the pragmatic approach, here as elsewhere, is to
link the production of such an "objective " definition with an achievement,
with the fact that in some cases the mode of attention proper to experi
menta l science is found to be a "due" one, not the general defini tion of
knowledge finally freed of its subjective attach ments.
   Whiteheadian generalities are themselves inseparable from a pragmatics,
a pragmatics of the concepts that pa rticipate in the concept of nature, and
must a lso be eva luated in terms of eventual success. On the one hand, they
must succeed in constituting knowledge as an ultimate, not as central . In
other words, the concept of nature must be such that nature provides a
" foothold " for knowledge, but it must not legitimize any particular form
of k nowledge; it must not dupl icate, by any k i nd of j ustification, the em
pirica l fact of the eventua l success of certai n ways of paying attention.
The q uestion of the type of attention that is d ue in each case is a q uestion
for which there is no conceptual shortcut. They must, moreover, succeed
in situating the mode of attention that gave rise to the bifurcation of na
ture i n a way that verifies that it is always possible to discover more in
nature, but without ever discovering in it that which would enable what is
known to be "expla ined."
   Did Whitehead succeed, from this last point of view ? To verify this, I
will address two technica l terms i ntrod uced to help think of the passage
of nature, the continuous and relational multiplicity of events, and the
qual itative multiplicity of objects: i ngression a nd cogredience. The goal
will be to show that these two terms, which rema in i ndeterminate at the
end of The Concept of Nature, a re so i n the positive sense of the term,
that is, i n the sense that every scientific explanation that targets them
would restore the bifurcation of nature. And the point will be to ra ise the
q uestion of the way this i ndeterminacy resists, or fails to resist, certain
contemporary modes of expla nation.
1 0 8   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NAT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The primary function of an object's ingression is to a ffirm that the ab
straction required by the judgment of recognition, memory, and compari
son is not reducible to these intel lectua l opera tions . When it comes to
what is a bstract, to the entity as an object of thought, it must be sa id
both that it is the product of an a bstraction and that this a bstraction may
respond-although this rema ins to be verified-to an offer for which na
ture is the respondent. The respondent, not the ca use: it is not beca use
" the same objects " have made ingression that we perceive them "aga in."
The criteria tha t render explicit our definition of " the same" do not de
fine the object in the sense that it belongs to nature and does not exist
independently of the event in which it makes ingression.
    It is here that the developments of neuroscience, of cognitive psychol
ogy, and of the "connectionist " models seem to be a ble to contribute some
thing new. For some, they enable us to envisage an explanation, scientific
at last, of the emergence of the percei ved object, that is, of the experience
associated with the Whiteheadian object: "there it is again."
    Let us take the case of the networks of coupled a utomata that serve as
references for the connectionist models of neura l mecha nisms. They were
considered momentous, since an abil ity for " a rtificia l recognition " can be
associated with them, as if the network were a ble to a bstract an object,
that is, to adopt a specific form of behavior that may serve as a signa l : a
given object, of which no one has produced an a bstract definition, is de
tected. Of course, when the connectionist networks function as a techni
cal appa ratus, the technicians know what is to be detected, and they also
know how to act on the connections in a way that stabil izes and specifies
the detection. Technical success is the ultimate. Yet when it comes to the
brain, the person who knows " what " is detected is absent. Could we not
say, then, that such a mechanism "explains" the a bstraction of what we
ca ll an " object," and that the latter is therefore merely a product of neu
ra l mecha nisms, not of a general ity belonging to the concept of na ture ?
Ingression would then be replaced by a process of emergence, expl ica ble
i n terms of connected neura l networks, and nature would bifurcate, for
the perceived object would not be a bstracted but produced as such by
detection.
    As the neurophilosopher Andy Clarke points out, however, such an ex
planatory hypothesis fea tures a cerebral machinery tha t works on itself
and by itsel f, and a world that appears on stage only in as insignificant a
way as possible, ca refully stripped of all that might constitute a landmark
and hence complicate the q uestion of responsibility. It is i mportant for the
stage-managers that the network 's beha vior can be described as expla in
ing an emergence that has no correspondent in nature, as responsible for
                                                            I NT E R L U D E   1 0 9




an emergent "there it is! " Like the networks used by engineers, although in
a different mode, the network is thus situated by what is at stake. The stag
ing in which it plays the role of what is responsible for emergence proposes
a confrontation between two abstractions: the " neuronal brain" and a real
ity conceived as " mute," like an illegible text or image. In contrast, when the
stage becomes crowded, when the brain receives an acting body and this
body is itself situated in a world whose patterns are important, and some
of which must be detected "on pain of death," the brain is no longer that
which explains, but j ust as much that whose workings are explained on the
basis of the activity of living beings capable of recognizing, but also of ex
ploiting, and even creating; w hat matters for their activity. This does not
mean that the question of the eventua l relevance of the connectionist model
loses its interest, but it does lose the power to make nature bifurcate. It con
firms that when the brain is addressed qua belonging to nature, one can
learn more from it. What one will learn will not, however, enable us to sur
mount the indeterminacy a ffirmed by Whitehead with regard to the object's
ingression, unless the kind of answer we seek is the ultimate, that deter
mines the staging.
   As the reader will recall, cogredience, for its part, a l l udes to what ex
ceed s the concept of nature, that is, to metaphysics. It designates the q ues
tion of what constitutes the meeting point between the two " rea lities"
we call " nature" and " mind," respectively: the question of what constitutes
an event for the person perceiving. As a concept, it points out that neither
nature nor mind is in command here. The interruption of the relation of
cogred ience is a fact for which not explanation but notice is appropriate,
even if it can " expla in itsel f" if we can a lways later-but only later
explain it. We then give to what has been associated with the interruption
the power to explain that interruption. In contrast, what can be affirmed
is that the precarious stability of the cogredient relation-the sorti ng pro
cess that d ifferentiates between what constitutes an event and makes the
present slip into the past, and what " escapes notice"-is itself something
that is at stake. At sta ke for survival, for lack of attention may enta il the
death penalty. At stake for spiritual techniques, that aim at the mind th rough
work on the body. At sta ke for magical practices, and for experimental
psychology-although today, the latter knows a great dea l less than the
magicians on ..t:he subject. Yet cogred ience is itself the common requisite
for these sta kes; it is what they all presuppose, a nd what turns all our ex
planations i nto commentaries.
   Today, the science of dynamic attractors a l lows us to make sense of
" phase tra nsitions," and of bifurcations or tipping-poi nts where a system
cha nges i ts behavior wi thout there being any need to assign a ca use
1 1 0   FRO M   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




responsible for this change. Could we not imagine that the specious pres
ent, the d uration of a here " a nd " now, might be explained in these terms ?
Once aga in, the goa l will not be to deny that, oriented by the models of
systems with attractors, the attention we pay to the brain may make us
better able to learn more about it. Yet once again, the expla natory ambi
tion, which would make nature bifurcate since what " constitutes an
event" would be determined by the dynamic system, is reflected by the
fragmentation of what must be thought of together.
   The explanatory power of systems with attractors is determined by the
possibil ity of sepa rating what explains-a system governed by a l i mited
number of varia bles whose relations rema in fixed-a nd what is to be
explained, the q ua l itative changes in beha vior that characterize this sys
tem. Yet the explanation loses its power if the model dea ls with a bra in
that is not isolated, but a n integral pa rt of what Whitehead called our
" bodily l i fe," a life that is never the same twice, that is never there " once
again." In this case, the explanatory model requi res what it does not
explain: what could be cal led "a viewpoint on bodily life " from which
would follow the defini tion of the variables required by the landscape of
dynamic a ttractors. Once again, the stage is repopulated, preventing
na ture from bifurcating, for such a viewpoint, far from being fixed once
and for all, must include, in one way or another, what it is i mporta nt to
pay attention to in a concrete situation . The question of what constitutes
an event, fa r from being solved, then constitutes the crucial element pre
supposed by the definition of the varia bles requi red by the model .
   Obviously, in neither of the two cases I have j ust envisaged is there any
question of designating a " mind " that makes cerebral complexity its in
strument. The mind as ultimate plays no role when nature is concerned:
its role is to avoid fa lse problems that emerge as soon as the brain, de
scribed as a set of entities in relation, is rendered uni latera lly responsible
for what we are aware of, like mountain climbers capable of producing a
hold by their own means and climbing up a smooth wal l . When the brain
becomes an integral part of what, with Andy Clarke, one could call an
ecologically rea listic situation, the mind is no longer the ultimate, since the
question exceeds the l i mits of the problem answered by the concept of
nature. We no longer have to do with genera lities, or attributing responsi
bilities, but with the i mpassioned and fascinating adventure of living be
ings in environments that are always already partially fashioned, in ways
that matter and signify.
   It is rema rkable that i n The Concept of Nature, ingression has the very
limited role of resisti ng the philosophical d isaster enta iled by the lack of
distinction between different types of object, di fferent types of situation,
                                                              I N TE R L U D E   1 1 1




and between loca l ization and situation. If, of course, instead of identify
ing that bird as a perceptual object associa ted with this sound, I was
moved by the vibrating corporeality of its song, and if I did not restrict
myself to recognizing this face, but felt when I saw it that the discussion
will be stormy or painful, the temptation to deny that the object affects its
environment would be much less sed uctive. But I would twice have ex
ceeded the limits of the concept of nature such as Whitehead constructed
it. As a living being, the bird testifies to a world in which beings sensitive to
its song exist. The expression on the other person's face raises the question
of emotion: not what I perceive, but how what I perceive a ffects myself.
    Whitehead was soon to cross the ocean, and on America n soil he wa s
to provide himself-was to dare to provide himself?-the means of be
coming what, in The Concept of Nature, he had challenged himself not
to be: a metaphysician. There is no contradiction here, for the metaphys
ics he wanted to avoid was the one that is done without knowing it
when nature is asked to expl ain knowledge-or without accepting what
it commits us to-when " m i nd " is i ntroduced to explain what does not
enter into the definition of nature one has provided onesel f. When White
head becomes a metaphysician, neither nature nor mind will subsist, and
knowledge will no longer be the ultimate. The point wil l no longer be to
construct a nature to which this flower, whose scent I recognize, may be
long, but a world in which this enjoyment vibrates: " how nice it smel ls."
    We may i magine that Whitehead, in 1 920, did not suspect the adven
ture on the threshold of which he found himself. No one can know, for
there is no trace left of his feelings in this rega rd . It remains that the op
eration of reading I have attempted certainly does not correspond to the
effect that The Concept of Nature had on contemporary readers. I have
accentuated the wholly mathematical freedom with which Whitehead
defines the problem of nature, whereas for many readers, no dou bt, the
two sou rces he privileges-the scientific definition of objects and sense
experience-were the two normal poles of the problem. What I ha ve cho
sen to exhibit is Whitehead's gesture, the way he decided to establish the
concept of nature as the answer to a problem, that is, on the edge of the
bifurcation that traps thinkers as soon as they to approach it, by attribut
ing responsibilities to subject or object. In so doing, I have presented The
Concept of Nature as the beginning of an ad venture, and I have placed
this adventure under the banner of mathematical audacity: not to sea rch
for some negotiated solution, evaluated accord ing to its plausibility or its
capacity to provide a minimum of satisfaction to the va rious parties, but
to tackle a problem mano a mana and go as fa r as that problem wi l l de
mand. In this case, to accept fu lly and without restriction what we a re
1 1 2   FROM   THE   P H I LOS O P H Y   O F N AT U R E T O M E TA P H Y S I C S




" instinctively will ing to bel ieve," but without trying to prolong, found, or
genera lize the justifications or interpretations we give to this " instinct." A
subjection to adventure, not to j udgment: the point is not to discuss the
genera l question of the extent to which " nature" is the respondent of our
knowledge a bout it, but to take an interest in what testifies to the impor
tance of this question for those concerned by it, in the processes of verifica
tion that include the ra bbit staring at the spot from which a noise is
coming, and the experimenter's art of consequences-If I m right, then       '



I should, in such-and-such conditions, be able to . . .
    The importance of Wil liam James for Whitehead's transformation into
a philosopher cannot be overestimated . Not only are the Essays in Radi
cal Empiricism as wel l as The Principles of Psychology present in The
Concept of Nature, but one could say that the very construction of the
concept of nature accompl ishes a j unction, which had rema ined rather
implicit in James, between radical empiricism and pragmatism, between
nature as what we a re aware of, and nature as providing a foothold. In
pa rticular, unlike Bergson, it is at the level of this foothold, and not of
experience in its immediacy, freed from what makes us ca lculate, verify,
and hesitate, that a relation with evolutiona ry thought is established . This
is why the question ra ised by Whitehead will never be that of knowledge
fa ithful to the truth of that experience . From this viewpoint, Whitehead is,
a fter Wil liam James, one of the very ra re philosophers of the twentieth
century to have fully envisaged the consequences of the Darwinian evolu
tion for the classica l problems of philosophy, that it, to have situated
questions of truth not on the side of right, legitimacy, or a uthenticity, but
on the side of its consequences. Nature neither explains nor j ustifies a ny
thing, but it is pragmatica lly impl ied in the consequences that verify, or
fa il to veri fy, the relevant or important cha racter of a landmark or a gen
era l ization, the appropriateness of a kind of attention. Perception impl ies
the risk of trusting what is perceived, a trust whose practica l consequences
may entai l the death pena lty for i mpertinence.
    However, Whitehead will not genera lize this pragmatic type of approach.
At first glance, the speculative adventure upon which he will embark even
reflects an abandonment of pragmatism. Yet only at first glance: that is,
when pragmatism is reduced to the sad mora lity of the businessman: what
is true is what is profita ble . The fact that William James's expression " cash
va lue" sufficed to j ustify such a red uction is not only indicative of the phi
losophers' laziness, but also of the continuing power of bifurcation, this
time bea ring upon what " really counts " and what is insignificant or illu
sory. And evol utionary biology itself testifies to the sa me power, when it
transforms selective advantage into an explanation and ca n then serve as
                                                           I N T E R L U D E   1 1 3




the base for a psychology or an anthropology that seeks to define a univer
sal huma n nature, forged by biological selection. In other words, the link
between pragmatism and evol utionary thought may easily become a new
instrument of judgment, once again testifying to the power of abstractions
when they function in a polemical mode. Whitehead, for his part, never
broke with the pragmatic art of consequences, which he no doubt learned
from James, because he did not stop for an instant at the idea that what
counts, what matters, might pertain to a generality. If he changed his ap
proach, it was because his problem had changed.
   Whitehead was no longer to limit himsel f to a pragmatics of concepts
aiming to avoid the fa lse problems to which our a bstractions give rise,
beca use, for him, the point was no longer to " civilize" our a bstractions,
to sepa rate them from their polemica l power, but to tra nsform them. In
Science and the Modern Word, the question of bifurcation was given a
new na me: "the fallacy of misplaced concreteness." A fa llacy, not a vice
proper to the intel lect. As an art of consequences, pragmatics forbids a ny
position of truth whose consequence would be to transform the problem
i nto an insurmounta ble horizon of the human condition. A fa l lacy is first
and foremost an exaggeration, an exaggerated impact a ttributed to an
undeniable success.
   The advantage of confining attention to a definite group of abstractions
is that you confine your thoughts to clear-cut definite things, with clear
cut definite relations. Accordingly, if you have a logical head, you can de
duce a variety of conclusions respecting the relationships between these
abstract entities. Furthermore, if the abstractions are well-founded, that is
to say, if they do not abstract from everything that is important in experi
ence, the scientific thought which confines itself to these abstractions will
arrive at a variety of important truths relating to our experience of nature.
We all k now those clear-cut trenchant intellects, immovably encased in a
hard shell of abstractions. They hold you to their abstractions by the sheer
grip of personality (SMW, 5 8 ) .
   I n cauda comes not venenum but humor: there is nothing abstract
a bout the power of abstraction. Whitehead wa s proba bly thinking of
Bertra nd Russell, but we may think of Richard Dawkins or Daniel Den
nett, honorable men, passionately devoted to the service of h umanity. To
underta ke to tra nsform the a bstractions that impose themselves upon
them, and which they try to i mpose in the name of reason, demands a trust
that will not be shaken by the cold logic of deductions, and humor that
does not denounce but knows that such coldness always has the poigna nt
will to convince a s one of its i ngredients .
                                                              C H A P TER E I G H T




Science and the Modern World

      A Strange Book




           ITH   SCIENCE AND THE MODERN WORLD,             the reader will be
           exposed to difficul ties that are not presented by The Concept
           of Nature. Fi rst of all, there is the difficulty of grasping the
very subject of this book.
  Apparently, it is a work that belongs to the register of the history of
ideas or of civil izations. Th is, at any rate, is what one might think a fter
reading the statements that open and close the book.
   The progress of civilization is not wholly a uniform drift towards better
things. It may perhaps wear this aspect if we map it on a scale which is
large enough. But such broad views obscure the details on which rests
our whole understanding of the process (SMW, 1 ) .
   The moral of the tale is the power of reason, its decisive influence on the
life of humanity. The great conquerors, from Alexander to Caesar, and
from Caesar to Napoleon, influenced profoundly the lives of subsequent
generations. But the total effect of this influence shrinks to insignificance,
if compared to the entire transformation of human habits and human
mentality produced by the long line of men of thought from Thales to the
present day, men individually powerless, but ultimately the rulers of the
world (SMW, 208 ) .
   Whitehead thus presents h i s book, if not as hi story, then i n any case a s
a med ita tion o n the hi story o f Western civilization. And at the conclusion
of the book, there appears that to which these " deta ils," hidden by a la rge
sca le vision, a l l uded : the disproportionate influence of a l i ne of " pow
erless " thinkers . This, of course, inspi res a slight d i scomfort on the pa rt
of the su spicious rea der. Undoubted ly, Whitehea d , the mathematician-
                                 S CIENCE   A N D   THE   MODERN   WORLD    1 1 5




philosopher, is to be situated in this lineage. On the way he will ana lyze
the influence of his precursors depends the way he envisages his own in
fluence, and often, when one expla ins the way philosophers situate them
sel ves by means of the terms of their analysis, one reaches the trivial ity
of a story of progress: h istory as a long path lead ing toward " me " (or us,
when the a uthors a l low themselves to spea k in the name of thei r epoch ) .
Bergson himself fell into this trap, since the intuition of which he is the
philosopher accompl ishes the exploit of reconnecting intelligence, whose
power and excesses can be understood thanks to the long line of philos
ophers, and instinct, whose perfection and closed nature can be expli
cated thanks to the long l ine of insects and parasites.
    If Whitehead's story differs from many other med itations on the prog
ress of civilization, it is precisely because, as he will make fully explicit in
Adventures of Ideas, what interests him is not the great story of the pro
gressive revelation of the truth of h istory that inevitably makes the West
the thinking head of humanity. What i nterests him is an " adventure of
reason," a nd it is th is ad venture that creates its subject. Reason is thus
defined as what is ventured in the course of this h istory. In other words,
what is sought is not a definition of reason, but a particular description of
the historical process that exh ibits what we call " reason " as one of its
questions. The meaning of that " rule" that the long l ine of thinkers, from
Thales to Whitehead, has impressed upon the world, a lso depends on this
process.
    In the present case, if Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon were victors
over identifiable enemies, strength aga inst strength, it was the h ighly un
heroic victory of persuasion over strength that the ad venture of White
headian ideas was to describe in 1 93 3 . Here, the power of ideas must be
said to be suggestion rather than truth , for, l ike what we call suggestion, it
travels along roads that do not have much to do with deduction, reason
ing, logical necessity, or the principle of reality. What was originally an
extravagant ideal, transported by a visionary thought, by an individual
bereft of social or pol itical power, beca me a " habit" or " routine," stabi
lized by institutions, laws, and professional regulations. If ideals a re victo
rious, then, it is without glory or glamour, by all the practices that are in
deed invented by men but that also fashion them in return, creating the
social environment from which new risks, new experimentations with ideas
become possible.
    Whitehead's great example, in Adventures of Ideas, is the complete im
plausibil ity of the saying of Jesus, calling upon men in the midst of a civi
l ization based on slavery, to recognize each other as the children of God .
The history that fash ions us today, " respectful of the rights of man," in
1 1 6   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




the na me of which slavery can be routinely condemned, had the Chris
tian idea l as an ingred ient, but it also constitutes a betraya l of this idea l .
We know t h i s today even better than Whitehead. The adventure contin
ues, he would have sa id: i n each new social environment, idea l s judged
to be utopian by the new norms will express the new formulation of the
problem these norms claim to have sol ved .
   This " pragmatic" conception of a story woven by experimentation with
the ideas and routines of habit refers to a conviction, an aesthetic, and an
ethic that were Whitehead's well before his philosophical adventure. They
are, for instance, already perceptible in the articles col lected under the title
The Aims of Education. And it is remarkable that the concepts created by
Whitehead in Process and Reality did not constra in this conception to new
risks but merely conferred on it a new amplitude, with the apotheosis of
the fourth part of Adventures of Ideas, in which beauty, truth, adventure,
and peace acquire the power to define all civil izations.
   This, moreover, is a difficu lty proper to the reading of Adventures of
Ideas: the concepts are present without the problems they answer, like a
quasi-poetic dupl ication of what is na rrated . It is therefore tempting not
to pay attention to them and to confuse what is narrated with one his
tory of ideas or of culture a mong others: it is simply more grandiose, or
naively a udacious, than most. In contrast, there is no temptation of this
kind in Science and the Modern World. Here, the concepts seem to intrude,
interrupting the narrative, brutally widening a perspective, ceaselessly im
posing upon the reader the question of whether she has to do with a deliri
ous eru ption or an inspired thought.
   To be more complete, let us describe the surprises this very strange
book has in store for its rea der.
   Right from the first chapter, Whitehead raises the problem of faith in an
order of nature, without which the flourishing of modern science would
ha ve been inconceivable. There follows a rather original reading of the ori
gin of that science which, as we shall see below, places it under the banner
of a historical revolt aga inst rationality. The reader, sed uced by this origi
nality, is nevertheless, like many scientists, ready to ma ke faith in the order
of nature a mere psychologica l adjuvant, a simple vision gua ra nteeing the
legitimacy of the quest: reality is determinist, or causa l, or written in math
ematica l characters. At the end of the chapter, however, Whitehead will
suddenly unfold all that this faith implicitly requires:
   There is no parting from your own shadow. To experience this faith is
to know that in being ourselves we are more than ourselves: to know that
our experience, dim and fragmentary as it is, yet sounds the utmost depths
of reality: to know that detached details merely in order to be themselves
                                 SCIENCE   AND   THE   MODERN    WOR L D    1 1 7




demand that they should find themselves in a system of things: to know
that this system includes the harmony of logical rationality, and the har
mony of aesthetic achievement: to know that, while the harmony of logic
lies upon the universe as an iron necessity, the aesthetic harmony stands
before it as a living ideal moulding the general flux in its broken progress
towards finer, subtler issues ( SMW, 1 8 ) .
    The succession o f "cola " marks the equivalence o f the propositions, each
of which, however, seems more stupefying than its predecessor. Whitehead
has done nothing other than explain the faith or trust of the scientist, and
especially of the practitioner of the theoretico-experimental sciences, but he
has explained it completely. Whereas scientists often express themselves as
if the order in which they have faith were already there waiting for them,
what they " discover" is inseparable from their shadow, from their own
presence in the landscape they describe. In order to come into being, the
logical harmony they make explicit and celebrate required a living ideal of
aesthetic harmony, without which the " scattered details" could never have
become themselves and found their logical place. Whitehead thus restricted
himself to explaining this living ideal, without which scientists would not
rack their brains over a detail that resists, would not expect their statements
to be able to predict the result of a new experiment, nor that their theories,
appropriately formulated after an eventful itinerary, could come to exhibit
a form of beauty and simplicity without which they would not be satisfied .
Yet unprepared readers might wel l conclude that the author is not only
original, but endowed with a solid poetic verve.
    Other surprises awa it our readers. They will realize, for insta nce, that
Whitehead never confines himself for very long to historical narrative.
Thus, in the course of Cha pter 4, when one might think the subject was an
interesting evaluation of the practical successes that marked the eighteenth
century, from the invention of English parliamentary government to that
of the steam engine, the story suddenly stops. We suddenly learn ( p . 64)
that space and time have two characteristics in common, "separative" and
"prehensive." For several paragraphs, the reader will attempt to follow the
elaboration of what a prehensive unity of volume means, but this analysis,
suddenly qualified as deceptively simple because it induces the idea that
space-time is a sel f-subsistent entity, independent of perception, is i n turn
interrupted . And Whitehead turns to Bishop Berkeley to ask what percep
tion is. He seems to accept the answer . . . except for one simple substitu
tion: where Berkeley speaks of the mind, Whitehead will speak of a process
of prehensive unification and general ize it to all that exists . . .
    Here, the reader who is a bit fa m i l i a r with the hi story of philosophy
( I dare not i magine what has become of the others ) is seized by a slight
1 1 8   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




dizzi ness. To ca ll upon Berkeley to resist a " ready-made," self-subsistent
space-ti me is to cal l upon the man who a ffirmed that " to be is to be per
cei ved." One might therefore have expected a l l notions implying a real
ity " i ndependent of perception " to be suspended . Yet Whitehead has j ust
transformed " being perceived " into a model on the basis of which this real
ity can be thought. An origi nal and poetic a uthor, no doubt, but also en
dowed with a strange sense of h umor . . .
   The reader, more and more dumbfounded, can certainly hang on, per
haps at the cost of proceeding to a selective reading. By the time she
reaches chapters 1 0 ( "Abstraction " ) and 1 1 ( " God " ), however, a l l possi
bility of selection collapses: the history of ideas has yielded to a meta
physical construction, and a construction that seems, moreover, to require
a reference to God as the "ground " of a l l l i mitation. Our reader then runs
the risk of abandoning Science and the Modern World: originality, poetry,
and humor, perhaps; delirium, certainly.
   What I have j ust descri bed was my first experience with Whiteheadian
reading, years ago. In other words, this reading was a defeat. Later on,
once I understood that Whitehead was not a historian of ideas liable to
deli rious surges, but a metaphysician, I came to a " non-reading" of Sci
ence and the Modern World, situating this work, as Whitehead himself
seemed to i nvite his readers to do in the preface to Adventure in Ideas,
within a conti nuity. Science and the Modern World, Process and Reality,
and Adventures of Ideas, writes Whitehead, a l l express one way of under
standing the nature of things, but in a complementary way, supplementing
each other's omissions and compressions. I thus accepted the idea that
these three books had the sa me a uthor, who chose, according to the per
spective adopted, to put forward his ideas in a specific way. A " non
reading " : the bizarre mode of composition no longer counted, because at
any rate I " knew " what Whitehead meant, and what he said, moreover,
much more explicitly in Process and Reality.
   It was then, in the early 1 980s, that I heard Lewis Ford present the re
sults of his work for the first ti me, work without which, I bel ieve, I would
never have envisaged to attempt the present essay. According to Ford,
Science and Modern World ( li ke Process and Reality later) was the result
of a genuine work of montage, not only in the sense that some chapters
come not from the Lowell lectures, whose publication the book officia lly
constitutes, but from other lectures (the chapters on mathematics and in
science and religion ) . In fact, one should read the two chapters, on a b
straction and on God , as well as what Whitehead in his Preface calls a few
"slight" a mplifications inserted in other chapters, as i f they had been writ
ten by " another author," introducing ideas that the former neither pos-
                                 SCIENCE    AND   THE   MODERN     WORLD      1 1 9




sessed nor foresaw. This i s confirmed by the analysis of the notes ta ken
at Whitehead's classes given at Harvard by one of his students: rea ding
them, as we shall see when the time comes, one can fol low " i n rea l time"
a rad ical change that took place in April 1 925, two months after the Low
ell lectures.
   Lewis Ford 's great book, The Emergence of Whitehead's Metaphysics,
1 92 5- 1 92 9, will constitute a permanent reference for my reading. I thus
uneq uivocally take a stand in the midst of the controversy that d ivides
Whiteheadian philosophers today, between partisans of the analysis called
"compositional " or "genetic," and partisans of the "systematic " analysis,
accordi ng to which a single system is, as Whitehead himself wrote, ex
pressed in various modes by all the "American " books. Yet my problem is
not the same as Ford 's: it is not to reconstitute the various strata that
make up a book; I accept the results of his analysis. It is to bring to exis
tence that Whitehead who, in June 1 925, when he signed his preface to
Science and the Modern World, knew what had j ust happened to him
and nevertheless insisted that the reader accept this book as representing
"one tra in of thought."
   Was Whitehead hiding the truth ? Did he think that if the transforma
tion to which this book bears witness were known, he would be asked to
rewrite the whole thing, which bored him i n advance (Whitehead appar
ently hated bei ng bored ) ? O r else, wi thout exclud ing this fi rst hypothesis,
can we not understand that we have to deal, despite everything, with one
trai n of thought ? In that case, Whitehead will have said nothing b ut the
truth, a l beit not the whole truth .
   As I will not tire of emphasizing, Whitehead was a mathematician. My
reading of The Concept of Nature has tried to show a mathematician
engaged by the definition of the problem he assigns himself. My reading
of Science and the Modern World will try to bring to life a mathemati
cian seeking how to formulate a problem a nd learning from his problem
what it obliges him to . A unique trai n of thought, so be it, for the prob
lem is one, i nsofar as it refers to a unique imperative, its " having to be
thought." Yet this unique character does not contradict the possibility of
brutal transformations in the formulation of this problem, with regard to
the construction of its possible sol utions.
   A philosopher never stops reshuffling his concepts, and even changing
them [ . . . J ( QPh, 26-2 7 ) . A concept is bereft of meaning as long as it
is not connected to other concepts, and is not attached to a problem it
solves or contributes to solving ( Q Ph, 76 ) . Problems and solutions are
constructed of which one can say "A failure . . . A success . . . " but only
gradually and according to their coadaptations ( QPh, 79 ) .
1 2 0   FROM T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The mode of reading I propose to adopt implies an active staging, the
creation of explicit distinctions where, as Ford has shown, Whitehead
proceeded with the most radical indifference, making coexist what I wil l
bri ng to existence as distinct. One way o f specifying this contrast would
be to say that Whitehead seems to have tried to induce a transformation
in his reader by setting up a kind of "total spectacle " : he trusted brutal
transitions and unexpected coexistences to carry out a destabilization of
al l the habits that had to be surmounted, deliberately j arring thought out
of its ruts. My reading, for its part, is addressed to the creator of this spec
tacle. And perhaps it is due to the fact that the defeat of my first reading
means that I resisted the spectacle itsel f, and that, in any case, I was not the
only one to do so. From the viewpoint of the effect sought, it must be said
that Whitehead missed his mark, and my mode of reading tries to draw the
consequences from this.
    However, this reading also translates a obstinate, i rreduci ble fact: at
the same time as I was learning to read Whitehea d , I was a l so learning
to i nha bit the " i mage of thought" G i l les Deleuze cal l s into existence in
D ifference and Repetition. From the outset, therefore, I thought Deleuze
with Whitehead and Whitehead with Deleuze, two distinct and insepa
rable explorations. Yet these two explorations made the compositional
analysis proposed by Lewis Ford something quite other tha n a useful
survey: what Ford had discovered had a l ready been descri bed by De
leuze, and conversely, what Deleuze descri bed had been experienced by
Lewis Ford 's Whitehead .
   Problems o r Ideas emanate from imperatives of adventure that present
themselves as questions. This is why the problems are not separable from
a deciding power, a fiat, which, when it traverses us, makes us semi-divine
beings. Doesn't the mathematician already claim to belong to the race of
the gods? In the two fundamental processes of adjunction and condensa
tion, this power of decision, based on the nature of the problems to be
solved, is exercised to the highest degree, since it is always with regard to
an ideal body added by the mathematicians that an equation turns out to
be reducible, or not to be so ( D R, 255 ) .
   If my reading o f Science and the Modern World does not " miss its
m ark," the enigmatic terms of adjunction and condensation wil l come
a live for the reader, and if they come alive, what Whitehead tried to trans
mit will be transmitted by other means. As a sign, no longer of a wager of
reading, but of a commitment to reading, I propose an initial presentation
of it here.
    Adj unction : Deleuze takes his inspiration here from the method of
sol ving a lgebraic eq uations ina ugurated by Abel , then Galois. Algebra ic
                                  SCIENCE    AND   THE   MODERN     WORL D     1 2 1




equa tions such as " 3x + 5 = 1 4," for instance, capture the features of the
problem in such a way that it becomes explicated qua lia ble " in itself " to
provide the missing information, in this case the solution "x = 3 ." However,
in the general case, the goal is to complete the problem by adjoining to it
elements, dimensions, expectations that do not belong to its original formu
lation (such as the "twelfth camel " of my introduction . . . ). The " ideal
body " that is to be adjoined means that the solution no longer corresponds
to an item of information contained i mplicitly in the problematic situation,
and which is to be explicated. It can be cal led " idea l " because it designates
the "idea," the i mperative of the problem to be solved, which intervenes
explicitly in the new formulation conferred upon the problem. It therefore
reflects the learning process of what the solution obliges. The mathemati
cian, working simultaneously on the formulation of the problem and the
determination of the path that wi ll lead to its solution, does not limit herself
to orga nizing the description of a situation: adj unction designates her as
a creator, prohibiting this mathematician from separating the " fact," "the
problem has found its solution," from her shadow, that of the mathemati
cian, whose trusting intervention-the problem must have a solution-has
created the path toward this solution.
   Between the first lines of Science and the Modern World and the two
chapters added by Whitehead a fter April 1 925, plus the minor " amplifi
cations" inserted in other chapters, the train of thought can then i ndeed
be said to be " unique," responding, moreover, to a problematic situation
which Whitehead more than proba bly medita ted upon long before he
crossed over to America . If one admits that the problem did not d ictate
his solution, the " additions " nevertheless mark a turning poi nt, the one at
which Whitehead " ma kes a decision " : decides that the process of explana
tion in which he trusted is insufficient, and makes up his mind to construct
what the solution demands. It is then, and only then, that he commits him
sel f to a creation of concepts that wil l make him the most a udacious of
twentieth-century speculative thinkers.
   Condensation: Deleuze ta kes his i nspiration from Charles Peguy's
Clio: a difficulty one encountered suddenly passes through a point of res
olution that is a l most physical in the sense of critical poi nts of physics,
such as condensation, fusion, and so on. As a l i q uid condenses brutally,
the possibility of a path of solution bursts forth, and both the thought
and the way in which what was to be thought presented itsel f, all at once,
determine one another as i f i n a new begi nning of the world . A new be
ginning, not an ill umination, nor new, instantaneous evidence. Everything
begi ns ( aga i n ) , for the difficulty, having become the principle of sol ution,
wi l l obl ige us to go through once aga in what seemed to be stably
1 2 2   F R O M   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




acq uired, and this itinera ry will ulti mately decide what the principle
demanded .
   And indeed, everything will begin again, but in Process and Reality. For
in this case, the strata of composi tion wi ll no longer concern only chap
ters or paragraphs, but sometimes sentences that transform the meaning
of the paragraph when they are inserted . It will no longer be a matter of a
strange book, but of a labyrinth-book, a book about which one no longer
knows whether it has an a uthor, or whether it is not rather the book that
has fashioned its author, in an incessant hand-to hand combat between
what has been written and that to which what has been written will oblige
the writer. Whitehead was " traversed " by a " decision," a "fiat," which re
defined both thinker and problem, both of whom a re subject to a series of
questions that henceforth no longer belong to one or the other.
   Questions are imperatives, or rather q uestions express the relations of
the problems with the imperatives from which they proceed . Should we
take the example of the police to manifest the imperative nature of the
questions? "I'm the one who asks the questions," but in fact it is already
the dissolved ego of the interrogated that speaks through his executioner
( D R, 255 ) .
   The commitment t o read has been made, a n d it remains to answer it.
And first of all, to avoid going straight to Whitehead 's fiat. We must start
by exploring the initial formulation of the problem, in this case the thought
of the organism Whitehead intended to propose, since it is this thought
that must summon the adjunction through the discordant separation be
tween the percei ved possibility of a sol ution and the means to construct it.
And before this, once again, it remains to perceive something of the im
perative from which Whitehead 's adventure proceeds: the " trust " that
enabled him to create the modern epoch, that is, his epoch, as a doma in of
experimentation .
                                                              C H A P TER N I NE




A New Epoch?




          N A GENERATION
      I
                          which saw the Thirty Years ' War and remem
       bered Alva in the Netherlands, the worst that happened to men of
       science was that Galileo suffered an honourable detention and a
mild reproof, before dying peacefully in his bed ( SMW, 2 ) .
   A certa in tone has been struck, the history o f what w e cal l modern ra
tiona lity wil l not be placed under the banner of heroism. It was in vain
that Galileo, not without a rrogance, mounted an assa ult on the Roman
fortress: he will not figure in Whitehead's story as a ma rtyr brea king with
a tradition, but fa r rather as the hera ld of a cha nge in menta l ity.
   This new tinge to modern minds is a vehement and passionate interest
in the relation of general principles to irreducible and stubborn facts. All
the world over and at all times there have been practical men, absorbed in
"irreducible and stubborn facts "; all the world over and at all times there
have been men of philosophic temperament who have been absorbed in
the weaving of general principles. It is this union of passionate interest
in the detailed facts with equal devotion to abstract generalization which
forms the novelty in our present society ( SMW, 3 ) .
   The multiple, i ntricate event constituted by the appearance o f "the
modern mind " has, of course, caused many gal lons of ink to flow, and
every analysis, every tra nsformation into a story, every transformation
into thought is insepa rable from the d iagnosis given by the author to the
world in which she li ves: from the great song of progress, the decisive mo
ment when Man emerges from darkness, down to prophetic impreca tions
agai nst technology, calculation, or reason . Whitehead 's story is, of course,
no more verid ica l than any other, but it is origi nal in that his goa l is
1 2 4   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETAPH YS I C S




neither to celebrate nor to denounce. Whitehead thought he was living at
a key moment, he thought he was telling the story of an epoch that was
slipping into the past. He was certa i nly wrong i n this, for what he de
scribes sti l l constitutes the dominant mode of thought today. Yet it is
precisely this opti mism, factually unj ustified, that gives his prose its actu
al ity: today's reader can share, if not his optimism, at least his diagnosis.
And this very diagnosis fashions a form of " non-factual " optimism, the
possibility of breathing, laughing, separating the quite j usti fiable fear, in
spired in us by our history, from any duplication making that history the
justification for a judgment. It may be a very bad story, but it is no more
than that.
    In any case, it is an astonishing story. Whitehead 's goa l is not to judge
but to shake our judgmenta l routines, particularly those that feature " a
modern m i n d " in harmony with itself. A harmony supposed t o manifest
itself in particular by the convergence between the progress of science and
the new turn taken by phi losophy: the world must henceforth be de
scribed in terms of possible knowledge, and the "cosmos," that which one
does not decipher wi thout learning to inhabit it, must be relegated to the
storehouse of illusions. Thus, right from the first chapter, it is amply em
phasized that the dominant phi losophies of science have not been a nd are
still not in the least participants in the adventure of that science, which
they nevertheless clai m to understand and even to found. Of course, mod
ern scientists and phi losophers all testi fy just as well to the new authority
of facts, but in an antagonistic way.
    David Hume is paradigmatic in this regard. Does he not claim, to his
greater satisfaction, that the link between cause and effect can only be ar
bitrary, si nce no fact can establish it? By so doing, he disqualifies the faith
attested by scientists in an order of nature that it is their role to deci pher.
Whitehead admits, of course, that some aspects of Hume's doctrine were
taken up verba lly by some men of science, but, as we already know,
words don't count for him. What matters is that
    [ . . . 1 scientific faith has risen to the occasion, and has tacitly removed
the philosophic mountain ( SMW, 4 ) .
    The relevance o f Whitehead's proposition, rather shock ing for those
who cha l k up the critical spirit to science, is of course parti a l . It concerns
only " realist" scientists, not those-I have in mind many specialists in the
so-called human or social sciences-who limit themselves to identifying
or constructing regula rities, while boasting of not going any farther. And
it concerns only the critical philosophers, be they the descendants of
Hume or, l i ke Kant, those who were awakened by Hume from their dog
matic slumber. Yet it is also these philosophers who took charge of pro-
                                                      A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 2 5




moting the rationality known as modern. And the way they promoted it
is i ndeed, even today, capable of inspiring in scientists the reaction de
scri bed by Whitehea d. Let us l isten to Stephen Weinberg, one of those
physici sts who dream today of a " fina l theory," closing the search for the
laws of na ture and i mposing itself as the starting point for a l l rational
questions about all that exists:
   Ludwig Wittgenstein, who denied even the possibility of explaining
the slightest fact by reference to another, affirmed that "at the basis of
every modern conception of the world lies the illusion that the alleged
laws of nature are the explanations of natural phenomena." Such warn
ings leave me cold. To tell a physicist that the laws of nature are not ex
planations of natural phenomena is to tell a tiger in search of its prey that
all flesh is grass. The fact that we scientists do not know how to state in a
way that would garner the approval of philosophers what we do when
we search for scientific explanations does not mean that we are indulging
in a vain activity. Professional philosophers could help us to understand
what we are doing, but with or without them, we will continue to do it
( DFT, 2 1 -22 ) .
   For Whitehead, the conflict is modern insofar as i t opposes two types of
protagonists united by the respect for " facts " : phi losophers, who ensure
that the facts are not asked for more than they can deliver, and scientists,
who undertake to ask those facts to explai n themselves, to explain reality,
even u ltimate reality. And this conflict places modernity under the banner
not of a progressive history, but of a revolt: a " historical revolt" against
medieval rationalism, against which "observable, irreducible" facts became
a weapon. The hi storical fact is that modern science repudiates philoso
phy, without thereby repud iating the trust in an order of the world to be
deciphered, whereas modern philosophers, for their part, are devoted to
repudiating this trust, which they associate with an uncritical past, and to
betting on the individual mind, which alone can be rendered accounta ble
for the well-founded ness of the reasons a ssociated with an order, what
ever it may be.
   Thus the evolution of thought in the seventeenth century cooperated
with the enhanced sense of individual personality derived from the Mid
dle Ages. We see Descartes taking his stand upon his own ultimate mind,
which his philosophy assures him of: and asking about its relations to the
ultimate matter-exemplified, in the second Meditation by the human
body and a lump of wax-which his science assumes. There is Aaron's
rod, and the magicians ' serpents; and the only question for philosophy is,
which swallows which; or whether, as Descartes thought, they all lived
happily together ( SMW, 1 42-1 43 ) .
1 2 6   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   The modern epoch is thus placed under the banner of a recurrent dif
ficulty, not of a progress of reason to be interpreted . Yet this difficulty
might perhaps not be very important if it affected only such special ized
thin kers as scientists and philosophers. For Whitehead, the true problem
is that we-a nd this " we " includes a l l those who accept the image of a
reality ruled by laws-have fallen into the habit of thi nking in an incoher
ent way.
   This radical inconsistency at the basis of modern thought accounts for
much that is half-hearted and wavering in our civilisation. It would not
be going too far to say that it distracts thought. It enfeebles it, by reason
of the inconsistency lurking in the background. After all, the men of the
Middle Ages were in pursuit of an excellency of which we have nearly
forgotten the existence. They set before themselves the ideal of the attain
ment of a harmony of the understanding. We are content with superficial
orderings from diverse arbitrary starting points. For instance, the enter
prises produced by the individualistic energy of the European peoples
presuppose physical actions directed to final causes. But the science which
is employed in their development is based on a philosophy which asserts
that physical causation is supreme, and which disjoins the physical cause
from the final end. It is not popular to dwell on the absolute contradic
tion here involved. It is the fact, however you gloze it over with phrases
(SMW, 76 ) .
   Whitehead's analysis is diagnostic, a nd the d iagnosis sti ll holds true.
Suffice it to think of the i neptitude of the propositions induced by the
postulate that Darwinian selection must suffice to explain the evol ution
of living beings because it acts as a barrier agai nst the i rrationality of fi
nal ca uses. The transmission of genes and their selection give meaning to
the only way of accom modating our own " finalized " enterprises ( i nclud
ing science ) to a world in which physica l causality reigns supreme. In the
name of this " holy war" against fina l causes, a l l human activities are sum
moned to a ffirm their submission to selective logic. As a result, the i ntel
lectua l a nd artistic capabilities of human beings, whose problem is that
they appear to be somewhat excessive with regard to strict surviva l needs
in these mammals, have been related by some contemporary spokesper
sons of Darwinism to sexua l selection. This means, whatever circumlocu
tions may be used, that the person who summons us to accept this sober
truth is also in the service of the only thing that rea lly matters: the trans
mission of her genes . Nor is it a matter of becoming indignant at the i dea
that one's ardor responds to a project of seduction, copulation, and re
cruitment of as many vehicles as possible for one's own genes. The point
is simply to note the imaginative poverty, the "enfeebled though t" of
                                                         A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 2 7




those who expose themselves i n such a deliberate way to the oldest argu
ment in philosophy, the retorsive argument, which can be expressed as
follows: as a test, apply to yourself the statement you j ust made, what
your statement affirms about everybody else: turnabout is fai r play.
   Whitehead does not denounce the modern epoch, but speaks of it as of
something that must, a nd will, pass. His diagnosis is also a prognosis. He
identifies the weak ness, the hesita tion, a nd the confusion concealed by
the successes that allow this epoch to be identified with progress, but this
wea kness, hesita tion, and confusion are descri bed in a way that affirms
trust: the adventure continues; that is, the incoherence is temporary and
" epochal."
   Whitehead 's great thesis in Science and the Modern World is that sci
ence ca n play an important role in the epochal change called for by the
adventure of ideas. This is why, in the same book, the goal may be to
j ustify, agai nst the philosophers, the scientists' faith i n an order of nature,
and, against the scientists, to place the history of modern science under
the ba nner of what he ca lls " the fal l acy of misplaced concreteness." A
concrete cha racter has been " misplaced," that is, conferred upon abstrac
tions whose success is that of modern physics. Yet Whitehead d iagnoses
that this very success is henceforth impeded by its own a bstractions. The
physici sts' matter ca n no longer be understood on the basis of the motion
of masses susceptible of "simple local ization" (an i nstant without thick
ness, a poi nt without extension ) .
  A t mry epoch the assumptions o f a science are giving way, when they
exhibit symptoms of the epicyclic state from which astronomy was res
cued in the sixteenth century. Physical science is now exhibiting such
symptoms ( SMW, 1 35 ) .
   The reference t o astronomy saved from the epicycles designates the
history that runs from Copernicus to Kepler, more than sixty years later.
And it was Kepler who took what may have been the most difficult step,
rejecting the epicycles to which all scientists before him, including Coper
nicus, had recourse to make mathematical description and observation
converge. Kepler dared to demand the secrets of pla netary motion from
observational data themselves .
   Far more than Copernicus or Galileo, Kepler enters the lineage of those
powerless visionaries about whom Whitehead wrote that they have ulti
mately guided the world . It is i mpossible to know to what extent White
head compared quantum physics, whose birth he witnessed and which,
from his viewpoint, " exhibits" epicyclic phenomena, to such pre-Keplerian
systems as that of Copernicus, who maintained the postulate of circular
motion, or that of Tycho Brahe, who tried both to keep the earth at the
1 2 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO PHY   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




center and to make the planets rotate a round a sun that itself rotated
a round the ea rth. Yet the parallel, that is, the anticipation of a " new
Kepler," can hold ( it was proposed by Arthur Koestler, who explicitly
took his inspiration from Whitehead i n The Sleepwalkers), and it is all the
more interesting i n that Kepler affirmed a new fa ith i n the order of nature.
Not a faith in the power of the facts " in themselves," brute and obstinate,
but in the possi bility that a deta iled examination of the facts may lead not
to arbitra riness, but to ha rmony : the living ideal of aesthetic ha rmony. For
it is precisely this faith that Whitehead was to associate with the notion he
placed at the center of Science and the Modern World: the notion of
orgamsm.
    However, the parallel must be drawn cautiously, for we must distinguish
Kepler's " faith" from his theory as astronomers have inherited it. The
mathematical construction of planetary ellipses responds to a quite deter
minate field of data, those of astronomy, which this construction enables
us not on ly to reproduce but to organize in an intel ligible and economical
way. Correlatively, the " new Kepler," who Whitehead possibly anticipated,
would be a working physicist, not a visionary inspired by her fa ith in
nature's harmony. With regard to the organism, in contrast, it is better to
speak not of a scientific concept but of a " doctrine," " thought," or " phi
losophy." For Whitehead, the organism, "as the complete expression of
what takes place," is a "generic" notion, which means that it cannot desig
nate a privi leged field of ideas. The questions that will be articulated
around the notion of organism must concern all those who are interested
in a particular aspect of the order of nature, but they must not ta ke the
place of their specific questions. The success of the " philosophy of organ
ism" wou ld be to have each of them situate its own specificity in a positive
way, and not, like the " materia list theory," mutilate their questions.
    One might of course think that the biological connotation of the term
chosen by Whitehead entails a privilege, but the privilege i n question is
strategic: it has to do with the particular situation of the life sciences. For
Whitehea d, they offer the i nteresting pa rticularity of having been handi
capped, rather than rendered fruitful, by what he ca lls " scientific materi
alism," that is, the explanation of all change in terms of cha nges i n "ex
terna l " relations between beings that do not change in themselves. This
handicap has even become a pure and si mple contradiction with the
modern doctrine of biologica l evolution, which shou ld be enough to i m
pose the a bandonment of " scientific materialism."
   The aboriginal stuff, or material, from which a materialistic philosophy
starts is incapable of evolution [ . . . 1 Evolution, on the materialistic
theory, is reduced to being another word for the description of the changes
                                                        A   N E W   E PO C H ?   1 2 9




in the external relations between portions of matter [ . . . 1 There can
merely be change, purposeless and unprogressive. But the whole point of
the modern doctrine is the evolution of the complex organisms from ante
cedent states of less complex organisms. The doctrine thus cries aloud for
a conception of the organism as fundamental for nature ( SMW, 1 07).
     As I have already emphasized, t h e contemporary leading l ights o f
Darwinian theory glorify this theory for ensuring t h e compati bility be
tween the " complexity of l iving beings " and a " material ist," or more ex
actly " physica list" theory, which limits itself to defining such complexity
as highly improbable, with reference to the omnipotence of selective sort
ing. Whitehead did not have to dea l with the poverty of contemporary
propositions, but he knew that in a ny case selective explanation was
doomed to substitute one and the same monotonous, "epicyclic " answer
( i n this case, "adaptionist " ) for the multiple questions that arise for those
who study living beings . Hence the crying need for another sta rting point.
Yet this starting point must not constitute a di rect answer to the crying
need: Whitehead is no " v italist" in the sense that he would claim to know
"what is life," or what the notions of goal and of progress mean for living
bei ngs. What is demanded of the thought of the organism will not be an
explanation of life but a characterization of the order of nature itsel f.
     The first appearance of a reference to the organism in Science and the
Modern World does not, moreover, concern biology but physics itsel f,
and more precisely quantum theory as it had been organized around the
model of the a tom due to Niels Bohr. This model seems to indicate that
the electron-there it is again-does not have a continuous motion but is
lia ble to occupy a series of discrete positions i n space during successive
durations in time. It is as though the permanence of the electron must be
understood not as the permanence of something that remains " the same,"
but as the permanence of a self-repeating pattern. Indeed , this interpreta
tion would make it perfectly normal that the description of a continuous
motion, presupposing a continuous succession of instants, is not appro
pria te for the electrons that orbit around the nucleus in the quantum
atom . The electron " does not exist" i n a given moment. What exists
" takes the time" required by a vi bration or a succession of contrasts. And
it is when he descri bes what wou ld be an " organised system of vibratory
strea ming of energy " that Whitehead suddenly speaks, without the least
wa rning, of a "vi bratory orga nism," only to concl ude a bruptly, in a mode
that is as hyperbol ic as it is out of place ( officially, the chapter deals with
mathematics in the history of thought) .
  The field is now open for the introduction of some new doctrine of
organism which may take the place of the materialism with which, since
1 3 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




the seventeenth century, science has saddled philosophy [ . . . I Such a
displacement of scientific materialism, if it ever takes place, cannot fail to
have important consequences in every field of thought ( SMW, 3 6 ) .
   We need hardly point out that quantum mechanics has by n o means
taken the road Whitehead hoped for. For him, the description of the quan
tum atom could only announce a new rea lism, since science owes it to
itself to try to elucidate the order of nature, a rea l ism that would aban
don the vision of a world described as a continuous succession of i nstan
taneous material configurations. The quantum theory of Heisenberg,
Born, Dirac, and von Neumann was to preserve continuity and let go of
realism. As far as I know, Whitehead never commented on this turn taken
by physics. Yet everything indicates that he would have maintained his
judgment of 1 925 concerning the epicyclic symptoms exhibited by physics.
   It is importa nt to emphasize once again that Whitehead does not envis
age any " theory " enabl ing the definition of both the ( quantic) vi bratory
organism and of the living organ ism . His proposition has no ambition to
provide a un ifying point of view, as was successively proposed by the no
tions of energy, system, or information. The organism does not designate
a possi ble obj ect of knowledge, it does not constitute an answer a round
which the sciences would converge, but it is rather, as we shall see, what
should oblige us to th ink a bout the d ivergence of their questions as a re
flection of the " l i ving values" that constitute the order of natu re. And the
living value, here, is none other than the affirmation that refuses to be
separated from its own shadow, simultaneously affirming what it has
succeeded in producing and the ideal without wh ich this success would
not have been possible. As such, the thought of the organism is obviously
itself a l iving value, inseparable from the project of articulating, in a fi
nally coherent way, what the modern era has opposed i n the mode of
contradiction. In the voca bulary of The Concept of Nature, the organism
is what will prevent nature from bifurcating and will articulate what
modern thought opposes: the free subject, assigning itself goals that affirm
the supremacy of final ca uses, and the indifferent objective world, which
affirms the supremacy of physical causes. It is thus not a unifying vision
of the world that is proposed with the organism, but what Whitehead
designates as a new mode of abstraction, capable of reconciling science
and philosophy.
   You cannot think without abstractions; accordingly, it is of the utmost
importance to be vigilant in critically revising your modes of abstraction.
It is here that philosophy finds its niche as essential to the healthy prog
ress of society. It is the critic of abstractions. A civilisation which cannot
burst through its current abstractions is doomed to sterility after a very
                                                        A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 1




limited period of progress. A n active school of philosophy is quite as
important for the locomotion of ideas, as is an active school of railway
engineers for the locomotion of fuel (SMW, 59).
   The definition o f " fuel " is obviously inseparable from that o f the tech
niques that define motors, gea rs, and infrastructures. Coa l, gas, and elec
tricity only became resources thanks to the ceaselessly renewed i nvention
of what a ra ilway is. The huffing and puffing of a locomotive, the heroic
ages of the ra ilroad workers, can be ca lled the victims of progress, but
they testify to the inventiveness of ra ilway engineers. According to White
head, our modes of abstraction have not benefitted from such creative
and critical efforts, and ideas have become unable to catalyze a " hea lthy
progress of society." We do not know when Whitehead bega n to conceive
of the notion of orga nism in relation to the question of the order of na
ture. What seems to me certa in is that the question of " social progress,"
that is, a lso of the diagnosis given of " progress " as defined by the modern
world, is considera bly ea rlier. The new mode of a bstraction Whitehead
na mes orga nism must therefore be approached twice. What it proposes
to set in motion the ideas concerning nature, to be sure, but the proposed
mode of setting in motion is insepa ra ble from the possi ble setting in
motion of many other things as wel l . To prolong Whitehead's analogy, a
ra ilway engineer is acti ve in solving problems invol ving motion and fuel ,
but he a lso dreams o f a l l that can also b e set i n motion thanks to this
sol ution: not only travelers, mercha ndise, minerals, and soldiers, but also
ways of living, ways of communication, modes of distri bution of the pos
sible and the impossi ble . . .
   It is, however, hard to describe at the sa me time the technical conception
of a new system of combustion and the dreams of those who conceive it,
who themselves make the difference between what depends on them and
what they must leave up to others. Likewise, when it comes to thinking of
the organism with Whitehead, the question will be that of the order of
nature. What is more, it will take us along on a metaphysical adventure in
which the actors of the modern world, which Whitehead dreams of seeing
transformed, will no longer have a distinct voice in the chapter. In Science
and the Modern World, Whitehead has absolutely no concern for this kind
of difference, but " thinking with Whitehea d " does not mean authorizing
oneself all the liberties that Whitehead took with his readers. Th is is why,
before approaching the question of the organism as such, I have chosen
to bring Whitehead's "dreams" to life, that is, to give a l l its importa nce to
his reading of the modern world . The question of science is of course part
of this reading, and the new type of movement Whitehead wishes to con
fer upon scientific ideas is the intended contri bution of Science and the
1 3 2   FROM T H E   P H I LOSO P H Y   O F   NATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




Modern World to the new epoch that is to be brought about. But what we
must leave behind is even broader, since it includes all the "superficial ar
rangements " to which we have become accustomed. In particular-this is
where I shall begin, and this is what is most surprising-the habit of salut
ing as a progress religion's loss of authority, that is, the loss of religion as a
living source of va lue.
   That Gali leo set out to attack the authority of the Church as far as the
" positive" truth of the world is concerned is pa rt of the classical history
of the progress that leads up to us. To be sure, Galileo was a Christian,
but progress, as it is narrated, holds that he partici pates i n the history of
the differentiation between persona l faith and the public authority of
rel igion, a history that (in European countries, at least) ends up with the
contemporary sel f-evidence that religion must be confined to a strictly per
sonal conviction, merely a particular version of the moral law i nscribed i n
each person's heart, without a n y incidence on the "public" world. Ga l i leo
did not, of course, demand, against Revelation, the possibi l i ty that each
person should determine in all freedom how the world works: rather, he
preached the exclusive authority of science in this regard . But this public
a uthority of science is also taken as part of progress as it is na rrated .
Galileo therefore participates in progress. He disqua lified rel igion where
we know henceforth that it was interfering in what was not its business,
in what should concern only science.
   Whi tehead refuses to define this " privatization of rel igion" as progress,
that is, to define the public authority of rel igion, by a retroacti ve judg
ment, as "a retrograde movement of progress," as what was to be elimi
nated. To tell the story of the modern world, for Whitehead, is also to tell
the story of a degeneration. " Modern " rel igion boasts of being a testimony
in the hea rt of the bel iever, without legitimate incidence on public life. In
fact, it has been reduced to a kind of supplement of soul, embell ishing a
comforta ble life.
   [ . . . J For over two centuries religion has been on the defensive, and on
a weak defensive. The period has been one of unprecedented intellectual
progress. In this way a series of novel situations have been produced for
thought. Each such occasion has found the religious leaders unprepared.
Something, which has been proclaimed to be vital, has finally, after strug
gle, distress and anathema, been modified and otherwise interpreted. The
next generation of religious apologists then congratulates the religious
world on the deeper insight which has been gained. The result of the con
tinued repetition of this undignified retreat, during many generations, has
at last almost entirely destroyed the intellectual authority of religious think
ers (SMW, 1 8 8 ) .
                                                       A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 3




  It may a muse free thinkers that the succession of Catholic popes since
Pa ul VI, instead of accepting the need to proceed to the retrea t that
everybody j udges necessary and has, a t any ra te, come much too late
as fa r as the marriage of priests, contraception, or abortion are con
cerned , hang on to these prohibitions aga i nst all comers. We think that
what they do not concede, some successor will sooner or later yiel d . And
no doubt they ha ve foreseen it too, for they too belong to the history
marked by the degeneration of rel igion, the und ignified retreat from the
positions it defined as vita l . They undergo the epoch as i f it poses no
other alternatives than defeat or resistance to cha nge.
  Religion will not regain its old power until it can face change in the
same spirit as does science ( SMW, 1 8 9 ) .
   The author o f these lines does not define himself as a Christian, nor
even as a believer. He will soon fi nd himself constra i ned to i nvolve God
in the conceptual construction of the order of nature, but he will never be
tempted by any confusion between this necessity and a j ustification of re
ligion as such, much less of any specific religion. The question of the fu
ture of rel igion is thus, for Whitehead, completely distinct from the meta
physical question of the order of creation, and the place of human beings
in this creation . Whatever the doctrine may be of what God asks of hu
man beings, this doctrine's destiny depends on the living values of which
it constitutes an affirmation.
   The power of G od is the worship He inspires ( SMW, 1 92 ) .
   The term " worship " is one o f those that Francophones can envy the
English language, for it unites when French fragments through such words
as " cuite," " adoration," and " veneration." For Whitehead , worship fi rst
signi fies " surrender to the claim for assimilation," a claim whose motive
force, he writes, is mutual love. The crucial point is that this definition op
erates in immanence. " That which " demands assimilation has no d istinct
identity. Of course, Whitehead spea ks of a force, but this force, which he
calls mutual love, is not the force of God 's love, a God who might demand
our surrender. This love belongs to the very experience of worship, and the
effect called surrender is not explai ned by a ca use, but characterized by a
style. To evoke God's power does not i mply, in Whitehead, the preliminary
affirmation of His existence, for both the God of a religion and the wor
ship that is framed by this religion derive, for Whitehead, from a funda
menta l experience of humanity: rel igious vision. A vision of which no re
ligion ca n be the privileged expression, al though each one develops and
collapses, from epoch to epoch, according to whether its doctrine, its rites,
its commands, or its definitions do or do not evoke this vision, revi ve it, or
inhibit it, giving it or failing to give it an adequate expression.
1 3 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   Religion is the reaction of human nature to its search for God. The pre
sentation of God under the aspect of power awakens every modern in
stinct of critical reaction. This is fatal; for religion collapses unless its main
positions command immediacy of assent. In this respect the old phraseol
ogy is at variance with the psychology of modern civilisations (SMW, 1 9 1 ) .
   The modern critica l spi rit could indeed be ca l led " rel igious " since it,
like what it denounces, is a reaction to a proposition dea ling with God .
The problem is that its axis, " to bel ieve or not to bel ieve " in God , testifies
in its way to the " weakening" of modern thought, and gives rather in
adequate expression to the rel igious search to which it owes its passion.
The q uestion " Does God rea lly exist? " is crucial only if God is concei ved
as demand ing and forbidding, that is, if the statements that include Him
claim to benefit from the authority to which the term " rea lly" always al
ludes, whether this authority refers to pol itica l power, to reason, or to the
truth of a revelation.
   In other words, Whitehead is an agnostic, in the sense that the question
" Does God rea lly exist ? " has, for him, no va lid answer outside of a reli
gious practice . Yet his agnosticism does not commun icate with a si mple
"anthropology of the religious feeling," whose a uthor would contem
plate as if from nowhere, submitting to a neutra l, objective, and in short
scientific gaze a human feature from which he himsel f would be rather
mysteriously free. His agnosticism is positively constructivist, that is, a lso
pragmatic, for the way rel igion is descri bed commits the person who de
scri bes it, i mpl ies a wager on wha t ca n " make a religion hold," on what
the rel igious feeling might indeed be capa ble of. For Whitehead, the wa
ger does seem to bear tod ay upon a rel igion'S ability to accept and affi rm
that the power of God it invokes can indeed be understood as the way
this religion defines the kind of power it claims. God is the name for the
efficacy upon human bei ngs of the rel igious vision that they nouri sh, cul
tivate, and constitute as an ingredient of their life.
   The twofold possibil ity of nourishing this constructivist conception of
the religious vision, and of the rel igions that give it an expression, which
is always "epocha l," and of trusting the ability of those of his readers who
ad here to a rel igion to accept this conception , must be understood as a
testimony to the time. More precisely, it would be a testimony to the ep
ochal change that Whitehead anticipates and tries to carry out. A construc
tivism squared : by provid ing a constructivist version of religion, White
head does not stop with the operation of demystification with which the
statement " rel igion is a construction " is i mmediately associated, but he
fights for the future of this construction, for the statements that will one
day inspire a new immediate assent and provide rel igious vision with the
                                                        A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 5




words and practices capa ble of stabil izing their collective importance,
i rreducible to a question of psychological comfort.
    Religion has emerged into human experience mixed with the cru dest
fancies of barbaric imagination. Gradually, slowly, steadily the vision re
curs in history under nobler form and with clearer expression. It is the one
element in human experience which persistently shows an upward trend. It
fades and then recurs. But when it renews its force, it recurs with an added
richness and purity of content. The fact of the religious vision, and its his
tory of persistent expansion, is our one ground for optimism. Apart from
it, human life is a flash of occasional enjoyments lighting up a mass of pain
and misery, a bagatelle of transient experience (SMW, 1 92 ) .
  It is thus without incoherence, but, as h e writes, " in all diffidence;" that
Whitehea d ventures, with regard to the vision that nourishes all religion,
the words that make him a witness to what he believes his epoch is ca
pable of.
   Religion is the vision of something which stands beyond, behind, and
within, the passing flux of immediate things: something which is real, and
yet waiting to be realised: something which is a remote possibility, and
yet the greatest of present facts; something that gives meaning to all that
passes, and yet eludes apprehension; something whose possession is the
final good, and yet beyond all reach; something which is the ultimate
ideal, and the hopeless quest ( SMW, 1 9 1 -1 92 ) .
   When h e was writing Science and the Modern World, Whitehead did
not yet know that this " something" would soon be situated a t the very
heart of a mode of a bstraction ai ming to " set in motion " an idea that he
had not yet constituted as a resource, that of a " cosmos." The thought of
the organism proposed in this book, for its part, has no direct incidence
on the religious vision . It designates the question of the order of nature,
not of what may be situated beyond it. The incidence is thus merely indi
rect, but it is clear: what Whitehead is undertaking, like a rai lway engineer,
is to critically ( re)set in motion ideas that are not themselves religious but
which, beyond their contradictions, have settled i nto an agreement that
defines as progress the denial of religion as an expression of l i ving values.
   Yet there would be nothing overly catastrophic in the privatization of
moral worlds, God speaking in the intimacy of each person's heart, if
other names than that of God had come to sta bil ize what matters to
human l i fe beyond itself.
   Whitehead does not cite Max Weber, who had proposed to associate
the rise of capitalism with the anguished question of sal vation with
which Protestants found themselves confronted, a question addressed to
each individual alone and undecidahle by defin ition. If he had done so,
1 3 6       FROM   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   NATURE   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




he would certainly not have been moved by the somber grandeur of hab
its of thought that make the accumulation of capital an end i n itsel f, but
would have read in it the best testi mony to the barbarous i magination,
featuri ng a despotic God and a nature that has bifurcated . The world is
reduced to a scene bereft of mean ing in itself, i n which the only thing that
matters, the individua l's sa lvation, is won or lost. But Whitehead pre
ferred to frame the question in a d ifferent way. The question that worries
him, as always, is that of a bstraction, and more precisely the lack of resis
tance characteristic of the modern epoch to the i ntolerant rule of abstrac
tions that declare everything that esca pes them fri volous, i nsignificant,
or senti menta l . We must take seriously the fact that the disasters of the
modern world, its ugliness a nd its brutality, are part of what is ca lled
" progress " ; what has been done was done in the name of progress. We
must think of the widely shared and plausible cha racter of this reference
to progress as an " epochal fact."
   In other word s, Whitehead ra ises the problem sta rting out from those
who have " sung a long" with i ndustrial development, while reserving the
right to deplore its excesses. In particular, he wonders why so many re
ma rka ble people-a nd he cites some of his col leagues-have been able to
accept and even approve, define as the price and even as the precondi
tion of progress the " rational ization " that reduces workers to " mere
ha nds, drawn from the pool of labour," and nature to a set of exploit
able resources .
   [ . I Self-respect, and the making the most of your own individual
        .   .



opportunities, together constituted the efficient morality of the leaders
among the industrialists of that period. The western world is now suffer
ing from the limited moral outlook of the three previous generations [ . . . I
A striking example of this state of mind is to be seen in London where
the marvelous beauty of the estuary of the Thames, as it curves through
the city, is wantonly defaced by the Charing Cross railway bridge, con
structed apart from any reference to aesthetic values (SMW, 1 96 ) .
   Here, Whitehead cou ld b e considered a precursor o f ecology. For him,
the ugliness of the Cha ring Cross ra ilway bridge testifies to a catastrophic
divorce, not from " purely aesthetic" values but from va lues that are aes
thetic in the sense that they testify to the reverence of human beings to
wa rd their envi ronment, a nd therefore to the intrinsic value they recog
nize in their envi ronment. He might also be con sidered a Ma rxist without
knowing it, for the domination of a bstraction is what is presupposed and
rea l ized by the process of commod ification, when all concrete produc
tion is reduced to its exchange va lue in a regime of generalized equiva
lence, and when the l i vi ng l a hor of h u ma n heings is eva l u a ted as " I a hor
                                                         A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 7




force." Yet there would be a risk of misunderstand ing in both cases, be
cause, for Whitehead, one should not attack one i ntolerant a bstraction by
another intolerant abstraction. When they turn the capital ist redefinition
of thi ngs and of social relations, or its contempt for the environment, into
the privileged key for a reading of the modern epoch, both the mil itant
revolutiona ries and the protectors of nature rely on an abstraction that is
in danger of being intolerant. Indeed, whoever says " key " says " mode of
reading that is blind to its own selectivity," for the key designates its lock
as the door's only relevant element. And if they rely on such an abstrac
tion, Whitehead would no doubt have insisted, however wel l-founded
their i nterventions and however relevant thei r denunciations, thei r moral
horizon risks being j ust as limited as that of their adversa ries.
   For Whitehead, the tale the modern world obl iges us to tell is thus, in
the first place, of how an affirmation of reason, of a vigorous and virile
reason chasing away superstition, but a lso of a short-sighted reason lack
ing in-depth vision, was able to contribute effectively to the liberation of
minds in the eighteenth century, but became fatal in the nineteenth century.
What he calls the " history of thought " is a history that is above all collec
tive and anonymous, which must be stated in terms of " habits of thought,"
that is, of the organizations that stabilize those habits as well, providing
them with a protected envi ronment in which they can be perpetuated even
when their destructive consequences a re obvious. As we shall see in what
follows, whoever speaks of a " stable habit implyi ng a protected environ
ment" refers to the general notions a rticulated by the " philosophy of the
organism." This means, in return, that the latter is indeed an a bstract, not a
salvific doctrine. Abstraction is necessary for setti ng resources in motion,
but it does not dictate the direction this motion must take. In the present
case, it does not define what must be done, because it is just as appropriate
for the description of what has happened to us. Yet it obliges us to think of
what has happened to us i n a way that is not the fatality or routine refra i n
about the normal price t o p a y for progress.
   In fact, what those visionaries of the origi ns-Gali leo, Newton,
Leibniz--could sca rcely have dared to hope for has i ndeed become a daily
routine in our universities. And this routine has also betrayed the trust
that bore them, the trust in a global order to be deciphered in the deta il of
facts. Nevertheless, the certa inties, value j udgments, and bl i ndnesses of
thei r uni versity hei rs do not a uthorize a ny a posteriori requisition against
these visiona ries. Nor do they reflect a n " i deology " i n the sense that it
could be separated from the active, i nventive thought on which it would
be parasitica l . They reflect what happened to thought itsel f, the wea k
ness with which it pays for the particular strength i t has acqui red , i n the
1 3 8   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




protected envi ronments in which it has developed . The problem is not
that the " vision " of the origins has become a ha bit, but that it has be
come a " professional habit." According to Whitehea d, the greatest dis
covery of the modern epoch has been the " method of training profession
als." This is what accounts for both its formida ble strength and its
eminent wea kness : the organization of the problems and responsibilities
of public life, as wel l as of school and university tra ining, have been
placed under the banner of " professiona lization."
   Each profession makes progress, but it is progress in its own groove.
Now to be mentally in a groove is to live in contemplating a given set of
abstractions. The groove prevents straying across country, and the ab
straction abstracts from something to which no further attention is paid
[ . . . 1 The remainder of life is treated superficially, with the imperfect
categories of thought derived from one profession ( SMW, 1 97 ) .
   Professional ization h a s spread t o all practices, including that of scien
tists. Whitehead makes it responsible, moreover, for a certain stagnation
of science in the course of the last twenty yea rs of the nineteenth century,
   [ . . . l one of the dullest stages of thought since the time of the First
Crusade ( SMW, 1 0 1 ) .
   Whitehead does not deny that the professional ization o f science may
be associated with the rapid progress of what have become " scientific
disci plines." But this is no reason to find a justification of professiona liza
tion. Wherever it exi sts, this progress comes in the first instance from the
fact that research, even if it did not have new ideas as motive forces,
could benefit from technological development. As Whitehead emphasizes,
this situation is pa rticula rly clea r in physics: whereas from a technical
viewpoint, Gali leo could have performed his experiments in front of the
fa mily of King Minos, an experi ment l i ke that of M ichelson, which re
sulted in the relativistic questioning of space-ti me, could not have taken
place before the moment it was carried out. The possibility of envisaging
a measure of the speed of l ight as compared to the ether testifies not so
much to the inventive strength of a science that would have escaped pro
fessiona lization as if by miracle, as to the d i rect symbiosis with technical
innovation from which this science benefits.
   The eighteenth century opened with the quiet confidence that at last
nonsense had been gotten rid of. To-day we are at the opposite pole of
thought. Heaven knows what seeming nonsense may not tomorrow be
demonstrated truth. We have recaptured some of the tone of the early nine
teenth century, only on a higher imaginative level. The reason why we are
on a higher imaginative level is not because we have finer imagination,
but because we have better instruments (SMW, 1 1 4 ) .
                                                        A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 3 9




     If professionalization does not prevent us from speaking of a certa in
progress of science, it has, however, been cata strophic from the viewpoint
of the way so-ca l led modern society has been thought and transformed .
For Whitehead, the bui lders of the Cha ring Cross bridge were genuine
professiona ls, proud of not allowing any senti menta l considerations such
as harmony or bea uty to enter into their calculations. Likewise, those
who today manage what are ca lled the " human resources " of corporations
are proud to have the strength to abstract from the immediate, concrete
consequences of their management in the na me of the pitiless necessities
of globa l competition .
     We should not be surprised, therefore, if the last chapter of Science and
the Modern World, entitled " Requisites for Social Progress," deals mainly
with the question of education. In fact, this question had a l ready occupied
pa rt of Whitehead 's life, when he left Cambridge for London. From 1 9 1 0
to 1 924, Whitehead abandoned h i s " gown " and devoted hi mself to " the
town." He took on heavy academic and administrative responsibilities, and
he was also an active participant in movements for educationa l reform .
     Of course, the way Whitehead ra ises the problem of education is not at
a l l that of a professiona l pedagogue. His gu iding idea is that children a re
lively and interested, and that the first problem in ed ucation is to nourish
interest without killing life. What Whitehead ca lls education does not,
therefore, in the first instance designate a rel iable tra nsmission of infor
mation, or a training in skills that could be evaluated, nor, moreover, the
opposite slogan, the respect of differences and the autonomy of the " learner."
In fact, education mobil izes all the themes that wil l oblige him to think as
a philosopher: coherence, interest, importance, life, values, emotions, spe
cialization, abstraction, and above all trust. All themes of which the thought
of the organism wi l l propose an initia l a rticulation . . .
     With the question of the organism, we thus come to the genuine epi
center of Whitehead's thought, at the point of articulation of the diagno
sis he gave of the modern epoch and the phi losophy of the organism he
undertook to construct. If Whitehead, following Wi l l ia m Ja mes, became
so interested in the creator's trust and the power of habit, it is perhaps
also because the ed ucator must affirm them both j ust as much. Ed ucators
must trust the creative character of what they are charged with transmit
ting, and, a lthough they a re concerned with the di fference between good
and bad habits, they cannot denounce habit as such. They will never turn
it into the manifesta tion of a regretta ble tendency of the human mind,
or a form of voluntary servitude. It was, moreover, on this point that
Whitehead expl icitly refused to follow Bergson, who proposed to identify
the fascination with abstracti on with a feature of human intell igence as
1 4 0   F R O M T H E   PH I LOS O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




such, or a trap into which i ntelligence falls almost necessarily. Whitehead
was not fighting against habits, nor did he call for a future i n which every
one would be a visiona ry. In the possibility of a transformation of ha bits,
he had the kind of trust that the craft of an educator presupposes and
reqUIres.
   For Whitehead, thinking a bout what social progress requi res designates
ed ucation as a crucial site, in which an epoch j udges itself on the basis
of the way it fashions those who wi ll prolong its choices, strengths, and
weaknesses. Education can create the habit of appreciating concrete facts,
complete facts. It can also create the opposite habit, as is the case with the
education that produces professiona ls, the habit of yield i ng in the face
of what is unaccepta ble, of adhering to what is i ncred ible. Because for
Whitehead, the link is obviously di rect between the blind way in which
thinkers who stuck to secure a nd definite habits of thought, that is, pro
fessiona ls, have subscri bed to the concrete unacceptable consequences
of industrial development, and the way in which other thinkers, just as
" serious," have prolonged , in a routine way, the incred ible theses that
made nature bifurca te and red uced rea lity to the agitation of stupid, in
sensate matter.
   When you understand all about the sun and all about the atmosphere
and all about the rotation of the earth, you may still miss the radiance of
the sunset. There is no substitute for the direct perception of the concrete
achievement of a thing in its actuality. We want concrete fact with a high
light thrown on what is relevant to its preciousness. What I mean is art
and aesthetic education [ . . . 1 "art " in the general sense that I require is
any selection by which the concrete facts are so arranged as to elicit at
tention to particular values which are realisable by them. For example,
the mere disposing of the human body and the eyesight so as to get a
good view of the sunset is a simple form of artistic selection. The habit of
art is the habit of enjoying vivid values. But, in this sense, art concerns
more than sunsets. A factory, with its machinery, its community of opera
tives, its social service to the general population, its dependence upon
organising and designing genius, its potentialities as a source of wealth to
the holders of its stock is an organism exhibiting a variety of vivid values.
What we want to train is the habit of apprehending such an organism in
its completeness ( SMW, 1 99-200 ) .
   The " organism" has made its appea rance, unexpected ly, in the context
of a factory, its workers, i ts stockholders, its executi ves, and its envi ron
ment, indicating the end of the diagnostic iti nerary and the moment
when it will fina l l y become necessary to envisage what Whitehead under
stands by an organism. Today, when " ra tiona lization," " competiti veness,"
                                                         A   N E W   E P O C H ?   1 4 1




and " flexi bility " reign , this emergence at the end of an itinerary may raise
a smi le, and this may already have been the case i n his time. The enjoy
ment of vivid va lues does not imply a praise of reality. It ma kes the d iffer
ence, central in The A ims of Education, between " vivid" and " dead "
ideas, the former setting the students' minds in motion, and the latter
being synonyms of indoctrination and passivity.
    Before we concl ude, I offer a tri bute to the person who, yea rs ago, made
this di fference a vivid idea for me when he forced me to set in motion what
I thought I knew well, in this case the equivalence between kinetic energy
and potential energy as ill ustrated by the perfect pendulum. A dead, scho
lastic example, he objected to me, which silences what this equivalence
does not say, but which is attested by the pendulum clockwork mecha
nisms: it is when the pendulum has fully unfolded its motion that it enters
into the twofold contact, with the mechanism of the needles and with a
fa l l i ng weight ( o r a relaxing spri ng) that ma kes it a " ti mekeeper." This
" technica l deta il " matters, whatever the claims of dynamic equi valence !
Thus, an austere treatise on clock making, dealing with " escape mecha
nisms," finally came alive, a passionate and fascinating story of the multi
ple inventions that take advantage of what only a pendulum coming to the
end of its ascent is able to do. An example of the aesthetic education men
tioned by Whitehead: the pendulum clock no longer illustrated a law of
motion without simultaneously nourishing speculation, poetry, and narra
tion. A genuine " ecology " of abstraction, for the abstract law of the pen
dulum can then elicit the attention it is due without denying the rest, in a
way that creates the possi bility of a mutual aesthetic appreciation be
tween specialists of precision and adventurers of genera lization. The ques
tion is no longer of knowing " who is right," but of what each one of them
has " done " with the vivid experience that nourished them a l l .
                                                                   C H A P TER TEN




From the Concept of Natu re to the Order of Natu re




       f  H E WH I T E H E A D I A N notion o f organism i s not, a s such, scien
                             �          �
          tific, un like the de ni tions t at each speci � l ized branch of knowl
                   .
        . edge mIght        .
                         be inclined  to gIve to what thIs notIon.   comprehends.
It perta ins to the philosophy of the organism to construct the a bstract
concepts that constitute each specialized version of the organism a s
" cases," exhi biting in a more or less pa rtia l w a y what these concepts, for
their pa rt, will designate as a "complete and concrete fact." In this sense,
the common reference to the organism will a lso have to i l luminate the
divergence between the sciences, for this divergence will reflect the way
in which the concern of each a uthorizes it to ta ke i nto account only cer
ta in aspects of the "complete and concrete fact" in order to give them a
determi nable meaning. This means that " scientific rea sons," as demand
ing determination, will sti l l be thei rs a nd wi l l not be j udged in terms of a
more powerful phi losophica l reason to which they must submit.
    In other words, Whitehead does not i ntend to return to the past. The
origi n of modern science was a bove all a hi storical revolt agai nst inflexi
ble med ieva l rationa l i sm . Gali leo played " the stubborn facts" against
reason, a lways returning to the way thi ngs happen aga i nst those who try
to understand why they ha ppen, but the phi losophy of the orga nism wi l l
not seek assi stance from ancient reasons " aga i nst" Gali lean abstraction.
Quite the contrary, its job will be to confirm the trust i n the facts that
ani mates modern science . However, those who have recorded thei r dis
satisfaction, as contemporaries of modern scientific facts and abstrac
tions, must be l istened to. In so doing, they have, each in their own way,
exhibited aspects of the experience for which these a bstractions, and the
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 4 3




facts they privi lege, did not account in a satisfactory way. Likewise, the
fact that the " reasons " a ppropriate in physics and chemistry a re an ob
stacle to the development of biology or psychology can and must be
taken seriously.
   It is important to emphasize that the obstacle in question is, in fact,
less " conceptual " than social, as is attested by the i nterminable debates
over the mind-body problem . Given that what we ca ll " body " can be rep
resented in these debates in terms of " state of the centra l nervous sys
tem," deciphera ble in principle as one physico-chemica l system among
others, while what we ca l l " m i nd " is reduced to so-ca l led question of the
" qua l ia " -perceiving a speci fic frequency of electromagnetic rad iation as
" red "-implies first of all that everyone seems to be able to grasp with
impunity what is designated by " body" and " mind " i n order to caricature
them in terms that repeat the bifu rcation of nature over and over again.
   Whitehead's procedure shou ld be approached while keeping this as
pect of the situation in mind: trust in ideas, to be sure, but a bove all in
the possibi lity of a transformation of habits. From generation to genera
tion, body and mind have found " defenders," protesti ng aga inst scientific
caricatures, but their a rguments have been impotent aga i nst the habits of
i mpunity of the scientists, who shrug them off with reactions of the type
" Yes, I know, but nevertheless " : nevertheless, you can't stop the progress
of science, and what does not seem to us to be possi ble today will be so
tomorrow.
   This is why Whitehea d will not base himself on d issatisfactions and
obstacles, but will place them in the service of a stra tegy addressing imagi
nation, the only eventua l producer of a transformation in habits. The goal
is neither to prove nor to refute, but to transform what was i ntended to
be a proof that there is room for d issa tisfaction, or a refutation based on
an obstacle reputed to be insurmounta ble, into contri butions to the " j ob
specifications" that his conception of the order of nature w i l l have to
fulfill.
   To spea k of a "job speci fica tions " is to avoid spea king either of " req
u isites " or of "concepts." Requisites were appropriate for the approach
of The Concept of Nature, beca use they were im manent to the problem
Whitehead had decided to raise in that book. Here, it is the epoch that
raises its ( nonphilosophica l ) problems, and the requisites wi l l have to wait
for the completion of the inquiry resulting in the " job speci fications," for
these requisites wil l reflect the way Whitehead defines, through the obl iga
tions imposed by these job specifications, what is required by the order of
nature. As far as conceptual construction is concerned, it will begin with
the transformation of what has been col lected and a ffirmed into requisites
1 4 4   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




immanent to the properly philosophical problem that is henceforth raised,
and it will have to satisfy the demands of logica l rationa lity and harmony
presupposed by faith in the order of nature. The notion of organism is
thus situated at the interface between an empirical type of inquiry whose
terra in would be the history of ideas, protestations, and denunciations,
and a conceptual construction, whose starting point will be the requisites
extracted from the terrain by the inqui ry.
   It is already clear that the conceptual construction obliged by the no
tion of organism wi l l have to aim at what was excluded by the approach
of The Concept of Nature: since we are no longer dea ling here with na
ture in the sense in which we experience it, but with that nature for which
we suppose an order, the point wi ll be to construct reasons; and therefore,
also to determine the obl igations to which our reasons must submit.
   We have to search whether nature does not in its very being show itself
as self-explanatory. By this I mean, that the sheer statement, of what things
are, may contain elements explanatory of why things are. Such elements
may be expected to refer to depths beyond anything which we can grasp
with a clear apprehension. In a sense, all explanation must end in an ulti
mate arbitrariness. My demand is, that the ultimate arbitrariness of matter
of fact from which our formulation starts should disclose the same gen
eral principles of reality, which we dimly discern as stretching away into
regions beyond our explicit powers of discernment ( SMW, 92-93 ) .
   Where scientific material ism postulates loca lized entities a s the ultimate
reference for all explanation, the phi losophy of the organism will ask that
the concepts to be constructed exhibit the way nature "explains itself."
This demand formulated by Whitehead is a mod ified version of "all in the
same boat, to sink or swim together," but it announces the need for a new
position for the category of the ulti mate. Since the problem wi l l hence
forth be the ulti mate of our explanations, what is presupposed by all our
explanations, we may take arbitra riness as a name for this ultimate, but
here the arbitrariness does not correspond to a li mit, imposing a renuncia
tion: it is defined by a demand. Whitehead demands that the ultimate ar
bitrariness must be similarly concluded with regard to every explanation,
even those concern ing the states of things that are most familiar. And he
demands, correlatively, that no aspect of reality should designate this arbi
trariness in a privileged way.
   As in The Concept of Nature, the designation of something u ltimate
thus goes hand in hand with conceptual construction, and they point to
the same strategy of resistance to the lures of specialized thought. The con
cepts to be constructed presuppose, and enable us to resist, the facile so
lution to which all specialized thought yields: someth ing ul timate often
     FROM   T H E   CONC EPT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 4 5




intervenes at the point when their clear categories, corresponding to
what they privi lege, cease to operate . This is the case when scienti sts
a ffirm that they can explain the how of things, but invoke the unknow
able character of chance, or of God 's wi l l , when their why is concerned .
But also when critical thinkers demonstrate that a l l our knowledge has
as its object phenomena not thi ngs as they exist in themselves, only to
collide, as with an enigma, with the fact that when astronomers pointed
their telescopes in the direction in which their calculations ind icated the
possible existence of an unknown planet, they did indeed find it. Or again,
when theoreticians of the mind-body problem declare that the ultimate
mystery is constituted by the emergence of qualia. The way in which a
difficulty, which fol lows from the framing of a problem, is avoided by
means of submission to the unknowable is j ust as unacceptable for White
head as the theory of " psychic add itions " : it corresponds to " rational i ty's
great refusa l to insist on its rights."
    Concepts will thus ensure that rationality can a ffi rm its rights, all its
rights, but not the right to an ultimate and sel f-sufficient explanation.
The very idea of such an explanation cannot seduce a mathematician:
every explanation has its premises, and every premise designates the i rre
duci ble responsibility of whoever demands the explanation, this explana
tion and no other. The premises a re part of the work. The right claimed
by conceptual work is the right of not turning what is ulti mate into a
limit of thought, where it is a special ized thought that meets its l i mits.
Li ke everything we a re aware of in perception, therefore, all our special
ized explanations will be " placed in the sa me boat " : what we a re directly
aware of wi l l have to refer to the same ultimate arbitrari ness as the
" depth " of reality that we cannot clearly grasp.
    First, however, it is time to write down the job specifications, that is, to
carry out empirical inquiry. Or, more precisely, the inquiry that wi ll trans
form all those whom it addresses into empirical witnesses, bringing to ex
istence one or another aspect of the concrete and complete facts of which
the organism will have to take charge. Obviously, what wi ll be retained is
not always what these witnesses thought they were producing-far from
it. Whitehead accords no importance to the intentions of the witnesses he
provides for hi mself or the vocation they conferred upon their proposi
tions. Whether they wanted to or not, they testify, and their testi mony
concerns the order of nature.
    The most extraord inary example in this matter i s certainly the one I
have a l ready cited: the treatment undergone by the thought of Bishop
Berkeley. Whitehead is not conce rned with Berkeley's doctrine, or his
usual historica l inheritance by Hume, then Kant. He intends to go back
1 4 6   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




to w hat is, for him, Berkeley's key problem, the cri tique of the mode of
abstraction that confers a misplaced concreteness upon simple loca liza
tion . In so doing, he obviously goes back to the problem ra ised in The
Concept of Nature as wel l . Berkeley asks why we confuse what we
perceive " here " with rea l things that we suppose to exist at a distance,
" there." But the point is no longer to fight agai nst the bifurcation of
nature, to construct the concept of nature required by what we are
aware of: this castle, this cloud, this planet, that decla re themselves to be
" there." For what is at issue now is the order of nature, and experience
will have to exhibit the way it participates in this order.
   Whitehead therefore registers Berkeley's testimony among his job
speci fications, as a protest against red ucing the concrete fact of percep
tive experience to the a bstraction of a space in which thi ngs " in them
selves " are situated, a " reality" to which we could refer while forgetting
the perceiving mind . He wi l l therefore affirm, with Berkeley, that what
constitutes the rea lization of natura l entities, castle, cloud, or planet, is
the fact of being perceived, but . . . on the condition of carrying out one
small mod ifica tion. The point is simply to avoid passing, as Berkeley did,
from the idea that natura l entities are " rea lized " in the unity of a percep
tion to the idea that they owe their rea lity to that perception. And to
avoid this, it suffices to " a d d " to Berkeley's testimony that what is rea l
ized is nothing other than the unity of the mind itsel f, or
   [ . . . I that the realisation is a gathering of things into the unity of a
prehension; and that what is thereby realised is the prehension, and not
the things. This unity of a prehension defines itself as a here and now, and
the things so gathered into the grasped unity have essential reference to
other places and other times. For Berkeley's mind, I substitute a process
of prehensive unification ( SMW, 6 9 ) .
  I n The Concept of Nature, the perceptive event, associated with " cor
poreal life," provided a l l experience with its " here," and perception with
its viewpoint. Whitehead had emphasized that what we are aware of ex
hibits itself as " provi ding a foothold " for mind : that is, the event decla res
nature's connection with the ultimate metaphysica l rea l ity, where " m ind "
and " nature" cannot be opposed . With Berkeley'S doctrine, we jump feet
first into the risk, emphasized in The Concept of Nature, of making mind
intervene in a way that blows up the entire powder keg. This is what
Berkeley did, si nce his name is henceforth l i nked to the extraordinary
questions associated with " solipsism," or the doubt that anything exists
independently of " my" perception ( or of yours . . . ). Yet with the " minor
mod ification " proposed by Whitehead, an entirely different kind of
" lea p" is announced, j ust as adventurous but with a quite di fferent orien-
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   OF   N AT U R E   1 4 7




tation. It is not a matter of a rguing over " what is more rea l ? " experience
or that to which it testifies, this castle, these clouds . . . The point is to
ta ke experience, and what it testifies to a bout what is other than it, a bout
other places and other times, as a mode of articulation to which the meta
physical language to be constructed will have to grant meaning.
   The key term is, of course, " prehension ." Prehension is a " ta k ing into
account," and this neologism indicates that Whitehead intends to free
this term from a l l subjective or intellectua l connotations, as well as from
everything such a connotation implies. The statement "I take into account"
presupposes the possibility of d istinguishing the subject and the account
carried out by this subj ect. If 1 take i nto account the possibil ity that it
may rain at the moment 1 step outside, and stop to get my coat, 1 do not
by any means have the impression that 1 a m producing myself in this
operation. Prehension, in contrast, should make the operation and the
production of rea l ity coincide. What prehends real izes itself i n the pro
cess of prehensive unification, my hesitation " here," my coat " there," the
threaten ing sky up above, and so on.
   Prehension is thus a primary term, as was perception for Berkeley. It
does not req uire explanation but must enable the exhi bition of the com
mon feature of all situations i n which something ma kes a d ifference for
something else, i nclud ing the least " psychological " ones. For instance, the
earth's trajectory " takes account" of the sun. The mathematica l function
with which celestial mechanics associates this trajectory testifies to a re
markably stable mode of prehension, referring to the sun qua endowed
with a mass and situated at a determinate distance. The identification of
the sun 's d ista nce and mass as variables of the earth's acceleration at each
instant thus expl icates, in an a bstract way, this aspect of the " prehensive
unification " that we ca l l acceleration .
   Perception is simply the cognition of prehensive unification; or more
shortly, perception is cognition of prehension. The actual world is a mani
fold of prehensions: and a "prehension " is a "prehensive occasion," and a
prehensive occasion is the most concrete finite entity, conceived as what it
is in itself and for itself, and not as from its aspect in the essence of an
other such occasion (SMW, 71 ) .
   The breathless succession o f utterances gives this passage the character
of a veritable eruption of metaphysics, of the description of what is " ac
tual," existing in and for itself, and Whitehead's readers might think they
have to do with a med itation on the thinkers of the seventeenth century.
Whitehead is not doing history of phi losophy, however. He treats Berke
ley, and soon Leibniz and Spinoza, as a mathematician treats his col
leagues. Like Berkeley, Leibniz, a nd Spi noza, he attempts the pa radigmatic
1 4 8   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




enunciatory adventure: the inauguration of terms that will bring to exis
tence both the thinker and the thought, terms which, in this case, must
carry out the transition from the question of the concept of nature to that
of the order of nature. To a ttempt this adventure, however, he, like all
mathematicians, must d istinguish, in the work that precedes him, between
what can be respected and what will have to be general ized in another
way. In this case, what is to be respected is the experience that has made
the thinker and the thought exist, but what can and must be generalized
designates the conclusions that Berkeley drew from them. This does not
mean that these conclusions are wrong, but that they reflect a freedom
and a risk that can, and must, be appreciated in a mode that is primarily
that of contrast, experimentation of agreements and d ivergences.
   The things which are grasped into a realised unity, here and now, are
not the castle, cloud, and the planet simply in themselves; but they are
the castle, the cloud, and the planet from the standpoint, in space and
time, of the prehensive unification. In other words, it is the perspective
of the castle over there from the standpoint of the unification here. It is,
therefore, aspects of the castle, the cloud, and the planet which are grasped
into unity here. You will remember that the idea of perspectives is quite
familiar in philosophy. It was introduced by Leibniz, in the notion of the
monad mirroring perspectives of the universe. I am using the same no
tion, only I am toning down his monads into the unified events in space
and time. In some ways, there is greater analogy with Spinoza 's modes;
that is why I use the terms mode and modal. In the analogy with Spi
noza, his one substance is for me the one underlying activity of realisa
tion individualising itself in an interlocked plurality of modes. Thus,
concrete fact is process. Its primary analysis is into underlying activity
of prehension, and into realised prehensive events. Each event is an indi
vidual matter of fact issuing from an individualisation of the substrate
activity. But individualisation does not mean substantial independence
(SMW, 69-70 ) .
   I t is hard, and n o doubt futile, to know whether Whitehead thought he
possessed the essential pa rt of the sol ution at the time he wrote these
lines. The proponents of a systematic reading, affirming the unity of his
work from Science and the Modern World to Adventures of Ideas, can
affirm that everything is a l ready here, summarized in brief form. Like the
Lei bnizian monad , the individual prehensive event may lay claim to the
features that Whitehead j udges essential to any rea l ism: " memory of
the past, i mmed iacy of realisa tion, and indication of thi ngs to come"
(SMW, 73 ) . Indeed, the event, as Whitehead characterizes it here, not
on ly reflects in itself the modes of unification of its contempora ries, but
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E P T   O F   NATUR E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 4 9




also those of its predecessors, and finally those aspects that the present
has determined with regard to the future. Yet one can j ust as well speak
of " wishful thinking " or " betting on a comet." For the notion of a sub
strate activity that is individual ized is a black box, a placeholder for a
sol ution. Let us say, more positively, that it a l ready designates what is
refused, the substantia l independence that corresponded to a world of
individuals, a nd that it introd uces a n initial " specification" to be fulfilled,
an initial constra int to be satisfied . The fact that an individual i s thought
of a s an individual ization impl ies that the question of the relations be
tween individuals (conceived as substantia lly independent) is a bad ly
framed question, in that it presupposes the possibil ity of conceiving of
isolated, localized individuals. The wel l-formulated question must deal
with the " how" of relations, not their existence. Yet these a re still mere
words, promising to be sure, but which have not undergone a ny of the
tests capable of determining what they commit us to.
   In fact, Whitehead is quite clea r a bout the operation he has a ttempted .
   In this sketch of an analysis more concrete than that of the scientific
scheme of thought, I have started from our own psychological field, as
it stands for our cognition. I take it for what it claims to be: the self
knowledge of our bodily event. I mean the total event, and not the inspec
tion of the details of the body. This self-knowledge discloses a prehensive
unification of modal presences of entities beyond itself. I generalise by the
use of the principle that this total bodily event is on the same level as all
other events, except for an unusual complexity and stability of inherent
pattern (SMW, 73 ) .
   The " psychological fiel d " of which Whitehead speaks refers, in a fai rly
transparent way, to the analyses of William James, and particularly to his
a rticle "Does 'Consciousness' Exist ? " to whose ambition Whitehead sub
scri bes (SMW, 1 43 ), as we have a l ready seen: James closes the philo
sophical epoch inaugura ted by Descartes .
   Whitehead, one might say, " starts out" from what is, for James, the riski
est speculation: consciousness does not exist, it is a fictitious unit; thoughts,
however, a re fully real, and are made of the same " stuff " as things. And
with the term " self-consciousness," Whitehead also accepts james's propo
sition that consciousness "stands for " a " function," a function that thoughts
" perform " and which is cal led " k nowing." With the expression " self
knowledge of our bodily event," the question of consciousness as a " func
tion " is thus raised . And the cautionary note is already struck: conscious
ness is not to be red uced to an "epiphenomenon," as is clai med by those
who, as they inspect the " details" of neuronal functioning, undertake to
"explain" it. The " tota l " bodily event is by no means the body as the object
I S O   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of scientific defini tion, but rather the unknown element of the problem
James proposed, and which will have to be solved .
    In Process and Reality, Whitehead wi ll implicitly present himself as the
one who "comes after Wi lliam James." Implicitly, because it is precisely
insofar as Science and the Modern World had turned William James i nto
the inaugurator of a new philosophical epoch that a much more general
remark by Whitehead, concerning the rhythm proper to the history of
philosophy, assumes all its meaning.
    Every ph ilosophical school in the course of its history requires two
presiding philosophers. One of them, under the infl uence of the main doc
tri nes of the school, should survey experience with some adequacy, but
i nconsistently. The other philosopher should reduce the doctrines of the
school to a rigid consistency; he will thereby effect a reductio ad absur
dum. No school of thought has performed its full service to philosophy
until these men have appeared ( PR, 5 7 ) .
    Insofa r as Whitehead always insisted o n presenting himself as a part of
the history of phi losophy, rather than as its culmination, it is not prohib
ited to maintain that, as soon as he began to write Science and the Mod
ern World, he considered himself to be trying to confer his " rigid coher
ence " upon the philosophy of William James, and more precisely on his
position with regard to consciousness. There is nothing negative a bout
this, coming from a mathematician: the point is to go " right to the end " of
a proposition, to render its presuppositions and consequences expl icit, to
reconstruct everything on its basis, at the risk that this undertaking may
render percepti ble ( to others ) a potential a bsurdity of the system. And, by
so doing, the service that will have been rendered to phi losophy will be
the dissatisfaction inspired, a motive for a new philosophical creation.
    In this case, before going to the end of the proposition that turns con
sciousness into a function, its meaning must be constructed. What White
head must avoid is fairly clear: his entire construction would col lapse if
he accepted a consciousness that would be the subject of statements con
cerning experience, a consciousness that, as the master of its ship, could
free ly choose to a d d ress one or a nother a spect of its own experience .
Consciousness cannot be a pure activity, capa ble, as the case may be, of
asking whether it might not, after all, be responsible for all that it per
ceives. Yet that does not make it a " function " in the scientific sense, that
is, expl ica ble as the sum of the " details" brought to light by the scientific
inspection of the body. For Whitehead, consciousness in James's sense
obl iges us to think of the " total bod ily event," and, as he continues with
rigid coherence, it obliges us to think of every event in the sense in which
it exists " for itsel f." The prod uction of a standpoint enabling us to speak
     F R O M   T H E   C O N C E P T   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 5 1




of " self-consciousness " is not the privilege of the " psychologica l field ."
The only pri vilege of this field is to constitute the site where the twofold
question "What is a function ? " and " What is a n event ? " will find its most
demanding terms.
   James's philosophy could be, and generally was, confused with a phi
losophy of an opportunistic entrepreneur, for whom the pretences of con
sciousness are illusory, for whom the truth of an idea is identical with
what it earns, with its cash val ue. No one would dare to disqual ify Pro
cess and Reality in this way, where the demand that a l l that exists may be
said to be both " cause of itself" and " function " was to find its ful l expla
nation. Quite the contrary, what characterizes Whitehead's great work is
the i ncongruous effort demanded of the reader, to whom a set of concepts
is proposed, none of which declares its cash val ue, and none of which,
moreover, has a ny meaning independently of all the others. Whereas
James's thought could be taken apart and simplified, Whitehea d 's writing
" red uces " this supple and vulnerable thought " to a rigid coherence " ; that
is, it actively prod uces a strange inseparabil ity between the experience
demanded by reading a nd the experience proposed by concepts.
   We have not reached that stage yet. Here, the point was to emphasize
the commitment constituted by Whitehead's allusion to the psycho
philosophy of Willia m James. If the psychologica l field is ever to be a rel i
able starting point for a general ization that may eventually surmount the
" territorial division between science a nd philosophy" ( SMW, 1 45 ) , it is to
the extent that it obl iges us to risk a l l that is presupposed by our descrip
tions centered either around the " subject" or the "object," either a round
what is " active" (explanatory) or a round what is " passive" ( explicable).
At this stage, however, the division in question is far from having been
actually surmounted . Whitehead is a nnouncing an ambition that he stil l
lacks t h e means t o satisfy, for the problem as he frames it is situated in the
strict prolongation of his position in The Concept of Nature. Nor is he
unaware of this, since he takes care, on the contrary, to specify the conti
nuity of his thought, to a rticulate the new notion of prehension with the
old notion of an object making ingression.
   I will say that a sense-object has ingression into space-time. The cogni
tive perception of a sense-object is the awareness of the prehensive unifica
tion (into a standpoint A, including the sense-object in question) of various
modes of various sense-objects [ . . . I I am merely describing what we do
perceive: we are aware of green as being one element in a prehensive unifi
cation of sense-objects; each sense-object, and among them green, having
its particular mode, which is expressible as location elsewhere. There are
various types of modal location. For example, sound is voluminous: it fills
l S 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




a hall, and so sometimes does diffused colour. But the modal location of
a colour may be that of being the remote boundary of a volume, as for
example the colours on the walls of a room ( SMW, 70-7 1 ) .
   S o far, then, Whitehead has l imited himsel f t o repeati ng what w e al
ready knew: ingression is a relation that has various modes. But he has
done so in such a way that observation is no longer connected with expe
rience, but with " rea lity," or the process of realization. The multipl icity of
modes of i ngression will have to be understood on the basis of the new
questions of rea liza tion a nd individual ization. We no longer have experi
ence of an event, but our sensible experience is a typical case of an event.
   We are only at the beginning of the itinerary associated with the phi
losophy of the organism, for the point here is no longer to think of per
ception, but to confirm fa ith in the order of nature. A castle, a cloud, a
green leaf have in common the fact of posing the q uestion of perception,
but insofar as they are united by this common feature, they are silent with
regard to the way we perceive and feel, that is, also with regard to what is
attested by what we perceive and feel . Here, Whitehead a bandons those
seventeenth-century thin kers who discussed the relation between percep
tion and the spatio-temporal world . Their testimony does not suffice, for
it is l iable to treat a castle, a cloud, and the face of a loved one indi ffer
ently. It does not do j ustice to what I have already introd uced as the ques
tion of " presence."
   Whitehead now turns to the Romantic poets of the early British nine
teenth century, toward those who " reacted " to scientific a bstractions by
celebrating a nature to which these abstractions fail to do justice.
   "We murder to dissect," accord ing to Wordsworth's accusation. White
head cites this ind ignation, this fury, and he chooses to understand it as a
testi mony not to the violence of the assassin, or to the pain of the victim,
but to the inadeq uacy of the " materialist" scientific approach, as wel l as
of the empiricist approach that was contemporary with it. The phi loso
phy of the organism is first and foremost an epistemology.
   It is important to ask, what Wordsworth found in nature that failed to
receive expression in science. I ask this question in the interest of science
itself; for one main position in these lectures is a protest against the idea
that the abstractions of science are irreformable and unalterable. Now it
is emphatically not the case that Wordsworth hands over inorganic mat
ter to the mercy of science, and concentrates on the faith that in the living
organism there is some element that science cannot analyse [ . . . I It is
the brooding presence of the hills which haunts him. His theme is nature
in solido, that is to say, he dwells on that mysterious presence of sur
rounding things, which imposes itself on any separate element that we set
up as an individual for its own sake (SMW, 8 3 ) .
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   OF   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   OF   N AT U R E   1 5 3




  When [ go for a wa lk, it is no longer a matter of saying of a hill, "Say,
there it is again," as was the case with Cleopatra's Needle. The hill, brood
ing and ancient, has a weight; it is a "presence" and not simply " there " for
me, who perceives it " here." The experience of its presence i mposes itself
in such a way that [ belong to it much more than it belongs to me: this is
what a science focused on separability cannot express.
   Nor, however, can it express what was celebrated by Shelley, who, unli ke
Wordsworth, loved science. For Shelley's poetry celebrates nature that is in
a state of flux, of perpetual change, and it testifies not to presence, but to a
" change that cannot die," an incessant shimmering, an elusive rustling.
 Shelley thinks of nature as changing, dissolving, transforming as it
were at a fairy's touch ( SMW, 8 6 ) .
  The contrast between brooding, a ncient presence and the shimmering
of colors and sounds does not depend on the difference in the tempera
ment of the two poets facing the " same" landscape. This would silence
experience in favor of bargain-basement psychology. If a d ifference in
temperaments does come into play, it is in the different sensitivity with
regard to two " facts," both of which must a ppear a mong the job specifi
cations. One of them testifies to what Whitehead will cal l " endurance,"
which i ncludes change, the other to what he will cal l "eternal i ty."
   The mountain endures. But when after ages it has been worn away, it
has gone. If a replica arises, it is yet a new mountain. A colour is eternal.
It haunts time like a spirit. It comes and it goes. But when it comes, it is
the same colour. It neither survives nor does it live. It appears when it
is wanted. The mountain has to time and space a different relation from
that which colour has ( SMW, 8 6-8 7 ) .
   " A colour i s eternal." Color a lready played a highly peculiar role in The
Concept of Nature, as it is the paradigmatic hostage of the bifurcation of
nature in the same way as qualia a re today in the sempiternal controversies
organized around the mind-body problem. Whitehead does not limit him
self to confirming the answer he had given in The Concept of Nature: color
is a sense-object, and all objects make ingression. Here, color appears en
dowed with an adjective, eternal, that topples us into a new world of ques
tions. The sense-object is no longer defined on the basis of the empiricist
question; what ra ises problems is no longer the relation between the set
of sense data [ can perceive and this " stone " to which [ attribute them . The
bifurcation of nature between primary and secondary qualities yields to
the question to which the poets obl ige us, the difference between modes of
experience of the brooding mountain, always there, and of color, without
age or memory, which appears when it is " cal led."
   The adjective " eterna l " has a rugged, and highly controversial, future
ahead of it. When he was finishing writing Science and the Modern
l S 4   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




 World, Whitehead conferred a decisive role upon " eternal objects," a role
that would not cease to be redefined i n subsequent times, on the occasion
of each technical tra nsformation of his thought. What is important, a t
t h i s point, is t o eliminate a ny possibil ity of confusion. For the moment,
the adjective " eterna l " is connected with a contrast. One may baptize
what endures with a proper name-each human being, of course, but
also a dog, a mouse, or even a mountain, and Cleopatra 's Need le-but
proper names a re not appropriate either for colors or sounds, or for the
geometrica l objects Whitehead a lso associates with the mode of experi
ence designated by the adjective " eternal ." When I say " it is blue," but
also " it is a circle," I a m not naming a blue obj ect, or a circular one, but
I testi fy to the ingression into my experience of an " eternal object."
    Whitehead is not mad enough to calmly a nnounce that " red " as we per
ceive it existed before the biological invention of the visual organs. This is
why he speaks of " eternality," a neologism that enables him to avoid " eter
nity." " Eterna l i ty " designates a dimension of the concrete, compl ete fact
that must belong to the job specifications. The testi mony of the poets
must be heard, but it does not say how it should be heard, what req ui
sites correspond to it.
    In the present case, the contrast between colors a nd mountains first
calls into question the construction proposed by The Concept of Nature.
The wonderful world of colors, the mystery of presence, the somber rumi
nation of the mountain testify to the fact that, by the mere fact that it does
not share the passage of nature, the object defined in The Concept of Na
ture is no longer adequate for thinking of the order of nature. Color was
a sense-object, and the mountain a perceptual object, taken in a hierarchy
that made it explicit that the mounta in a lways has a color, whereas we
can have the experience of a color independently of what it colors: the
famous Cambridge blue. The poets contributed a testimony that ra ises a
very di fferent question, no doubt because thei r experience is not focused
on the urgency of havi ng to decide whether that yellowish shadow is or is
not a tiger. And, in so doing, they also forced the experience Whitehead
assimilated under the word " recognition " to diverge: "it's the same color"
and "that's my coat" testify to experiences whose difference can no longer
be referred to a hierarchy.
    "There it is again " was appropriate for Cleopatra's Needle and a bird
song, because the main contrast took place between events that passed
without return and obj ects l iable to be recognized, both required by what
we are aware of. What is happening, however, is no longer the event, but
what is unification, gathering, in a twofold sense, passive and active. The
event not only discloses itsel f as related to other events: it realizes this re
lation in and for itsel f. It happens and passes, of course, hut we must first
     F R O M   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 5 5




say that, like the here " and " now of The Concept of Nature, its duration
is that of an individualization, of the " hold ing together " of the gathering
it constitutes. Correlatively, the part is no longer merely included in the
whole, and the totality of events " l inked " to a particular event is no longer
merely " signified " by this event. The whole ruminates in every part, and
the various parts are henceforth " presence."
    As far as color is concerned, it is no longer there "again " but "once
again," always the same but a lways new, for it is not worn out, does not
l ive, does not end ure. Eternal not because it is always there-it would
never be anything but an indefinite endura nce-but because experience
testifies to color in the sense that it is what it is, without reference to a
process within time. Color is eternal in the precise sense that it requires
that endura nce a nd change do not define in an exhaustive way what is
required in the order of nature. Red testifies to something that, in nature,
does not emerge from this order l i ke a l l that endures and changes. Red
appears " when it is cal led," a lthough the sensation of red requires the
endurance proper to the eye and the brain. In order to express this non
emergence, this appearance that does not testify to a process but rather
to a call, Whitehead will henceforth reserve the term " ingression." Red
does not emerge from the order to which the eye and the bra i n testify, but
rather the eye and the bra in must be understood on the basis of the pos
sibil ity of the ingression to which the sensation " red " testifies. The fact of
their existence testifies " for" the eternal object felt as red .
    Both sensible objects and intelligible obj ects are "called," or ga thered
together, by the notions of eternal object and ingression . Yet this asso
ciation designates our human experience, not a pa rticular connection
between sensible and intell igible, such as a particular legitimacy attrib
uted to sense experience and to formal reasoning. Eternal objects are not
there to found geometrical reasoning, or the ind isputable sensation " blue."
They a re req uired by the contrast exhi bited in a privileged way by the
experiences that make us spea k of sensible objects and intelligible objects.
In the event constituted by my experience of the famous blue coat, blue
qual ifies another event which, for its part, endures: that more or less
worn-out coat. The cloth may undergo wear and tear, but a color, for its
part, will always be " that" color, whatever detergent commercials may
claim to the contrary. Consider this circle clumsily d rawn in the sand,
perhaps to illustrate a process of reasoning. The wind is erasing its con
tours, but the "circle" that qual ified my experience of the contour will
not disappear with the wind .
    Whoever considers that Whitehead is proposing eternal objects as a
solution to the problem raised by geometrical forms and colors will rightly
conclude that he has fa llen into a trap identified by Gil les Deleuze: that
1 S 6   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of the " decalque" ( traci ng ) , or the concept " made to explai n," in this case
made to found the contrast, to which experience testifies, between color
and mounta i n . And it i s criticism that Whitehead wou ld be the first to
accept, since it would mea n confusing job speci fication a nd concept. If
experience is what ra ises problems, the way the problem is constructed
belongs to the formulation of the requisites, tha t is, to the characteriza
tion of a n orga nism as a complete, concrete fact, a nd it is in response to
this formulation that eternal objects will, as the case may be, recei ve their
concept.
   For the moment, eternal objects merely oblige us to resist the idea that
sensation or intellection emerge from the brain. [n Process and Reality,
these objects will be defined as " pure potentials for the specific determina
tion of fact " ( PR, 22 ) , and Whitehead will then have completed the con
ceptual construction that transforms the experience of color into a "case."
As indicated by the adjectives " sensi ble " and " i ntelligi ble," red or circle
will then refer to our experience, not to direct access to a " pure" potential.
   Let us return, now, to the mountain that " endures." Unlike eternal ob
jects, which offer the temptation of a brutal continuity between the sense
objects of The Concept of Nature and the speculative scheme of Process
and Reality, endurance constitutes a theme that is obviously new. The event
had been that which passes. If an order of nature exists, it is because the
event, henceforth understood as a unifying grasp, can also hold fast and
endure through an envi ronment that never ceases to change. And the po
et's emotion when faced by the mil lennial mountain must be heard. En
dura nce is not only a fact: it is an accomplishment a nd an achievement. It
requi res that the order of nature i ntegrate what we are accustomed to
thinking as paradigmatica lly human, that is, value.
    " Value" is the word I use for the intrinsic reality of an event. Value is an
element which permeates through and through the poetic view of nature.
We have only to transfer to the very texture of realisation in itself that
value which we recognise so readily in terms of human life [ . . . 1 realisa
tion therefore is in itself the attainment of value. But there is no such thing
as mere value. Value is the outcome of limitation. The definite finite entity
is the selected mode which is the shaping of attainment; apart from such
shaping into individual matter of fact there is no attainment. The mere
fusion of all there is would be the nonentity of indefiniteness. The salva
tion of reality is its obstinate, irreducible, matter-of-fact entities, which are
limited to be no other than themselves. Neither science, nor art, nor cre
ative action can tear itself away from obstinate, irreducible, limited facts.
The endurance of things has its significance in the self-retention of that
which imposes itself as a definite attainment for its own sake. That which
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 5 7




endures is limited, obstructive, intolerant, infecting its environment with
its own aspects. But it is not self-sufficient. The aspects of all things enter
into its very nature. It is only itself as drawing together into its own limita
tion the larger whole in which it finds itself ( SMW 93-94 ) .
   We a re a t a crucial point here, and the tone has changed . For value i s
what i s required by the divergence between the experiences of Berkeley,
Spinoza, Lei bniz, Shelley, or Wordsworth . Value i s required by an author
capable of using the same term, whether in reference to a n electron, a
living organism, or an i ndustrial firm. The organism has now come into
contact with its requisites.
   There is not the slightest al lusion in Whitehead's text to subjects who
would " have values" in terms of which they would evaluate, or to which
they would conform. To follow Whitehead, then, we must obviously free
the term "value" from any psychological connotation, as wel l as from any
appeal to any kind of transcendence. Yet this demand is not gratuitous: it
announces that what we call " va l ue" will be put to the test i n a highly in
teresting way. The obstinate preservation of a value, whatever happens,
may be a heroic virtue: there can be no question of denying this. With
typical British humor, Whitehead limits h i mself to giving a generic defini
tion. If we, as h umans, can claim to be d ifferent, it is not because we nour
ish values. Value belongs to the order of nature: it is what is realized by a l l
that exists, in the sense that w h a t exists succeeds in enduring, succeeds in
maintaining its individual way of gathering together, that is, of making
thi ngs hold together in a determinate way. Val ue indicates a success in and
for itself.
   The habitual economy of scientific explanations is turned upside down,
as is that of subjective motivations. Wha t is maintained without change
is no longer the ensured starting point for understandi ng what changes.
Don't ask me why I am distracted : on the contrary, be a mazed that I a m
able t o complete m y phrase safe a n d sound . Above a l l , do not consider
that it is " I " who a m responsible for this exploit. "My" success, l i ke that
of an a tom, has no justification higher than this fact: the experience of
this phrase to be compl eted has succeeded in hold ing out in an environ
ment that might have had a very di fferent role: " Wait, you've distracted
me: what was I going to say? "
  The explanation of endurance is not an attri bute of the individual who
endures, but depends first of all on a dynamics of infection. A l l that suc
ceeds in enduring has succeeded in infecting its environment in a way
that is compati ble with this endurance.
  " Infection " is the term Whitehead chooses to designate, in a generic
way, what the poets celebrate as " presence." Celebration refers to the fact
1 5 8   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that it is a poet's experience that is infected by the mountain, gloomy and
ancient. " Infection " must be understood, not without humor, in a neutral
sense, designating the success constituted by all endurance in a changing
world. The interest of this chosen term is that it designates the specific
character of this success. This infectious holding-together is not a fusion
but a valorization, a determi nate shaping, conferring a value-that is, a
role-on what is prehended . The fact tha t the variables of a function, in
the same way as the poet's experience, require a " value" thus ceases to
belong to linguistic contingency. Far from being a mere quantity, the value
of a variable presupposes the stahility of the role that one thing plays for
something else and measures the importance of that role. In addition, the
term " infection " is there to remind us tha t there is nothi ng neutral about
"attributing a role to something." The role you a ttri bute to me drives me
crazy.
   Every entity that realizes itself in i ts mode of prehension of other be
ings also prehends the way in which it itself is prehended by those others,
or the aspect of i tself that is taken into account and valorized by these
others . How will it prehend the prehension of itself that it reflected back
to i t ? Such a re the stakes of the " dynam ics of infection," upon which the
success of end urance depends. Infection designates the way in which the
modes of prehension a re reflected for each other, and success implies a
co-adaptation of values. When a being endures, what has succeeded is a
co-production between this being and " its " environment. This environ
ment is nothing other than the total i ty of bei ngs taken into account and
va lorized in a determinate way, and each of the valorized beings pre
hends the ta king-into-account of which it has been the object, the role
that has been assigned to it, in a way that is not incompatible with the
maintenance of this mode of prehension, or of this role.
  This time, the question of the organism is indeed raised, and it selects
what will count as the concrete, complete facts. Farewell to Cleopatra 's
Needle, and even to the gloomy h i l l : for neither the perceptual object,
nor weighty presence, enable the complete unfol ding of the dynamics of
repercussion and infection. The very notion of " due a ttention " becomes
indeterminate, for the repercussion of a ttention upon that to which one
pays a ttention can no longer be neglected . Henceforth, the favora ble
cases will be those in which the " interaction " must be called an inter
action, that is, the shaping of an attainment that exhibits its dependency
by the way in wh ich each of the interacting terms valorizes the other: for
instance, the complex sexual parade in which a male and a female, from
posture to posture, from a pproach to approach, gradually co-produce
one another, as each one confers upon the other the role and the va lue
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N A T U R E   1 5 9




correspond i ng to mating. O r aga i n, the set of cases in which the role as
signed to a being becomes a n i ntegra l part of i ts individualization. For
better or worse, as, for instance, i n the case of the infernal dynamics of
relations of dependency-when the gaze you cast upon me becomes an
ingred ient of my experience of myself, to the poi nt of producing mysel f
i n the way y o u need, o r a t least in the way I sense y o u need, and s o on.
The result is sometimes a h uge misunderstanding, but a remarka bly en
during production of two beings whose respective modes of valorization
ca l l obstinately upon one another.
    The fact that the dynamics of infection can find privi leged examples in
relations of dependency obviously does not mean that such relations be
come the truth of what makes h uman beings hold together. They a re pa rt
of the way things may happen, of the adventures of individualization, i n
the same sense that t h e fact t h a t h u m a n young need a h u m a n environ
ment to become children, and that children dare to become, because they
feel that one trusts they will, beca use their clumsy efforts a re approved
and encouraged . Such facts do not require any particula r psychologica l
explanation, in the sense that its goal would be to j ustify a departure from
a norm of a utonomy; for the idea of a utonomy, for Whitehead, is obso
lete. Relations of dependency can i nstead require fine-grained descriptions
with regard to the way in which the environment, and perhaps particu
larly an environment infected by that norm of a utonomy, pa rticipates in
this selected mode of achievement.
    All va lues presuppose a risk. The generic risk that corresponds to
endurance qua successful infection m ust not be expressed i n terms of a
conflict-between autonomy a nd dependency, for instance-but rather
of "clash." Conflict i mplies the existence of a negation-it is he, and then
not I, or I, and then not he-and can only belong to a rea l ization tha t
gives meaning to the negation, or at least to its germ : to hesitate, to feel
in confl ict with oneself. A clash, for its part, is neutral and i ndeterminate
in its result. It exhibits the fact that an "entity," rea liza tion, individual
ized mode of capture, can only succeed i n holdi ng fast i f the way it " in
fects " its envi ronment does not give rise to repercussions that make it
lose its hold . Clash thus signifies that infection has failed. This is what
happens, for i nsta nce, i f I am ta lking to someone who absta i ns from all
the semiautomatic signs of complicity that indicate that she is l isteni ng.
I begin to sta m mer: how can I keep hold i f the person I a m dea l i ng with
provides no foothold, does not integrate within her own reality the as
pect of hersel f I a m proposi ng h e r-yes she is listening to me-but rea l
                                                      ,



izes herself in a way that is i ncompati ble with what my mode of holdi ng
together and eva l ua ting proposes to her ?
1 6 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   People say "our visions of life clashed," but Whitehead has written, " a
clash of doctrine is not a disaster-it is a n opportunity." H i s "trust" delib
erately ignores hatred and anguish, polemical passion, or the feeling of
having been abused . What counts is what happens. A clash can be an ob
stacle and a limit, or it can "evolve " into a dura ble, even symbiotic new
harmony. Or else it can create problems. There is a clash between the de
sire of the person stretched out on the psychoana lyst's couch to get a reac
tion, and the latter's obstinate, irreducible silence, and this silence, this
aspect of the psychoanalyst prehended by the ana lysand, infects the expe
rience that prehends it and ta kes it i nto account. Unless, of course, the
a na lysand succeeds in " prehend i ng" certa in other aspects, tenuous a nd
involuntary: the rhythm of the psychoana lyst's breathing, his muscular
tension . . . In which case the clash is between the psychoana lyst's doc
trine a nd a mode of success wh ich, for him, presents an obstacle to the
analytical task.
   The term " infection " is thus technical, that is, neutral with regard to
the di fferences we attribute to what end ures. In Adventures of Ideas,
Whitehead will use it in particular to characterize the role played by
Christia n ethics, associated with the completely impractica ble ideal pro
posed by the life and preaching of Jesus of Ga li lee.
   A criterion of evaluation had now been created, expressed in concrete
illustrations that resisted all perversion. This criterion is a gauge allowing
us to estimate the defects of human society. As long as the Galilean im
ages are merely the dreams of an unrealised world, they must continue to
propagate the infection of a worried mind (AI, 1 7) .
   Whenever Whitehead uses the term " infection," his point i s t o deny
that so mething has " i n itself" a power over something else. The only
power of the Ga lilean idea l was the obstinacy of concrete illustrations,
vectors of contrast, and the worry inspired by this contrast.
   The reader wi l l have intuited that Whitehead is no critic of power as
such: a nature in which nothing succeeded in infecti ng anything else would
not be a nature, a nd the possi bility of maintaining a ny kind of nosta lgia
toward a " powerless " society impl ies i n itsel f an incalculable number of
"social achievements." From this viewpoint, Whitehead is rather close
albeit in a whole other tone, since his goa l is not to unveil human illu
sions-to the thesis of Michel Foucault, accord ing to which power is not
primarily repressive but inciting, inspiring interests, questions, and knowl
edge. This, indeed, is how infection in Whitehead's sense could be defined :
not by the imposition of a role, but by the i ncitement, reflected in multiple
and varied ways, to ta ke up and prolong that role. In the generic sense,
nothing imposes anything, for there is no a uthority that has, by itself, the
     F R O M   T H E   C O NCEPT   O F   N AT U R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   N AT U R E   1 6 1




power to impose. All " social power," unless i t is purely and simply repres
sive (a rare and unstable case), designates first and foremost a dynamics of
infection .
   To a l l ude here to Michel Foucault is to give myself the opportun i ty to
emphasize the exten t to which Whi tehead is liable, and wi l l become in
creasingly more lia ble, to disorient a reader for whom denouncing power
is the very duty of phi losophical thought if it is to serve h uman emanci
pation, including an emancipation that would have as its prerequisite the
destruction of the human, all-too-human subject. Foucault h imself never
conformed to this obliga tory figure. He a ffirmed tha t he merely " d e
scribed," without reference to a transcendence that would a uthorize de
nunciation, and he has, moreover, been reproached with fai ling to " found "
in reason that in the name of which he set forth his merciless diagnosis,
that i n the name of which the struggles that should fol low from such di
agnoses would proceed . To " think with Whitehead" exposes us to a
rather different test, for not only does Whitehead not denounce, but he
also does not a ttach himself specifically to a description of power as
such. The twin poles of power that Foucault has taught us to distinguish
repressive and incita tory power-would not have surprised him, for they
both belong to the defin ition of the dynamics of infection . Yet what inter
ests him, what i nterests an ed ucator, what will become a requisite for his
conceptual construction , is not the analysis of the formations of power,
but that of the link between power and adventure.
   Let us take a somewha t speculative example. Some a nthropologists
have ventured the hypothesis that before h uman beings were spea king
or thinking, they were " dancing " ; that is, they were singularized by the
power that sound exercised over their experience qua rhythmic. More
precisely, by the power their experience conferred upon the rhythmic
sound tha t infects it. The hypothesis of such a power, which would define
us well before we define i t, or specialize i t before we construct its multiple
consequences, before we exacerbate it or repress i t, would no doubt have
interested Whitehead, however adven turous i t may be. As we shall see in
what follows, he was to associate language and consciousness with doubt,
with trial by consequences, but he would have found it interesting that
this novelty should have intervened in a history already marked by an
other novelty: by the power already con ferred upon rhythm to infect hu
man experience and to produce a dancing group ( or one marching in step )
with individuals.
   Dance, it is sometimes said, makes the dancer: a good testimony to the
power eventually associated with rhythm. Yet we must i mmediately add
that there does not exist any "dance in genera l " to which this power may
1 6 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




be attri buted, which would allow us to do without the multiple adven
tures that presuppose this power, but which this power does not explain.
And we must a lso add that from " free" i mprovisation to faithful execu
tion, from the singular act from which " a " dance emerges to codified body
stances, the question is not one of freedom from power. All testify to the
power associated with sound and rhythm by human experience, yet all do
not testify to it in the same way. They do not all correspond to the same
definition of the role, although, in any case, the dancer is " enrolled."
    This example announces what i s already engaged with the notions of
value, endu rance, and infection: a quite peculiar politics of explanation,
articulating thi ngs that seemed to be made to oppose eac h other. The
paleoanthropological hypothesis according to which a "cerebra l innova
tion" was associated with those hominids from which humans a re sup
posed to have i ssued , conferring upon rhythm the power to i nfect experi
ence, is exemplary from the viewpoint of the position in which it places
those who formulate it. On the one hand, of course, it expresses the futi l
i ty of the temptation to define freedom " against" power, yet on the other
hand i t expresses the futility of the attempt to return to a determination
" beyond " multiplicities, toward what would be common to all humans.
For a " new fact," such a s this hypothetical "cerebral i nnovation," if it
ever took place, would certainly perta in to something "in common," but
i t would be something " common" that would be necessarily silent with
regard to the divergent meanings mobilized by human practices with re
gard to it. Whatever the work of future neurophysiologists may be, their
results will in fact be added to the long series of what, on this hypothesis,
has a l ready been created to convoke, capture, cana lize, manipulate,
socialize, and comment on a power that has no identity other than the
series of roles that are constructed along with it. Somewhat in the same
way that the force of gravity, as soon as we leave the domain of bod ies
defined as " heavy," has no other identity than the series of roles conferred
upon it by far from equil i brium physico-chemical systems, by birds, by
dancers, by mounta in-cl imbers, and so on.
    Even when, in Adventure of Ideas, the subject is human societies,
Whitehead will refuse to oppose power and freed om, but w i l l choose
to place on stage two contrasting versions of power-persuasion and
force-and will identi fy commerce as what marks the genui ne " p rogress "
of civilizations. Persuasion and commerce wi ll refer to that other human
i nnovation, the i nfectious power proper to " ideas," recalling the fact that
one may speak both of the commerce of ideas and of the commerce of
things. Of course, the persuasive character of an i dea guara ntees nothing:
a loathsome idea can infect the mind, as powerfully rhythmic music can
     FROM   T H E   C O N C E PT   O F   NATU R E   TO   T H E   O R D E R   O F   NATU R E   1 6 3




lead human bei ngs into battle. Nevertheless, for Whitehead, the reference
to the power of persuasion, in contrast to despotic power, is what is
required by the very definition of what we cal l " ideas." And no " decon
struction," debunking the inciting infection where the i l l usion of free and
transparent rational production prevai led, can abstract from the fact that
it presupposes, requires, and prolongs the power associated with ideas,
while descri bing i t otherwise. Foucault's i ncisive laughter, the confusion
he sowed i n so many well-thinking minds, presupposes and mobilizes
this power just as much as the knowledge-power he describes.
   Infection i n the Whiteheadian sense is neutral with regard to values, in
the usual meaning we give to the term " va l ue ." O n the other hand, it
has the rather peculiar effect of communicating di rectly with the possibil
ity that what is holding together may cease to hold together. An obsti
nate, i ntolerant value succeeds in infecting i ts envi ronment, but this suc
cess is never a right, and i t has as i ts correlate the fact consti tuted by the
community of events that enables the organism to " maintain its hold."
   Whether this permission is expressed in terms of more or less precarious
tolerance, of a risky wager, of experimentation or of confirmation, and
even of dependency, it always designates the success of a " trust." The image
of mountain-climbers is radicalized; they exist-that is, they endure-o nly
insofa r as the patience of what they define as a " hold" is confirmed . The
question raised by professionals, for its part, is generalized: the obstinate
maintenance of their rut, the possibility of making judgments denoting the
absence of any " aesthetic appreciation" with regard to what escapes this
rut, presupposes the " patience" of their environment. If a general burst of
laughter were to greet such j udgments, professionals would learn prudence
very quickly, and might even allow themselves to be infected by the differ
ence between the questions with regard to which their j udgment holds and
those that make them lose their foothold.
   The fact that endurance is a factual success without any higher guar
antee may be expressed as fo l lows : may those who a re no longer a fraid
that the sky might fa l l on thei r heads be all the more a ttentive to the
eventual impatience of what they depend on. Thus, i t is not without in
terest today that the new figure of Gaia i ndicates that i t is becoming ur
gent to create a contrast between the earth valorized as a set of resources
and the earth taken into account as a set of i nterdependent processes,
capable of assemblages that are very different from the ones on which we
depend. In order to distinguish the endurance of Gaia-and of the multi
tude of bacteria l populations tha t play an active role i n i ts assembl ages
from the precariousness of our modes of existence and of those of other
large mammals, some speak of a Gaia 's " shrug of the shoulders" capable
1 6 4   FRO M   T H E   P H I LOSO PH Y   O F   N ATU R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of making us lose our foothold: " Gaia is ticklish, we depend on her pa
tience, let us bewa re her i mpatience." The contempora ry period is ex
ploring the difficu l ty of a transforma tion of what are ca lled "values " in a
sense that corresponds well to the Whiteheadian use of the term : a partic
ular way of shaping our a tta inments, presupposing the stability wagered
upon by this way, while explaining itself in terms of habits.
   In contempora ry terms, we will say that end urance, va l ue, clash, obsti
nacy, conflict, harmony, dependency, patience and i mpatience, and so on
place the notion of organism under the banner of an etho-ecology: the
approach that tries to connect the ethos, or the way, constitutive of a liv
ing being, that such a being takes its environment into account, and the
oikos, or the vaster tota lity to which it belongs, and more precisely the
many links, niches, and col lectivities produced by the ethos that mutua lly
imply one another, and on which each depends in one way or another. An
orga nism does not expla in itself qua having succeeded in conquering a
stable identity, bearing its titles of legiti macy, but it explains itself in and
on the basis of the patience on which it depends, a patience presupposed
by the va l ue of which it is the achievement. The orga nism ex hibits a
"trust," and this " trust " is etho-ecologica l, simultaneously a way of shap
ing that is always individual, l i mited , and obsti nate, and a wager on an
envi ronment that confirms and nourishes it.
                                                          C H A P T ER E L E V EN




Scientifi c Objects and the Test of the Organism




      r O R WH I T E H E A D , a l l that endures succeeds in enduring, every
      r success designates inseparably both individual obj ects and their
         environment-that is, the concrete, complete fact to which the
notion of organism corresponds-and every science of nature, insofar as
it deciphers a real ity in terms of the interplay of i ndividual actors, con
cerns organisms. It is this third affirmation that we shall now put to the
test. Can the notion of organism communicate with a new value for the
d ivergent multiplicity of scientific undertakings, with shaping their suc
cesses in a manner that affirms, in a coherent way, the order of natu re
that each explores, according to its own means ?
   Whitehead appeals in particular to the possibility of a physics that
would accept that its a toms, i ts molecules, and its electrons are organisms.
And he tries to infect the usual narration of the development of science in
the nineteenth century with this possibility. Thus, the same paragraph will
witness the coexistence of scientists we a re in the habit of separating:
Bichat, Miiller, Schleiden, and Schwann, associated with the cellular the
ory in biology; Pasteur and his micro-organisms; but also Dalton, who
introduced atoms into chemistry. All of them conferred a new type of
meaning upon the " individual." Of course, the idea of the atom goes back
to Democritus or to Lucretius, but for Whitehead, who emphasizes the
contemporaneity of physical atoms with the cells of microorganisms, the
point is to accentuate their novelty, to open them up to a future in which
they would no longer participate in the rhetorica l success of " scientific
materialism."
   United in this way, physics, chemistry, and biology not only cease to
share in a hiera rchical vision in which molecules a re made out of a toms,
1 6 6   FRO M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




cells out of molecules, and out of cells . . . and so on, they break with
every " world vision " in genera l . For it is by characterizing the respective
practices of these sciences that the etho-ecology proper to their respective
" atoms " can be approached .
     Add a proliferating virus to your culture of microorganisms, boi l your
cellular culture, mix your molecules of oxygen with hyd rogen and add a
spark , heat your gas to the tempera ture of plasma, bombard your alumi
num a toms using a radioactive source: in each case, what you study
spotl ights the contrast between " keeping hol d " and " losing hold," which
designate the organism from the viewpoint of its endurance and the
l i mits of its endurance. The scientific practices Whitehead intends to unite
have all abandoned in fact-that is, in practice-the idea of an atom, an
element, or a part as self-subsistent individuals and principles of explana
tion of i nterpretation for everything else. They all derive their success
from the fact that they have been able to characterize their " atoms " in a
practical way, qua something " holding together," whose endurance must
be evaluated on the basis of the trials this hold resists or fails to resist.
    We shall not be surprised i f Whitehead privi leges his favorite example,
the electron and the electromagnetic field that is inseparable from it. In
The Concept of Nature, the electron as a scientific object was interpreted
as the systematic correlation of the mod ifications of all events, insofar as
these mod ifications express i ts ingression. Yet every event is now itself
understood as a unifying grasp of a set of aspects of its environment.
Henceforth, then, the possibil ity of identifying the electron as a charge
fi rst reflects the endu rance of the mode of grasping that specifies i t, the
fact that this grasp succeeds in holding fast. The inseparability of the elec
tron and its field thus becomes exemplary for Whitehead 's thesis: the
electron is what it is because of the way it prehends its environment, and
its environment i s what it is because of the way i n which this prehension
infects it. In this case, physical laws describe a mode of pattern under its
twofold complementary aspect, implying the endurance of the electron
and the patience of the environment. Their object is the way in which the
electronic grasp mod ifies the environment, and in which this mod i fica
tion mod ifies this grasp itself.
    Nevertheless, the assimilation of the electron to an organism is not a
simple redescription of what physics a l ready knows.
  The concrete enduring entities are organisms, so that the plan of the
whole influences the very characters of the various subordinate organisms
which enter into it. In the case of an animal, the mental states enter into
the plan of the total organism and thus modify the plans of the successive
subordinate organisms until the ultimate smallest organisms, such as elec-
          S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 6 7




trons, are reached. Thus an electron within a living body is different from
an electron outside it, by reason of the plan of the body. The electron
blindly runs either within or without the body; but it runs within the body
in accordance with its character within the body; that is to say, in accor
dance with the general plan of the body, and this plan indicates the mental
state (SMW, 79 ) .
   Physicists t o whom this text is presented usually develop a frankly
phobic reaction: for them, the electron's behavior is a function only of
physica l varia bles, the living body is a physical environment l i ke any
other, and therefore the electron rema ins " the same" inside or outside the
body. Whitehea d agrees with this to some extent: even within a living
body, the electron runs blind ly, b l ind to the stakes of i ts beha vior for
the body. Yet only to some extent, for no environment is " l ike another,"
and the experimenta l environment from which our description of the
electron's behavior derives is not, in a ny case, comparable with any other.
   The question turns not upon a decidable experimenta l question but
upon the way the experiment as a n achievement is descri bed . For the
physicist, experimentation succeeds i n addressi ng the electron i n genera l,
but in a particular way, in which it is capa ble of testi fying rel iably to its
behavior, tha t is, of ena bling the identification of the varia bles that deter
mine this behavior. For Whitehead, such an achievement corresponds to
creating a pa rticular environment for the electron, and the experimenta l
electron will be the electron that has solidarity with this environment.
Qua ntum mechanics confirmed this, i n its own way, when it forbade the
attribution of properties to quantum entities independently of the experi
menta l appa ratus ena bling the testimony that gives mea ning to these
properties. Yet old habits die hard, and physicists have so far preferred
to see i n this prohi bition a dramatic limit upon objective k nowledge,
which ra ises problems for rea lism, rather than a perfectly positive testi
mony dea ling with " q uantum orga nisms."
   For Whitehead, even loca l ization, the possi bility of being situated in
space and time, is rel ative to endurance. This implies that space-time it
self, far from bei ng the common framework for events, constitutes an a b
straction . The possibi lity of situating bodies with regard to one another in
terms of distances or temporal interva ls is not prima ry, but corresponds
to the pattern of the environment that interacts with the etho-ecology of
those enduri ng entities whose behavior can be characterized i n terms of
va ria bles of space and time.
   When he wrote Science and the Modern World, Whitehead had, of
course, already ela borated the theory of space-time he envisaged as an
alternative to Einstei n's. Whereas Einstein proposed a unique space-time
1 6 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




whose loca l properties of spatial curvature a re affected by the (massive)
bodies situa ted within it, Whitehead, between 1 920 and 1 923, constructed
a theory of multiple space-times, a theory that never, in fact, really inter
ested the community of specialists. When he presents it in chapter VII,
moreover, Whitehead freely admits the legitimacy of this reaction: his the
ory is mathematica lly much more complicated tha n Ei nstein's because it is
more genera l . Indeed, it relegates to the " empirical case" ma ny of the
properties that Einstein's genera l relativity defines a priori as belonging to
the space-time metrics.
    In particula r, Ei nstein's theory allows the deduction of one a nd only
one law of gra vitation, and ca n therefore be presented as a genera l ization
of Newtonian space-time, a genera lization that is pa rticularly satisfying
beca use it rea lizes the dream of a purely geometrica l behavior of heavy
bod ies, reflecting the metric properties of space-time. Whitehead 's theory,
for its part, starts out from the refusa l of such a geometrization. It affirms
that every body defines its own spatio-temporal stra ti fication, its own
discrimina tion of what space and time a re. A body's spatio-tempora l be
havior in relation to other bod ies thus becomes relative to the articula
tion between the spatio-tempora l stratifications tha t each defi nes on its
own account. Conseq uently, the universa l releva nce of the law of gravita
tion can no longer be either deduced or j ustified . It reflects one possibility
a mong others, and the limits of its validity for our universe must be de
ci ded experi mentally.
    The version Whitehead proposes of the genera l theory of relativity thus
unfolds a universe of possibilities, among which there appears, as a very
particula r ca se, the si tua tion descri bed by Ei nstei n on the strength of
Newtonian universa l i ty. Physicists have j udged it a s a useless compl ica
tion, but sometimes I find mysel f daydrea ming that, in view of the prob
lems contemporary physics encounters when faced by the unification of
the gravitational force with the other i nteractions, this complication might
wel l open up interesting perspectives. In a ny case, i t meant placing phys
ics at risk, on the grounds of imperatives of intel ligibil ity that i ndeed an
nounce the theory of the organism. The metrical properties associated
with space-time should not be defined a priori, but should cha racterize
the pattern of the environment that is insepara ble from enduring bodies
qua enduring. Endura nce should be the primary fact, presupposed by all
physica l descriptions.
  The pattern is spatially now; and this temporal determination consti
tutes its relation to each partial event. For it is reproduced in this tempo
ral succession of these spatial parts of its own life. I mean that this partic
ular rule of temporal order allows the pattern to be reproduced in each
          S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 69




temporal slice of its history. So to speak, each enduring object discovers
in nature and requires from nature a principle discriminating space from
time ( SMW, 1 1 9 ) .
    Whitehead later ca lled this most general fact, t o which physics as well
as biology or perceptive consciousness bear witness, the " extensive con
tinuum " : each in its own way bespea ks the solidarity we observe, a nd on
which we depend, in the midst of the multipl icity of events.
    Above all, the extensive conti nuum must not be confused with a "com
mon place " existi ng prior to events, nor, more genera l l y, with an expla
nation of their sol idarity: it will instead have to expl a i n itself once this
sol idarity has been gra nted its concepts . It is neither a reason, nor, m uch
less, an a priori condition. It consti tutes the most a bstract characteriza
tion of the way events a re situating themselves with rega rd to one an
other, of the relational complex that a rticulates with one another all the
possible viewpoi nts of each with rega rd to others, quite apart from the
way each one produces the concrete meaning, for it, of that from which
it is insepa ra ble. With rega rd to this a bstraction, Einstein's space-time,
endowed with a metrics intended to explain the motion of bodies, is al
ready the expression of a specific mode of solidarity, presupposing masses
and motion, that is, a speci fied mode of endura nce.
    Are Whitehea d 's propositions capa ble of finding the sl ightest echo
within physics ? The question remains open, but the very fact of ra ising it
is importa nt. For together with this question it is also the question of the
" world visions " inspired by physics that is raised .
    The fact that physical laws, by mea ns of such " visions," including those
that introduce the quantum void or virtual particles today, have not
ceased to encourage the error of " misplaced concreteness," to introduce a
reality doomed to make nature bifurcate, is by no means an accusation. It
is simply the direct conseq uence of the kind of success tha t singularizes it,
and is announced by the notion of physical "law " : the situations that will
be privileged are those in which the a bstraction that sepa rates an organ
ism from its envi ronment-that is, that defines the endura nce of the for
mer and the patience of the latter in terms of right, not of fact-will be
operational and fruitful . Another way of describing this success is the re
duction of all change to an explanation in terms of what Whitehead ca lls
" external relations " : the beha vior attributed to each enduring entity is not
relative to the way it rea lizes itself through the unification of i ts prehen
sions, but is a function of varia bles designating other entities qua respon
si ble for the cha nges it undergoes.
    If physicists presuppose endurance and patience, chemists, for their part,
are pri marily interested in the contrast between pa tience a nd impatience,
1 7 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LOSOPHY   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that is, i n the conditions of the chemica l tra nsformations by which mol
ecules gain or lose their abil ity to hold and endure. Modern chemistry
has learned to cha racterize the ethology of molecules, or the way they
hold together; more recently, it has also learned some aspects of their ecol
ogy, or the k ind of pattern this holding-together imposes upon the envi
ronment. Yet here we run into a difficulty, in which the philosophy of the
orga nism is put directly to the test. I f the interests of physicists and chem
ists diverge, how can we explain the fact tha t they agree in describing
" the same atoms" or " the sa me molecules " ?
   Something is certa inly put to the test. It remains to be determined, how
ever, who puts whom to the test. It would be tempting, here, to evoke the
complications of high-energy physics. Physicists who study the proton
observe tha t thi s particle, on whose identity the identification of the vari
ety of atomic nuclei rel ied, is a " soup." They even go so fa r-a nd this, for
a physicist, is a terrible condemnation-as to speak of a "chemistry of the
proton " ! Yet it is not appropriate for the philosophy of the orga nism to
derive an a rgument from the perplexities of a science, for the point is not
to take one's rivals down a peg, at the risk of beating an undignified re
treat once these rivals succeed in deci phering the la byrinth in which they
seemed to be hopelessly lost.
  It is in their full maturity, and not in the process of their constitution,
that concepts and functions necessarily cross one another, each being cre
ated only by its own means [ . . . J ( Q Ph, 1 52 ) .
    This statement by Gilles Deleuze and Fel ix Guattari has made more than
one phi losopher shudder, but it ta kes on an immediate meaning for the
philosophy of the orga nism. No more tha n scientists should separa te
themselves and thei r achievements from their own shadow, should any
one take hold of those scientists' shadows independently of what they
have achieved or the function they have succeeded in constructing, re
flecting the way the varia bles that inseparably characterize a type of or
ganism and its environment hold together. We must therefore turn to the
exploit consti tuted, for twentieth-century physics, by the possi bil ity of
a ffirming that molecules remain " the same " throughout a l l the roles they
play in physica l explana tions, whether these molecules belong to a gas, a
liquid, a solid, or a situation of phase transition, and even the chemistry
in which they enter into reaction.
    To separate this exploit from its shadow, to make it rhyme with the
" uni fied vision " of a world whose funda menta l laws a re deciphered by
the physicists, is not to pay homage to physics, but rather to insult it. For
i t mea ns relegating an achievement to an imagery that makes short shrift
of the physicists' sophisticated, imaginati ve work. Here, in fact, what is
           S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 7 1




called " explanation" has nothing to do wi th a deduction . To succeed i n
explaining h a s meant t o succeed in redefini ng, i n each case, what " mole
cules in interaction" mea ns: tha t is, the way these interactions must be
cha racterized in order for theoretica l description to converge with experi
menta l observation. The grea tness of physics derives from the fact that
the physicist's goa l has been in each case to learn how to define molecules
and the i r role, tha t is, how they " i nfect" their neighbors and a re " i n
fected " by them. And the exploit of twentieth-century physics is to have
succeeded in prod uci ng a ( more or less) coherent a rticulation of the defi
nitions, different i n each case, of i ts actors, i ncl uding actors tha t a re ca
pable of entering i nto chemical reactions. It is i ndeed possible to a ffirm
that it is " the same " a toms that enter i nto the characteriza tion of va rious
chemica l reactions, but that the role "a sa me" a tom plays depends upon
the reaction, that is, upon the environment to which this reaction corre
sponds. Some atoms, however, pa rticularly those of carbon or iron, have
thus become verita ble chameleons, unfol ding many different properties
according to their environments.
   In fact, physics today has a l ready begun to explore the limits of this
achievement. This is not a q uestion of reflexivity or of epistemology, but
of pursuing the adventure a nd surprises reserved by i ts achievements. I
am thinking in particular of those physicists who no longer study " ma tter"
but " ma terial s," which a re no longer defined by " q ua l i ties " tha t oppose
them to a homogeneous ma tter but by the fact that things ha ppen to
them . Correlati vely, they a re no longer characterized in terms of proper
ties, flexi bility, fragil ity, or va rious a nd d iverse textures, as the questions
now concern verbs denoting actions and passions . Wha t ma kes glue
stick, mayonna ise set, soap foa m, or steel bend and then suddenly brea k ?
Corresponding t o such questions, there is now a multiple wea lth o f mod
els that negotiate how to co-define the relevant actors, their modes of
coupling, the sca les of description tha t enable us to approach the trans
formations, whether progressive or bruta l, of observable properties.
   How ca n one express the contrast between a rema rkably stable whirl
pool that can be engendered by a turbulent flux when it comes to strike
an obstacle, and the clear, distinct sound produced by a solid when
struc k ? In both ca ses, a giga ntic number of pa rticles pa rticipate in wha t
is to be explained, be it whirlpool or sound . When the subject is sound,
however, the multiplicity can be forgotten, since a few pa ra meters suffice
to characterize the sol id's vi bra nt elasticity. When it comes describing the
whirlpool, in contrast, one m ust yield to the obvious: the description of a
liquid flux colliding violently with an obstacle does not deliver the whirl
pool's secret unless i t takes into account how whirlpools form on every
1 7 2   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETA P H Y S I C S




scale, playing a role that cannot be smoothed over in terms of average
va lues . As far as the " behavior" of a material is concerned , its ductil i ty, its
fragility, it will be the fault lines, their modes of propagation, their en
counters with heterogeneous media, their entanglements with each other
that will tell why it bends or breaks.
   In the guise of what is called the "mesoscopic," situated " between "
microscopic descriptions, whose actors are supposed to be definable in
dependently of their environment, and macroscopic descriptions of the
observable properties of the whole, physicists have thus discovered the
need for an a rt of negotiating the in- between, the modes of existence of
bei ngs that should not be confused with mere intermediaries translating
the microscopic into the macroscopic. They are genui ne actors, interact
ing with one a nother in genuine intrigues, which we must learn to nar
rate if the intell igibility of observable properties is to be produced . Whereas
sociologists may have been tempted to take the crystal as a model and to
define society in terms of a finite number of varia bles, materials physi
cists know, when they dea l with a piece of steel that consists only of iron,
carbon, and a few impurities, that they a re addressi ng a " pattern " whose
singul arity must be explored each time, and whose relevant constituents
must be negotiated and characterized on each occasion. They thus pro
long an exploration carried out for millennia by those who have learned
the art of forging steel of ever-different properties.
   Here, the goa l is not to adduce physics as an example for sociologists,
for the adventures of steel, in the last analysis, occupy only a few hundred
pages in a treatise on meta ll urgy, and the fact that they could have been
characterized by metallurgists as " properties " referring to well-defined
processes of fa brication is enough to reca ll the pragmatic d ivergence be
tween the two domains. The point is to celebrate a history whose success
must, first and foremost, be descri bed as relevance. The a rticulation,
henceforth enta ngled, between questions that had-a l beit for only a
century at most--clearly separated what concerns physicians and what
concerns chemists, may confirm the wager that the philosophy of the
organism makes on the order of nature: " there are organisms everywhere,"
and each kind of organism is in itself, and without any beyond, an active,
enduring production of what the scientist deciphers . But it confirms, first,
that scientists, despite their simpl i fying slogans, are indeed those for
whom nature is a source of innovation: by ta king a closer look, one finds
more in it.
   However, it belongs to another science, biology, to unfold the tota lity
of what the orga nism obliges us to think. Living beings have the privilege
of exhi biting endurance qua achievement, in the midst of a risky envi ron-
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O RGA N I S M   1 7 3




ment. Indeed, although beings and their interactions, as characterized
both by physics and by chemistry, may wel l have come to exhi bit the in
sepa ra ble character of the definition of an entity and that of its envi ron
ment, the val ues to which they give mea ning remai n those of varia bles.
Biologists, for their part, address the enduri ng organism insofar as its sta
bility is at stake for this organism itself, insofa r as it matters.
    Biologists do not so much explain the living being as celebrate the liv
ing being's achievement: this might be the proposition that emerges from
the phil osophy of the orga nism, and this proposition can shed l ight on
the contrast between " biologica l function " and " physico-mathematical
function," a contrast that gave rise to the vitalist temptation to oppose
the " how," which supposedly suffices for physics a nd c hemistry, to the
" why," whose relevance is i mposed by the living being.
    In fact, every time biologists identify the intricate, multi ple roles of the
various components of a cell, a tissue, an organ, or a body, they are sub
ject to the temptation of explaining the tota l ity in terms of goal-directed
organization. They deal with the organism qua exhibiting, in an obvious
way, its dependence upon a selective taking-together: certa in entities are
taken into considera tion and not others, and in this way to the exclusion
of other ways, while the overa l l regi me wagers on such an environment
and loses its hold if the confidence implied by this wager is betrayed . Also,
when biologi sts a re confronted by a pathology, they see the relative sim
pl icity of functional relations-this is responsible for that-disa ppear in
favor of an a lmost indescribable multiplicity of relations: the safe hold of
reasonings gets lost at the sa me time as the biological function. In other
words, descriptions of a " normal " l i vi ng bei ng did not expl a i n its func
tional sta bility, but depended on it. And when, once they become bio
physici sts, our biologists study the va rious components of a living being
sepa rately in the context of an experimental environment, they discover
how hard it is to make an isolated component have the type of behavior
that characterizes it in the midst of a living organism. If the difference
between an electron within a body and an electron in the la boratory is
hard to determi ne, the three-dimensional folding that confers its " func
tiona l " properties upon the protein offers problems whose frightful sub
tlety is being discovered by contemporary science: the " functiona l " pro
tein needs its living environment.
    The term " organism " thus rightly indicates a privilege of living beings.
In biology, the question " how ? " exhi bits itself as inseparable not from the
why (pourquoi) but from the what-for (pour quoi): it is insepara ble both
from the world for (pour) which a living being's functioning has meaning
and from the wager for this world, and not another, that this functioning
1 74   FROM   T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




affirms. In other words, the privilege of a living bei ng is to exhibit each
biologica l function as risking itsel f " with regard to " the outsi de world,
and " for" an external worl d .
   Quite obviously, in the case of a l iving being, the p roblem of the
" whole" and the " part," of the body and " its " parts is also ra ised, and
raised in terms of functional interdependence. Both the whole and each
part need the success of the other parts for their own success and for the
endurance of their mode of " functional " behavior.
    The question of the whole and the parts is an ancient one, which
haunts biology. Is the whole anyth i ng other than " s u m " of its parts ? Is
it " more," or is it not " less," in the sense tha t, in one way or another, it
" binds" its parts, subjecting them to its own interests and thus depriving
them of certain possibilities of behavior ? Such questions also belong to
the history of phi losophy. Even Leibniz, who sought to understand a re
ality conceived in terms of monads, each of which deployed for itself its
own viewpoint, wa s obl iged at the end of his l i fe to introduce the stra nge
notion of a vinculum. As a nonsubstantial link, knot, or yoke, the vincu
lum answers the need for describing the crowd of monads that make up
an individual body qua collected, or " subjected," varia bles of a function,
although each one nevertheless conserves its autonomy. It was this kind
of question that plunged embryology in the first half of the twentieth
century i nto a crisis, before the tri umph of molecular biology defined the
entire field as " fal low," destined to be el ucidated some day in genetic terms.
Embryologists had discovered the failure of any attempt to explain the
progressive di fferentiation of the embryo in terms of " a bstract" mecha
nisms, identi fiable independently of the total ity in which they participate.
They had to admit that in embryology no ca use has within itself the
power to ca use or the power to produce a specific effect independently of
a specific envi ronment. At the limit, all ca uses designate the developing
embryo as such as " the ca use " responsible for their effect.
   For Whitehead, the pa rts do not constitute the whole without the
whole infecting the parts. In other words, the identity, or the enduring
pattern, of the whole and the parts are strictly contemporary. This is Why
the same term, " i nfection," can be used both to designate the rela tions
between the whole and the parts, and to describe the relations of a living
orga nism with its environment. If the body exists for its pa rts, it is be
cause its parts a re infected by such-and-such an obstinate aspect of what
we ca ll the body, but which, for them, is a portion of thei r environment;
if the pa rts exist for each other and for the body, it is beca use the respec
tive patterns of each a re highly sensitive to any mod ification of the envi
ronment they constitute for one another.
           S C I E N T I F I C   O BJ E CTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   ORG A N I S M   1 7 5




  Thus the body is a portion of the environment for the part, and the
part is a portion of the environment for the body; [the d ifference between
the case of the body and its parts, and that of the living being a nd its ex
terna l environment is] only they are peculiarly sensitive, each to modifi
cations of the other ( SMW, 1 49 ) .
   Some ten years later, i n Modes o f Thought, Whitehead was t o say the
same thing in a more poetic form:
   In fact, the world beyond is so intimately entwined in our own natures
that unconsciously we identify our more vivid perspectives of it with our
selves. For example, our bodies lie beyond our own individual existence.
And yet they are part of it. We think of ourselves as so intimately en
twined in bodily life that a man is a complex unity-body and mind. But
the body is part of the external world, continuous with it. In fact, it is just
as much part of nature as anything else there-a river, or a mountain, or
a cloud. Also, if we are fussily exact, we cannot define where a body be
gins and where external nature ends ( MT, 2 1 ) .
   The body is not made u p o f a l l i ts parts, a nd its parts a re not pa rt o f
the body. The parts have vested i nterests i n each other a nd i n the body,
in the sense that these a re the proximate environment required by their
success. The only genuine totality is the event itself, each event rea l izing
for itself the combination of its prehensions, the account of wha t it takes
into account. Each pa rt is grasped by the whole as an aspect of its own
pa ttern, a variable of its functioning. And this aspect of itself, obstinately
exhibited by the whole and by the other parts, i nfects the environment of
each part, which thus exhibits itself as a part. For as long as it lasts.
   To refer to a familiar situation, let us take the pa rticular exa mple of
the " whole" constituted by a hospita l, and of the " parts " constituted by
doctors and patients. Doctors and pa tients enter and leave the hospita l .
Outside the hospital, the doctor is a normally courteous exemplar o f hu
ma nity. In the hospital, having become a " part" of the hospital, he sweeps
in, followed by a cohort of assistants, ta lks about the patient, to whom he
scarcely says a word, and often lea ves before he can be asked the slightest
question. Nevertheless, stil l qua pa rt, he is extremely sensitive, not, to be
sure, to the suffering patient, but to the selected " aspects " of the patient
that a re addressed to his sk i l l . As far as the patient is concerned, once she
becomes a part, she accepts to be treated in this way, and accepts to anx
iously await the verdict the doctor will issue on the basis of data whose
mea ning she, as a patient, is not supposed to share.
   The endura nce of the pattern named " hospital," as we know it, depends,
of course, on the patience of the environment: if, for instance, users did
not accept to be defined as " pa tients " as soon as they enter the hospita l,
1 76   FROM   T H E   P H I LOSOPHY   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




that is, to renou nce most of their rights, the " whole" and the other parts
would lose thei r hold . As long as the hospital as we know it succeeds in
infecting both patients and doctors, it will succeed in enduring.
     Let us return to the biologists, who, for their part, a re not confronted
with a " social fact" but with a multiplicity of " natura l " hi stories. Whereas
the history of an a tom or a molecule remains largely hidden to us, that of
a living individual, of a population, of various popu lations in interaction,
and of species, together constitutes the terrain on the basis of which the
most complete and concrete testimony we have available on the subject
of nature may be heard .
     Among these histories, the Darwi nian ones were radically innovative,
as they brought with them a new mode of a ppreciating living beings,
pl aced under the banner of a long, slow process, and of celebrating the
" l iving value " associated with obstinate sma ll causes that end up produc
ing major effects . Today, the interpreters of Gaia a re the heirs of this ap
preciation. In contrast, today as in Whitehead 's time, most of those who
profess a llegiance to Darwin have produced a biased, abstract version of
him, focused on competi tion . For Whitehead, this is the direct conse
quence of the concrete, misplaced character of the a bstraction according
to which an organism is what it is independently of its environment. I f
the identity of a living being h a d been recognized as a " living value" in
separable from its envi ronment, the notion of a " favorable environment"
wou ld have been recognized as something crucially a t stake in evolution .
But an abstract role was conferred upon the environment, and the only
responsibility assigned to it was that of selective sorting, where this term
presupposes the possibility of defining independently the criterion of
sorti ng and that which is sorted .
   The given ness of the environment dominates everything. A ccordingly,
the last words of science appeared to be the Struggle for Existence, and
Natural Selection. Darwin's own writings are for all time a model of re
fusal to go beyond the direct evidence, and of careful retention of every
possible hypothesis. But those virtues were not so conspicuous in his fol
lowers, and still less in his camp-followers. The imagination of European
sociologists and publicists was stained by exclusive attention to this as
pect of conflicting interests. The idea prevailed that there was a peculiar
strong-minded realism in discarding ethical considerations in the deter
mination of the conduct of commercial and national interests. The other
side of the evolutionary machinery, the neglected side, is expressed by the
word creativeness . The organisms can create their own environment. For
this purpose, the single organism is almost helpless. The adequate forces
require societies of cooperating organisms. But with such cooperation
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O RG A N I S M   1 7 7




and in proportion to the effort put forward, the environment has a p las
ticity which alters the whole ethical aspect of evolution [ . . . 1 roma ntic
ruthlessness is no nearer to real politics, than is romantic self-abnegation
( SMW, 1 1 1 - 1 1 2 ) .
    Whitehead 's proposition d i d not make history i n biology, although it
did nourish the thought of one its most remarkable scholars, the embry
ologist Conrad Waddington. Unti l his death in 1 975, Waddington was " a
biologist o n the watch." H e did not l i m i t himself t o analyzing the question
begging " errors of misplaced concreteness " that lead to red ucing Darwin
ian evol ution to a genetic sorting process. He sought out and tried to
gather together a l l those biologists, physicists, mathematicians, and phi
losophers who were lia ble to contribute to a " theoretica l biology," or a
formal ization that would enable biologists to resist the many pseudo
di lemmas that harass the way living beings are thought: innate/acquired,
genetically determined/relative to the environment, individuaVgroup, and
so on.
    Nevertheless, quite apart from the question of his own infl uence, White
head was right to trust l i ving beings and the interest they inspire. Ab
straction has never encountered the same adhesion in biology as it has in
physics, and the dissatisfaction it inspires has not ceased to give rise to
new interpreters. Thus, the sociobiologica l abstraction, which constitutes
natural selection as the only thing responsible for the "values " attached
to the organism-i f poets feel the beauty of the glow of the sunset, it is
because celebrating it has enabled hominids to seduce females, and has
therefore given them an advantage with regard to their less eloquent
colleagues-can certainly be presented as a triumph of scientific rational
ity. Yet this professional j udgment, continuing as it does a long the path of
an a bstraction whose only value is the reduction of all values to selective
va l ue, is the vector of more controversies than consensus i n biology.
    Whereas in physics, the idea of a law of nature does not give rise to
any particular impatience, it pertains to the life sciences to produce wit
nesses against the a bstraction ca l led " materialist." This is the case i n ge
netics, when Barba ra McClintock, busy a nd precise, nevertheless affirms
the i mportance of " l istening to what corn has say." It is the case in em
bryology, when Albert Dalcq is moved by the fact that the embryo'S re
sponse to his experimental questions has " a l l the surprise and charm one
can find in the answer of an intelligent i nterlocutor." Also in evolutionary
biology, when Stephen Gould opposes to the nasty ugl iness of all-terrain
selectivism the j oy of a biology that would learn how to understand how,
when it comes to l i ving beings, " the world outside passes through a
bounda ry i nto organic vitality withi n ." And in ethology, when meticulous
1 78   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S




study is joined to a link of respect, or even love, or else a mazement, or
aga in j u bilation: all that is impl ied, along with astonishment, by the term
" wonder." Each time, the sense of a presence that cannot be appropri
ated, an invitation to becoming, finds its witnesses, a rticulated without
contrad iction with the most meticulous investigative approach.
    And theorists themselves try to respond to what is dema nded by l iving
beings in terms of forma l descriptions, whether it be autopoiesis with
Fra ncesco Varela , or the great undertaking of Rene Thorn that sought to
cha racterize the type of mathematization that is releva nt to living beings.
And perhaps a bove all, the a l l iance between forma l and dynamic model s
of etho-ecological co-construction Stuart Kauffmann is now trying to
forge in his Investigations. As Whitehead had foreseen, each of them tes
tifies, each in his own way, to l iving bei ngs, implying and ca lling for a
new conception of the order of nature. All a re infected by the discovery,
cha racteristic of the life sciences, that chains of cause to effect are never
prolonged very far, and that, at each step, one must be ready for a muta
tion of the mode of description, a bifurcation of what is a t stake, the in
trusion of a new actor pointing to (without causing it) a radica l tra nsfor
mation of the distri bution of rol es and significations.
    Although the philosophy of the organism designates biology as its
privileged field, its ambition is not l imited to biology. We should recall
that it was from objective perception, "I see a castle there," that White
head drew the correlative notions of event and prehension. Yet percep
tion is henceforth a dangerous abstraction from the point of view of the
orga nism, as are the notions of perspective, reflection, a nd viewpoint,
which belonged to the contributions proposed by classical philosophy
for the job specification. These notions will have to be generalized , in
order to exhibit the fea tures that now designate the organism: endurance
as what is at sta ke, risky success, and the insepa ra bility of what endures
from its environment. In other words, they will have to be reformulated
in a way that renders explicit what they require, and will have to un
dergo the same tra nsformation as the " presence " celebrated by the poets,
which has become a " dynamics of infection."
    Perception and the spatio-tempora l definition of the physica l object
were the two sources of " facts " privileged by The Concept of Nature,
corresponding to this book's a mbition: to resist the bifurcation of nature,
whose j ustifications, consequences, and the possibilities of getti ng a round
it were explored, in one way or another, by the great classica l philoso
phers. Henceforth, in contrast, the starting point constituted by the defi
nition of the electron and the field associated with it no longer communi
cates directly with the q uestion of the order of na ture, for it presupposes
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   THE   O R G A N I S M   1 7 9




the patient character of the environment constituted for the electron by
the field . The electron's functional behavior, the stable definition of the
varia bles that define it, is what is presupposed and confirmed by the ex
perimental staging that enables it to be made explicit, but from the point
of view of the order of nature this is not a generality, but only what is
dema nded by physics . In other words, the fact that physics succeeds in
describing a world of sta ble entities in functiona l interaction speaks less
of the order of nature in the generic sense than of those aspects of the
order of nature that p hysics will recognize as its own, once experimenta
tion has a llowed their i dentification .
   The question will arise in a similar way with the object of perception.
We recall that, in The Concept of Nature, Cleopatra 's Needle communi
cated with the possibility of saying " there it is again" and required an ob
ject. The object did not explain its recognition, but was required for recog
nition to have a respondent and not to make nature bifurcate. But perceptive
experience, precisely because it exhibits this dimension of recognition in a
dominant way, communicates with the abstraction of a staging that is
neutral with regard to values, and makes us forget that concrete experi
ence can very seldom be reduced to the observation that Cleopatra's
Needle is indeed stil l there in its place. In other words, the fact that per
ceptive experience privi leges permanent objects, defined as sta ble active
conditions for the perceptions we have of them-I see the Needle, and I
also know that you, who are on the other side of the square, see it too, but
from another perspective-does not constitute a relia ble general i ty from
the viewpoint of the philosophy of the organism. It does not exhibit the
risky character of the uni fication it presupposes. The notion of perspec
tive, and more precisely the stable differentiation implied by the notion of
perspective between the object and its spatial environment ( space as the
place of all the perspectives from which Cleopatra's Needle ca n be seen ),
speaks not of the order of nature but of that particular aspect of the order
of nature that is called perception .
   In Modes of Thought, Wh itehead will explicitly question the concept
of perspective he had accepted when the a bstract question was to de
scribe how we ca n perceive, " here," the Needle, castle, or cloud that are
l ocated " there ." Perspectivism, that is, the i dentification of prehension
with a form of " reflection," the event reflecting all other events from its
viewpoint and being reflected from their viewpoint by all events, places
the emphasis on a possible symmetry, an impartiality that conceals the
concrete fact that what we perceive interests us and matters to us.
  We may well ask whether the doctrine of perspective is not an endeav
our to reduce the concept of importance to mere matter-of-fact devoid of
1 8 0   FROM   T H E   PH I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




intrinsic interest. Of course such reduction is impossible. But it is true to
say that perspective is the dead abstraction of mere fact from the living
importance of things felt. The concrete truth is the variation of interest;
the abstraction is the universe in perspective ( MT, 1 1 ) .
   The reflective mirror, whose various orientations exhibit the different
ways of placing the same scene in perspective, communicates with the
abstract ideal of neutral ity with regard to values. It is the person who ori
ents the mirror who decides what the mi rror will reflect. The value of the
mirror qua mirror is precisely to authorize the abstraction of its own role.
If this role is to be taken into account, it will be insofar as it departs from
the ideal: such a defect, such an irregularity, deforms the image. The no
tion of perspective thus has the weakness of its vulnerability to being re
duced to a simple "effect" of the landscape. Unless, as Leibniz proposed,
one ma kes the landscape an effect of the perspective. In both cases, how
ever, what is missed is the risky affirmation of the person who perceives
" for" a world . The point then is not dependence; what is affirmed is the
way one is oneself the invention of the world on which one depends.
   It might have been anticipated, however, that the link between perspec
tive and importa nce would communicate not with " variation of interest"
but with the question of value, as proposed by poets and imposed by bi
ology. It seems that the phi losophy of the organism ought to end up with
a mea ning of the term " perspective " tha t resonates in the a ffirmation " to
each his own perspective," obstinate, selective, affirmative, intolerant. To
hell, then, with the common world that col lects perspectives, and with
Leibnizian harmony, which turns this common world into a well
constructed i l l usion. Whitehead seemed destined to move from classic
perspectivism, a Cleopatra 's Need le perceived from d i fferent viewpoints,
to a perspectivism of a Nietzschea n or at least postmodern type . Yet
Whitehead did not make this move. His thought was to bifurcate in a
wholly other direction, without the least explanation.
   Here, " thinking with Whitehead" obliges us to take the li berty of a di
agnosis. What prevented Whitehea d from carrying out the obvious gen
eral ization that would have led him to a psychology based on the biased
and pa rtial cha racter of perceptions, thus putting an end to the explora
tion of the facts that exhibit the order of nature ?
   To attempt this diagnosis, I propose to tackle the problem from the
other end . What would Whitehead have wound up with if he had trans
ferred to psychology the notions of endura nce and value, whose releva nce
is exhibited by biology ? A rather formidable result: the pra ise of the pro
fessional. Indeed , what better exa mple could there be of an orga nism than
the professional described by Whitehead, he who boasts of the selective
          S C I E N T I F I C   OBJ ECTS   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   T H E   O R G A N I S M   1 8 1




seriousness of his thought, that is, of its limitations ? What better example
of obstinately affirmed value than the professionals' trust in the well
foundedness of the rut they are following, of the routine mode of grasping
that they are prolonging? What better example of endurance than a pro
fessiona l judgment, maintaining the separation between what should be
taken into account and mere anecdote, whereas the anecdote in question
may signify the despa ir of thousands of persons ? What better example of
successful infection than the creation of such professionals from " norma l "
beginners: those first-year students who will have to lea rn the differentia
tion between the " good " questions, those that will turn them into " true
professionals," and the others, which inspire " impatience " of their teachers
in the form of an explicit reprimand, or an inept answer, or a little smile
that is mocki ng, condescending, or pitying ? And what better example of
the " patience " of the environment than the fact that this differentiation
has been ta ken up: the good questions are objective, scientific, or rationa l,
while everythi ng else, even if it is what is most importa nt, belongs to " val
ues," to subjectivity, to sentimentality, to culture . . . ?
   In other words, Whitehead's proposition, centered on the orga nism and
on " va lue" as the outcome of limitation, is certa inly not bereft of rele
va nce with regard to psychological science, which, fol lowing Wi lliam
James, he wished to make enter the " order of nature." Yet it risks nourish
ing a psychology that defines as its normal horizon what Whitehead has
precisely questioned . The professional 's rut would be celebrated as para
digmatic success.
   Physicists who describe the motion of a solid body take advantage of
the endurance and the patience cha racteristic of what is cal led " p hysica l
reality." The possibility of making a mathematical function correspond to
the motion of a pla net, for instance, presupposes and reflects the fact that
this motion testi fies to a determi nate mode of prehension that seems to
have endured since the solar system has existed . Biologists, for their part,
know that the way a l iving being " holds on" reflects a risky and successful
sorting of what affects it, and thei r own description depends on this suc
cess. Biologists are " captivated " in both senses of the term: the success of
their description depends on a success that precedes it, and has deter
mi ned the terms of that description. For them, to understand means to
" follow" this sorting process, but also to " appreciate " how the body dis
tributes mea nings, how the parts refer to the whole that infects them. In
contrast, the psychologist's description, if it were simi larly " captivated,"
would risk either edifying redunda ncy or cynicism. Thus, psychologists
captivated by the professionals' quiet success would be led to celebrate the
firm, self-assured way they " sort" what they have to deal with, relega ti ng
1 8 2   FROM T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




to the status of an anecdote all that anyone other than they might find
importa nt or worrisome. Starting out from this hypothesis, they could
esta blish a cynical portrait of what it is to be human, beyond all illusions
of l ucidity. And they could also identify how the norms common to our
societies infect everyone, such that the "development of the sense of mo
ral ity " in the adolescent, for insta nce, would pertain purely and simply to
the fabrication of a being that does not inspire impatience on the part of
its social milieu.
   This perspectivism might sati sfy a professional psychologist, but it
wou ld neglect one small deta il, or j udge it purely anecdota l : by fol low
ing the biologist's example in this way, the psychologist does not re
semble a biologist at a l l . A living being's lim itations celebrate its success,
whereas whoever might undertake to descri be me on the ba sis of my
lim itations would insult me. In contra st, whoever nourishes my " d is
quiet" (inquihude)-a Leibnizian term that is to be understood without
the slightest doloristic connotation-nourishes me: not in terms of a
phobia of all l imitation, but of an appetite for experimentation, for the
consequences of variation of interest, for the exploration that plunges
what I thought was given into the rea l m of the possible.
   " It can cease to hold." For biologists or doctors, th is means in the first
insta nce the risk of illness or death . Yet whoever is interested in human
experience must take this question as a primary term. This, moreover, is
what the familiar stories do, such as the one of the king whose prestige
infected his envi ronment to such an extent that no one, prior to the
impertinent child, had dared to say, " But he has no clothes ! " O r those
games that exhibit the abil ity of infectious dynamics to desta bil ize
the relation to the " norma l " world : " I 've got you, you've got me by the
chinny-ch in-ch in, the fi rst to laugh . . . " I I rrepressi ble la ughter reflects
the impossi bil ity of " sta ying serious" in an environment infected by re
ciprocal modes of prehension focused on only these aspects, a sparkling
glance, pursed l ips, frowns, that can both inspire and foretell laughter.
   In The Concept of Nature, the relation of cogredience, the " and " in the
" here and now " of all experience, exhibited the precariousness of the fact
of " holding on " : the specious present that Whitehead in herited from Wi l
liam James end ures and succeeds in making those variations that do not
make it slip into the past of a new present hold together, but it is fleeti ng



I In the French game of "}e te tiens . tu me tiens par fa harhichette," two children

hold each other's chin as they stare into each other's eyes. The first to laugh loses.
-Trans.
          S C I E NT I F I C   O BJ E C T S   A N D   T H E   TEST   O F   TH E   O R G A N I S M   1 8 3




at first. Once it has gone, it is gone, and the very a ttempt to hold it back
makes it slip away, unless we have to dea l not with a deli berate effort but
with the result of spiri tual techniq ues whose result is precisely the di
vorce between vol unta ry effort and accompl ishment.
   Since it is fleeting, William James's specious present thus forces us to
conceive of the problematic c haracter of holding-together, which may be
concealed both by biological success a nd by objective perception desig
nating an object-that castle, tha t cloud-that will stil l be there when I
open my eyes again. Yet lived continuity, as James has described it, a suc
cession of presents that appropriate their past, ta king up once again what
precedes them and assigning a val ue to it by ma king it a variable of their
own function, not only designa tes an enrichment of the job specifications,
leading to a new formulation of what is required by the philosophy of the
organism. It a lso ra ises the problem of the communication between the
" order of nature " and the metaphysical question, implying what we cal l
" mind," or rather " soul," in the sense that the soul designates that which
psychology should have to address if it is to address the experience of
disquiet.
   If it is not to make nature bifurcate immediately, the mode of holding
together of lived conti nuity must be conceived as inseparable from the or
der of nature. If not, the soul would risk being identified with a feature that
is fundamenta lly a lien to this order: freedom, to be precise. In one way or
another, this order itself will have be situated, and with it the notion of
organism. Just as chemistry exhibits what physics accomplishes in abstrac
tion, a nd biology exhibits what chemistry succeeds in a bstracting, the
question now arises of what psychology should exhibit so that the abstrac
tion on which biologica l order depends may be situated and identified .
   Accord ing to my diagnosis, we can foresee that when Whitehead takes
up the question of the " specious present," the question should be decided
of how the endurance of the organism may be a rticulated with " the dis
quiet of the soul ." And the specious present will indeed appea r in Science
and the Modern World in a decisive place, tha t is, as an introduction to
three paragraphs that constitute, according to Lewis Ford, an insertion
added by Whitehead after April 1 925.
   The total temporal duration of such an event bearing an enduring pat
tern, constitutes its specious present. Within this specious present the
event realises itself as a totality, and also in so doing realises itself as
grouping together a number of aspects of its own temporal parts. One
and the same pattern is realised in the total event, and is exhibited by each
of these various p arts through an aspect of each part grasped into the to
getherness of the total event ( SMW, 1 04-1 0 5 ) .
1 8 4   F RO M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   N AT U R E T O   META P H Y S I C S




   We seem to be on familiar ground here, a l l the more fa miliar in tha t
Whitehead was dea l ing with end ura nce in the preceding paragraph, and
the obstinacy with which " the same thing for itsel f" is there in front of
you, however you may analyze it from the tempora l flux of its parts . One
might therefore think tha t that he is prolonging this same question by
specifying how the whole realizes itself by gatheri ng together its parts, each
according to the aspect that contributes to its own pattern. One might even
suspect the role that psychological experience must have played in the
philosophy of the orga nism. Whitehead no doubt intended to make it the
terra in of conceptual construction that was to provide " rigid coherence "
to William James's " adequate" exploration . For the psychologica l field,
interpreted as " self-knowledge of our tota l bodily event," is indeed wha t
imposes a fully deployed conceptua l construction, si nce it impl ies, as a
concrete fact, what biology certa inly does not a llow to be ignored, but
from which the biologist may be tempted to ma ke a bstraction: the " for
itself" cha racter of the event.
   Yet it was in fact another author who had taken his pen, accord ing to
Lewis Ford, who has dubbed what begins in this way the insertion of the
" triple envisagement." Wha t is being introd uced is a notion to which nei
ther physics, nor perceptive experience, nor the biologica l organism, nor
the poets chosen by Whitehead, nor even Wi lliam James has borne wit
ness: that of the " possibilities of val ue," whose envisaging is a primordial
aspect of " eterna l activi ty." It is the birth of this other a uthor, henceforth
a metaphysician, that must be described before we pursue the reading
of this insertion, one of the most obscure texts in Science and the Modern
World.
   Let us note, however, that at the moment when this other Whitehead
underta kes to turn the economy of his own thought inside out, to pl unge
into the risks of metaphysics, whereas he had previously tried to conceive of
the order of nature, that is, the enduring success of beings, it is a term deriv
ing directly from William James, " specious present," that came to his pen.
                                                            C H A P TER TWE L V E




The Event from Its Own Standpoi nt?




       f
      "'
          H E PATH I have fol lowed leads to the question o f the " psycho
          logical field " associated with the thought of Wil liam James, and
          the fact that I have introduced the term " soul " ind icates the
stakes I propose to associate with it. To descri be the soul is problematic
in terms of a theory that relates value and endurance; such a theory rather
means insulting the soul . The concepts ca l led for by our fa ith in an order
of nature do not suffice, for they do not enable us to resist the bl ind version
of this fa ith proposed by professionals. If unity is to be real ized where
subject and object are opposed , we m ust rise back up from the success
exhibited and celebrated by orga nisms toward what is possible-which
these organisms succeed in excluding. The concepts to be constructed can
not take advantage of the modes of intel ligibility proposed by the " order
of nature," but must risk the test of the metaphysica l question in its full
state of deployment.
   This line of reasoning is entirely due to my imagination, to the way I am
trying to accompany Whitehead 's thought. Se non e vero . . . Yet other
paths may be envisaged, which al low us to understand what happened to
Whitehead in April 1 92 5 . Let us therefore fol low another, complemen
tary path. Let us consider human experience, the " psychological field "
defined as " a bodily event considered from its own sta ndpoint," as they
force upon us questions that remain unsolved . In fact, the conceptual con
struction to which the thought of the organism obliges us has only j ust
found its own locus and risks . For to the question " What is an event? "
only concepts enable us to respond in a generic way, independently of the
limitations that allow an organism to be characterized .
1 8 6   FROM   T H E   P H I L O S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




  As Whitehead often repeats, the order of nature has as its subject " that
which endures" : that is, not the event, but the pattern realized by the event,
which, in the case of success, is repeated from event to event. The point
will therefore be to construct the distinction between this pattern and the
event itself, which is " prehension," the unifying grasp of the aspects pre
hended accord ing to a determinate mode. This is where the reference to
the " bodily event" is crucia l .
   I t is important to discriminate the bodily pattern, which endures, from
the bodily event, which is pervaded by the enduring pattern, and from the
parts of the bodily event. The parts of the bodily event are themselves
pervaded by their own enduring patterns, which form elements in the
bodily pattern. The parts of the body are really portions of the environ
ment of the total bodily event, but so related that their mutual aspects,
each in the other, are peculiarly effective in modifying the patterns of
either [ . . . I we can now see the relation of psychology to physiology and
to physics. The private psychological field is merely the event considered
from its own standpoint. The unity of this field is the unity of the event.
But it is the event as one entity, and not the event as a sum of parts
(SMW, 1 4 9- 1 50 ) .
   To conceive the event a s one entity thus mea ns, a t the sa me time, to try
to construct the k ind of " rigid coherence " appropriate for the innovative
thesis of Wi lliam James. For there can obviously be no question of con
sciousness "qua function " being consciousness " reduced to a function."
This is why thinking of the event " for itsel f" is crucially at stake. What
interests " psycho-phi losophy " must be both d i stingu ished from, and
placed in rela tion to, the enduring patterns cha racterized by the so-ca l led
objective sciences, and on which these sciences depend , from physics to
physiology. The " terri torial division" between science and philosophy
must not be " surmounted " by explanation, but the very possibility of ex
plana tion must have the status of a consequence from the perspective of
a thought based on the event.
   When Whitehead wrote the lines just cited, he seems to have thought he
had constructed the terms of its solution . The event rea lizes and unifies,
and it unifies " for itself," by producing its own standpoint. In other words,
the rea lity of an event must be understood on the basis of " internal " rela
tions alone. An event is not what it is because of other events, but because
of the grasp it rea lizes of those other events, the way in which it " pre
hends" them, and the aspects under which it takes them into account as it
produces itsel f. An event itself, as such, thus never has the power to define
what its action will be, or its effect, or its influence on something else. The
aspect of itself that will be ta ken into account, and thus contribute to the
                           T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 8 7




explanation of the account, did not, as such, preexist this taking-into
account. Action, effect, influence: all these terms that seem to designate
"external " relations, in which a transformation is explicable by something
external, are relative to endurance. They designate the type of ta king-into
account, the role, or the " va lorization " that an event's mode of pattern
obstinately confers upon what is prehended . Of course, the transformation
can " be explained " as a function of something external, but here the fact is
disconnected from the " principle." What explains did not have the power
to explain " i n principle " : it obtained this power in fact. Yet this fact is rela
tive to the endurance of the pattern, to the mode of tak ing into account,
insofar as it has succeeded in enduring.
    In other words, we should not celebrate the sun as a source of life, but
the endurance of a mode of pattern that ma kes the properties of sola r
l ight exist for the plant, these properties that henceforth infect us as well,
since the mode of pattern proper to our experientia l apparatus has pro
duced its sta ble signification, which can be articulated in terms of a func
tion. As a dynamics of successful infection req u i red by the order of
nature, the endurance of modes of pattern that refer to one another does
not a l low us to descri be the way an event is prehension " for itself," even
as it participates in a world from which it is i nsepa ra ble.
    As far as the taking-into-account as such is concerned, it ra ises a prop
erly conceptual q uestion. Indeed, the mode of tak ing-into-account, the
aspect in which the various a spects " enter " into the constitution of an
event-that is, j ust as much, the way this event testi fies to the presence of
other events beyond itself-must be so cha racterized as to enable the af
firmation that an event " explains itsel f" with regard to others. And this
affi rmation must in no way be liable to confusion with the i dea that one
event is expla ined by others. To construct the concepts to which the event
obliges us, it is therefore crucial to avoid all recourse to terms that imply
a sta ble mode of valorization-this has th e value of a cause for that--or
that intervene in descriptions conditiona l upon the endurance of pattern.
All these terms refer to the event as " pervaded " by a pattern, and define
va l ue as the outcome of the corresponding limitation. The point is to con
ceive of the event " from its own standpoint," as a " determinant," without
any allusion to the q uestions of endurance, motion, or emergence.
    It is here that the " eternal objects " will reappea r, in a problem that is
henceforth conceptua l . Whitehead 's "first metaphysical solution " consisted
i n bringing to conceptua l power the testimony of " eternality " that col
ors and geometrical forms had led him to inscri be in his job specifica
tion . And this is easy to understand, for the point is to conceptualize the
ta ki ng-i nto-account i n a way that cannot be confused with an emergence,
1 8 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




for what emerges i s always an enduring being, never a taking-into
account. Eternal objects, however, were required precisely by that a spect
of what we perceive tha t does not emerge from the flux of things. The
fact that colors " come and go" requires that eternal objects make ingres
sion . One might say that their i ngression " ma kes an event," even though
they themselves a re not events. And this is precisely what interests White
head. The determination of each mode of ta king i nto account requires an
eterna l obj ect, because no mode of determi na tion can be descri bed as
"emerging" from what is taken into account.
   Wherever such objects have ingression into the general flux, they inter
pret events, each to the other. They are here in the perceiver; but, as per
ceived by him, they convey for him something of the total flux which is
beyond h imself ( SMW, 1 5 1 ) .
   Color, always a specific color, or geometrica l forms, a circle or a
square, a re no longer privi leged as such, but beca use they exhibit the
" twofold role," that is, the relationa l character, that Wh i tehead hence
forth a ttributes to " eterna l objects " : green is what I perceive as belong
ing to that lea f, the circle is what I conceive as proposed by that wheel .
We must i nsist on this point, for j ust as perceptive experience risks fa
voring the error of " misplaced concreteness " beca use of the privilege it
confers on the rela tiona l contrast between the " here " of the percipient
event and the loca lizable " there " of what is perceived, sen sible and in
tel ligible obj ects run the risk of dangerously centering the conception
of eterna l objects a round " what" we, who a re here, perceive there. But
what i s genera lized is by no means the experience of sensi ble or i ntel
lectual certainty, the wel l -determined character of a " form " with the
power of dictating how it must be perceived, the circle qua i l lustra ted by
all round objects, this green by the leaves of that tree. If eterna l objects
intervene in the thought of the event, it is in a generic mode, equa l ly
relevant for a l l perception. An eternal object is henceforth that which
has ingression in the mode of " how " an event ta kes another event into
account, that which a llows prehension to be sa i d to be the prehension of
something else.
  We must start with the event as the ultimate unit of natural occurrence.
An event has to do with all that there is, and in particular with all other
events. The interfusion of events is effected by the aspects of those eternal
objects, such as colours, sounds, scents, geometrical characters, which are
required for nature and are not emergent from it. Such an eternal object
will be an ingredient of one event under the guise, or aspect, of qualifying
another event. There is a reciprocity of aspects, and there are patterns of
aspects. Each event corresponds to two such patterns: namely, the pat-
                          T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   STA N D PO I N T ?   1 8 9




tern of aspects of other events which it grasps into its own unity, and the
pattern of its aspects which other events severally grasp into their unities
(SMW, 1 0 3 ) .
   Eternal objects thus ensure the distinction between the two types of
pattern, that of the unification of the event " for itself," and that of its as
pects tha t a re grasped by other events. This is a crucial distinction, since it
must enable us to speak of consciousness as a function, without affirming
that consciousness " is merely a function," or is the mere result of some
thing other than itself. More generica lly, it is the q uestion of individual iza
tion that is at stake. If the " how" of the taking-into-account " did not make
an event," the individual might be deduced from its community. Eternal
objects thus give resonance to the d ifference between what Whitehead
rejects: a "simple fusion " that gives no meaning to individuality, and what
he aims at: a specific mode of tak ing into account, in this way and not
otherwise. An event does not have the power to determine how it will be
prehended, but it must be prehended, and it must be prehended " sever
ally," in a determinate mode each time. Prehension and ingression thus
cannot be defined separa tely. Prehension without ingression would be re
duced to some determinate relation of cause to effect. As fa r as the ingres
sion of an eternal object is concerned, if it were conceivable independently
of prehension-always that prehension-whose " how" is to be determined,
it would confer upon eternal objects a power of explanation that would
relegate the concrete fact, the event that determines itself to be this event
and no other, to the rea lm of appearances. We would then fal l into what
Whitehead defines as the paradigmatic philosophical error: trying to ex
plain a particular fact on the basis of universals.
  Philosophy is explanatory of abstraction, and not of concreteness
(PR, 2 0 ) .
   It remains to b e seen how these two registers, with rega rd t o which the
event is to be understood, are a rticulated, that is, the mode of unified
grasp tha t is real ized on the occasion of each individua l ization, and the
contribution of each individual to other individualizations.
   The answer to this question would have been the " solution," the crown
ing achievement of the construction of the concepts that gives its intelli
gi bility to the order of nature. But the actual Whiteheadian solution, the
one Whitehead was to propose in Process and Reality, is not the answer
to this q uestion . For in Process and Reality, the event wi l l simply have
d isappeared, or, more exactly, will have lost its primordial conceptual
status . Here, then, we have reached the critica l point, the point at which,
for Whitehead, there occu rred what I have called an " adj unction," and
we a re also at the threshold of an adventure which, in a pproxi mately
1 9 0   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   NATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




four years, would ma ke him the most unique speculative thinker of the
twentieth century. We are in April 1 925.
   We do not know what path Whitehead followed; no doubt he followed
severa l simultaneously. What we do know, from the notes ta ken in his
classes by one of his auditors, Wi lliam Ernest Hocking, is that on April 7
he announced that he was in a " state of confusion." In front of students,
who were no doubt somewhat confused also, he affirmed that science
today needs an "atomic" theory of time. While he was at it, he affirmed
the need for questioning a fea ture he had previously associated in a stable
way with the event, that is, the relation of inclusion . We must, he insists,
distinguish between inclusion, or the extension of events including other
events, and tempora li ty, which is associated with the " d i rection of time."
Whitehead then refers to Hegel : extension is an a bstraction that demands
that one go beyond it. A fourth and fifth point follow, which directly associ
ate the question of the event with two new themes that will become vital in
Process and Reality: the " potential" and " becoming."
  4. The temporalization of extension, via realization of the potential.
The individualization of each event [is brought) into a peculiar together
ness. The future, qua relevant to reality, is merely for something which is
real. A n event as present is real for itself. It is this becoming real which is
temporalization.
  5. But here we bump up against the atomic view of things, also their
subjective view. The subjective view has got to be expressed within the
objective view. It is there-the psychological field. You have got to ex
press the subject as one element in the universe [as there is) nothing apart
from that universe ( EWM, 2 8 1 -2 8 2 ) .
   The " confusion " Whitehead displays thus h a s as one o f its ingredients
a vi brant connection between " atomism " and " subjective vision," where
the latter designates the " private psychologica l field " of which Wi lliam
James is, for Whitehead, the privi leged witness. Yet although Whitehead
thought of himself as James's successor, it is here that the answer to the
question " how to succeed ? " is being played out. For the "subject" is now
that element of the universe on the basis of which we ca n a sk the ques
tion " what is an element of the universe ? " That to which we are obliged
by " subjective vision " must therefore be ta ken fully into account. Tempo
ralization is not the unfolding in the course of time of rea l elements as a
function of real elements, it is " rea l becomi ng," and as such requires that
the uni verse also be characterized as " potentiality."
   On Apri l 4, Whitehead had already pointed out the following new
theme, a mong other considerations:
  Potentiality is so called in contrast to actuality. But a contrast implies a
positive element ( EWM, 2 8 0 ) .
                          T H E   E V E N T   FR O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 1




   I have presented two paths leading to what happened to Whitehead at
the beginning of this month of April 1 925, and there is no way or reason
to choose between these two paths. Whitehead's question may have been
both to conceptua l ize the event and to construe the fact that there is no
psychology without " disquiet," without " hesita tion," without the sense
that the future hesitates in the present. A future that this gesture, this word,
this detachment engage in a way that may be stil l indeterminate, but from
which there is no possible turning back . If del iberation and the hesitation
deployed in ca lculations belong to the workings of consciousness, the pos
sibility of hesitation must, for its pa rt, belong to the " psychological field,"
that is, to the " bodily event," the only even t of which we have experience
" from its own standpoint." With regard to what is required by this possi
bility, the contrast between potential and actua lity, it must be affirmed in a
generic way; otherwise, we would ourselves ultimately be authors of what
we experience when we do not limit ourselves to recognizing Cleopatra's
Needle over and over again. We alone would be responsible for our anguish,
our doubt, and our decisions in a world of " professional " values. And nature
would i mmediately bifurcate, for "trust" would be "purely subjective," an
agitation causing a ripple in the veil of ignorance.
   In order for the philosophy of the orga nism to construe the way the
universe responds to " trust," what is rea l ized must make an i rred ucible
difference. An i rreducible meaning must be given to a " fact" as tha t
which might not ha ve been: that is, also, to what has not been as wel l as
to what might have been. Yet the extensi ve tissue of the events incl uded
in one another implies that every event is a grasping of other events, and
is grasped by other events. It affirms solidarity, but this solidarity risks
ma king i mpossible what Whitehead will never cease, from now on, to de
mand for all that exists : elbow room for sel f-determination.
   At first, Whitehea d may have thought that etern a l objects, whose
ingression ma kes the d ifference between the determination of a stand
point and a standpoint as emergence or reflection, would suffice to affirm
the primordial character of the fact that a grasp has ta ken place in this
way and in no other, to deprive the contin uous tissue of its power of ex
planation. Yet how was he to a rticulate ingression with the interwoven
continuities ? In any case, in April 1 925, Whitehea d carried out a choice,
or had one ca rried out upon him. A decisive power that traversed White
hea d, and turned him into a " semi-divine being," or, more h umbly, " a
speculative philosopher." A n adjunction w a s necessary: the atomic char
acter of duration must be a ffirmed, against the i dea of a tempora l flux
indefinitely divisible down to the fiction of an insta nt without thickness .
   Here, thinking with Whitehea d becomes difficult, for one is tempted to
hurry, and to measure all the consequences of the addition. Yet Whitehead
1 9 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




was to proceed i n a completely di fferent way. I n Science and the Modern
 World, he limited hi mself to adding two cha pters and a few i nsertions,
so that, he may have hoped, what had j ust ha ppened to him might pass
almost unnoticed . I n all probability, he put off for the future the task of
exploring (one reca lls the " condensation " Deleuze adapted from Peguy )
some of the consequences of what he had j ust decided . The reader is thus
i n a state of tension: whoever knows what is coming can say " it was al
ready there " ; whoever does not, stops where Whitehead himsel f stops,
that is, at the construction of an articulation between the continuous and
the discrete, at the risk of getti ng lost, as I myself did. My choice is not to
hurry, and even to slow down the pace, so as to learn, with Whitehead,
to what one is committed by a conceptual adventure that accepts being
obligated by its own concepts.
    So fa r, I have emphasized the urgency of a thought of the event, and its
connecti on with the question of experience, the only testimony we have
to an event " from i ts own standpoint" (SMW, 1 50 ) . Yet it was in no such
terms that Whitehead introd uced his "adjunction." It a ppeared in the
form of a few paragraphs, added rather a bruptly to the end of the chap
ter devoted to the physica l theory of relativity. It was thus in connection
with the theory of space-ti me as an extensive continuum that Whitehead
chose to a ffirm for the first time the " atom ic" character of duration,
made up of "atoms," or of " epochs," which a re themselves indivisible.
   Whitehead's choice implies that the construction of concepts has no
privi leged locus. It can sta rt up on the occasion of any question, as long
as the philosopher knows to what obligations it responds. In the present
case, if real ization is to be conceived as the rea lization of a potentiality,
rather than as rea lity in the course of becoming, it cannot be conceived in
terms of continuous space and ti me. It is not enough to say that a rea liza
tion " takes time," or that it " ta kes its time," as if it could be observed and
cha racterized " from outside," with regard to a common continuous time.
The terms of the problem must be reversed . If rea l ization is primary, i f it
cannot be expla i ned but " explains itself," then a l l the notions that enable
us to explain something in terms of something else must be abandoned,
as far as it is concerned . And among them is i ncluded henceforth, first
and foremost, the notion of continui ty.
   Whitehead had a l ready emphasized that the spatio-temporal coordi
nates to which physics attri butes a determining role require the endur
ance of bodies, both those that locate and those that are located . Yet the
point is no longer to think of the order of nature and its relation to en
durance, but to think of rea lization, which is presupposed by a l l end ur
ance but is neutra l with rega rd to it. The concept of rea l ization must
                            T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 ]




designa te what occurs for and by itsel f. Actua l ity is therefore not situated
" in time " : it situates itself, that is, it prod uces its situation. In short, it is
"epoch-ma king," in the sense in which we use this expression when we
designate an event qua creator of the possibilities of questioning and de
scri bing it.
   In realisation the potentiality becomes actuality. But the potential pat
tern requires a duration [sc. to become actuality]; and the duration must
be exhibited as an epochal whole, by the realisation of the pattern [ . . . I
Temporalisation is realisation. Temporalisation is not another continu
ous process. It is an atomic succession. Thus time is atomic (i.e., epochal),
though what is temporalised is divisible ( SMW, 1 2 6 ) .
    A t this stage, the reader might b e tempted to try to imagine this
"atomic time," and perhaps more successfully than I have been able to.
In any case, this is no intuition of ti me-quite the contra ry. The i mpossi
bil ity of appeal ing to intuition with rega rd to an atomic time goes with
out saying, since we run into the " specious," constructed character of the
intuition of continuity, as analyzed by Wi lliam James. Whitehead 's thesis
does not have the voca tion of leading us to an a uthentic relationship to
lived time, but, here as always, of resisting the power of a bstraction. It is
therefore by using it to measure the power of the abstractions a uthorized
by continuous time, and not by trying to inhabit it for itsel f, that we will
explore the interest of this thesis.
    In this case, as the site of the first insertion indicates, the thesis of atomic
ti me a l lows us to construe the mea ning of what Whi tehead a l ready a f
fi rmed in The Concept of Nature, that na ture knows no such thing as an
instant without thickness. Yet it also enables us to measure i ts i mpact.
    In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead spoke of nature as what we a re
awa re of in perception . He was thus free to associate an instanta neous
quantity with an idealization, and with the path of approxima tion that
carries out this idea lization. The q uestion raised by Science and the Mod
ern World is that of the order of nature, and the confrontation is no longer
merely with the measure of a quantity but with the order attributed to
nature by physico-ma thematica l laws. In this case, the notions that refer
to nature "in an insta nt," particularly those of position, velocity, and ac
celera tion, are no longer derived from what we a re aware of, and can
therefore no longer be defined a s ideal izations . They a re required by the
equations that make motion a function of space and time, whether they
are those of classical dynamics-motion as described by Galileo, Lagrange,
or Hamilton-or those of relativity. The instant without thickness is thus
an integral, and even centra l part of the functional order presupposed
and described by mathematica l physics.
1 9 4   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




    The situation of the first i nsertion, testifying to the atomicity of time,
thus reflects the fact that Whitehead fina lly has the means to specify in
what sense physical laws, and, more genera lly, the extensive continuum,
are indeed an a bstraction. He can finally identi fy, in a positive way, the
sense in which the concrete character conferred upon the notion of loca l
iza tion, i mplying the point and the instant, was misplaced . When this
loca lization is relevant, it does not reflect the fact that the physicist may,
unlike the chemist or the biologist, get " to the bottom of thi ngs," exhi bit
ing nature's exact submission to spatio-temporal laws. What is exhibited
by the a bstraction of loca lization, where such a bstraction is releva nt, is
the possibility of doing without the "atomic " cha racter of real ization. The
notion of function, which is at the center of so-ca lled modern physics, is
thus by no means synonymous with supreme intelligibility. It is recog
nized and saluted as a j udicious approxi mation, an approximation whose
l imits are no doubt pointed out by q uantum mecha nics.
    I sha l l linger a bit over this relation to mathematica l physics, because
for me it designates one of the ways of expressing the importance of
Whitehead 's thought. The conceptua l construction engaged in April 1 925
may indeed be presented as the first philosophica l proposition a llowing
both the celebration of the exploit constituted by " mathematization,"
that is, functiona l ization, that physics since Ga l i leo has ca rried out, and
the liberation of thought from the temptation to a ttribute a meta physical
significance to this exploit. The Gali lean body in motion, endowed with
an initial velocity and subject at each i nstant to gravitation, can indeed
be descri bed by a function, which defi nes i ts accelera tion, that is, in
Whitehea dian terms, its way of " taking account" of the earth's presence
at each instant. And the history of dynamics, for its part, exhibits the
multiple ways in which this ta king-in to-account may be represented . Far
from being the simple description of a motion, a trajectory is a physico
mathematical entity whose definition depends on the choice of varia bles
of which this trajectory wi l l be a function. With general relativity, the
earth's presence no longer makes a difference for an a rrow's trajectory
in terms of " force," or even of "gravitational potential," but through the
structure of space-time itself. Of course, with Whitehead's alternative the
ory, space-times become multiple: the enduring body is no longer plunged
within a structured space-time. Instead, the differentiation of space and
time is one aspect of an enduring pattern. Nevertheless, all these theories
share the same abstraction. In Newtonian physics, the function describes,
at each instant, how a body's acceleration continuously composes, or
" unifies," the tota lity of what Wh i tehead would call the external rela
tions releva nt to this body's behavior. And i f the theory proposed by
                          T H E   EVENT   F R O M   ITS   OWN   STA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 5




Whitehead could have been fully developed, its success would also have
been to explica te the differentiation of space and time under the banner
of continuity, governed by a function . It would not have authorized a
positive contrast between the potential and the actua l, any more than the
functionalization of motion from Gali leo to Einstein.
    In physics, however, it wil l be objected, functions and the equations that
articulate them correspond to a form of potentia l . Rea l motion is there
fore defined aga inst the background of the possible. Moreover, doesn't
the significance of the invention of the " field " in physics consist of the fact
that it places potential at the center of the description ? Of course, but this
potentia l confers no meaning upon hesitation, provides no locus for the
possibility that what is real ized in this way could have been real ized oth
erwise. More precisely, a motion could have occurred otherwise, of course,
but only if the initial conditions of the traj ectory had been different. And
this, it should be noted, is stil l the case in contemporary theories of " dy
na mic chaos," insofar as these theories feature a " sensitivity to i nitia l
conditions " : if the actual state of a chaotic system were determined with
an infinite degree of precision, the solution of the equations would unfold
the actual behavior of that system, insta nt by instant. Readers familiar
with the subject will not fai l to obj ect that this is not the case in qua ntum
field theory, but they will have to admit that in this case it is the notion of
actuality that becomes indetermina te, or attached to the act of detection.
   The strength, and also the l imit, of the notion of function consist in the
fact that it features a behavior qua unification, the a rticulation of distinct
functional varia bles, but without ma king unification a " real " problem.
More precisely, the problem only arises for the physicist, who must rise
back up from observa ble behavior to the function, or must integrate the
functiona l equa tions to deduce the observa ble behavior. The state of
a ffai rs to which the function corresponds, for its part, is defined not in
terms of problems, but of solutions. The function, one might say, trans
forms the behavior it describes i nto a continuous succession of instanta
neous solutions to the problem it enunciates once and for all. As long as
this function enables us to ta ke the pattern as given, that is, without func
tiona lization, it matters little whether it brings into play relations that are
external ( the earth's presence is responsible for . . . ) or internal; no possi
ble meaning can be given to tempora l ization, to the positive contrast be
tween potentiality and actuality.
   Since Leibniz, the notion of function has presided over the symbiosis
between mathematics and the order of nature, and it is this symbiosis that
Whitehead is now interrupting, or, more precisely, restricting to the cases
in which it is in fact releva nt. There is no doubt that Whitehead knew that
1 9 6   FROM   T H E   PH I LOSO P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




there must, in one way or another, be a break with such a symbiosis. One
may imagine, however, that he did not know how to carry out this break,
how to specify in what sense the functional physico-mathematical order is
abstract, and what it does without. And this difficulty was intensified, or
exhibited, by an ambiguity. Until April 1 925, the two decisive terms repre
sented by pattern and rea lization designated both a process and its end
result, the event that realizes, and what it realizes. They could thus give the
impression that process and product may be confused, which is precisely
what is proposed by functions, as a continuous rea l ization .
    The character of an " epoc h " or a " pa use" must be conferred upon the
" duration of an event," its " specious present." Such is the meaning of the
insertion Whitehead added to his considerations on the theory of relativ
ity. The ambiguity has now been ra ised, and the brea k with the func
tiona l physico-mathematica l order has been consummated .
    It is worth specifying the way Whitehead introduces his "atomic theory
of time " into this insertion. He introduces it in the same mode in Process
and Reality, as an answer to the sa me q uestion. It is as if this question,
that is, the question of the i mpossibility of motion, as demonstrated by
Zeno, were for him attached inseparably to the event of this enunciation.
    Let us take the movement of an arrow, for insta nce, but forget the laws
of dyna mics: we are among the Greeks. For Zeno, the a rrow should
never reach i ts target, beca use traversing the dista nce to this target im
pl ies successively tra versing an infinite number of sub-distances, those
that are obtained by dividing the tota l distance into two, then the first
half into two, then the first q ua rter into two, then . . .
    Since the invention of the mathematics of infinite series, the technique
of " dichotomous " ( i nto two) division has beca me a pedagogical intro
d uction to the idea that the sum of the terms of an infinite series may be
equa l to a finite number: '12 + 1 /4 + I /x + ' / 1 1; + . . . 1 . For mathematicia ns,
                                                               =



" Zeno's pa radox " finds a satisfying sol ution with the notion of infinite
series, since the contradiction between finite and infinite is resolved . The
para dox is thus evoked to make this a rticulation between finite and in
fin ite interesting, to ma ke the contra diction vi bra te before it is solved .
Nevertheless, there is something bothersome, or insufficient, in this situa
tion: it gives the role of a solution to something Zeno knew perfectly well,
for he knew that the distance he broke down into an infinite series of di
chotomous divisions was finite. In other words, the novelty of infinite
series in mathema tics is undeniable, but it concerns the new problems it
a llows to be ra ised, not the eli mination of the original pa radox, which
dealt with the articulation between physical motion and divisibil ity in
the mathematical sense. The paradox can therefore be considered as
sol ved only by those who accept that the conti nuum, in the mathematical
                           T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   ITS   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 7




sense of what is infinitely divisible, is appropriate to the concrete motion
of the arrow. It is therefore not surprising that Bergson saw both in the
paradox and its alleged solution the illusion of a " spatialized " motion,
divisible in the same sense as the distance traversed .
  Like Bergson, Whitehead refuses the (dis)solution of the paradox, but
for him Zeno's paradox obliges us to conceive, not the continuity of a
concrete motion, but the question of continuity itself.
  [ . . . ] Zeno understated his argument. He should have urged it against
the current notion of time in itself, and not against motion, which in
volves relations between time and space. For, what becomes has duration.
But no duration can become until a smaller duration (part of the former)
has antecedently come into being ( SMW, 1 2 7 ) .
   If the process o f real ization were t o share the d ivisibility o f what is con
tinuously extensive, it could no more take p lace than the arrow's motion
could, according to Zeno, enable it to traverse any distance whatsoever.
One could always descri be any duration as including shorter d urations, or
any real ization as including a series of disti nct realizations, or aga in, any
adoption of a position as incl uding a series of successive positions. And
one would finally arrive at a continuous series that prohibits what is being
realized from being said to be "epoch making," producing a present that
"adopts a position," irreversibly, with regard to the future. No adoption
of a position would finish happening, unfolding in expectations and sub
expectations, and the sole actuality would then be the continuity, indefi
nitely divisible, of change that the function in fact descri bes. Whitehead
repeats this in Process and Reality:
   The extensive continuity of the physical universe has usually been con
strued to mean that there is a continuity of becoming. But if we admit
that "something becomes," it is easy, by employing Zeno's method, to
prove that there can be no continuity of becoming. There is a becoming
of continuity, but no continuity of becoming. The actual occasions are
the creatures which become, and they constitute a continuously extensive
world. In other words, extensiveness becomes, but "becoming " is not it
self extensive. Thus the ultimate metaphysical truth is atomism ( PR, 3 5 ) .
   The two registers o n which the event had t o be expressed-individual
and community, unification " for itself" and " for each of the others "-are
thus relegated to two d isj unct questions: that of what becomes, and that
of the continuity that is brought into existence (constituted ) by becomings
that are themselves "atomic." In other words, that which in 1 927 presented
itself as an adj unction, inducing the addition of two chapters and some
insertions, has become, by 1 929, an ultimate metaphysical truth, forcing
what had seemed to be acquired to be gone over again. It is no longer the
order of nature but becomi ng, and it is no longer the organism but the
1 9 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




"actual occasion," that oblige us to think. But we have not reached this
point yet.
   In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead thus l imits himsel f to
making insertions, as if he were merely contributing a few speci fications
that might have gone without saying or that might follow from the doc
trine he had set forth previously. His second insertion, expl icitly introduc
ing the atomicity of time, appears in the chapter devoted to quantum
theory. In the course of this chapter, Whitehead had shown that the endur
ance of the structure with which physicists associate the atom must no
doubt be said to be the reiteration of an elementary pattern understood
as a " v ibration," that is, an undivided succession of contrasts. He can now
insert/conclude that corpuscular, or primate organization indeed requires
the atomicity of time, as he had announced to his students in Apri l :
   Thus realisation proceeds via a succession of epochal durations [ . . . ]
one complete period defines the duration required for the complete pat
tern. Thus the primate is realised atomically in a succession durations
[ . . . I This vibration [which constitutes the primate] is not to be thought
of as the becoming of reality; it is what the primate is in one of its discon
tinuous realisations (SMW, 1 35-1 3 6 ) .
   However, is what is appropriate for a vibratory organism also appro
priate for a living organism ? In fact, Whitehead has not proceeded to
any insertion here, and we can understand why. It is hard to move from
atomic duration to the endurance of entangled patterns implying what
we ca ll " whole " and " parts." One consequence is clear, however: both the
orga nism and the order of nature that the orga nism was to enable us
to think, because they lend themselves to explanation and inspire us to
think of a continuity of becoming, may henceforth be conceived as giving
a partial and biased explanation of themselves. What was " value" hence
forth affirms unilaterally, as its cond ition, the stable elimi nation of diver
gent possibil ities.
   The limits of the notion of organism are in fact similar to those of the
notion of function: both define a being not " for itsel f," but insofar as it
endures. What varies from science to science is the " i nsofar as." A biologi
cal function cannot be assimilated to a physico-mathematical function.
It is not defined in terms of varia bles, but rather in terms of va rieties that
result from sorting operations, thresholds, and d iscriminations, in short,
judgments. Thus, the definition of a sense organ constitutes a j udgment
with regard to what the organ defines as " sensible." This, moreover, is
what constitutes its " value," the risky success that makes it an organ. Even
if Rene Thorn had succeeded in what he defined as his great work, exhib
iting the mode of mathematization adequate to living beings, a mod e that
                          T H E   E V E N T   F R O M   I T S   OWN   S TA N D P O I N T ?   1 9 9




would organize biology as spatio-temporal functions have organized the
way physicists address what is cal led physica l rea l ity, he would not, by
so doing, have "explai ned " living beings in the way physico-mathematical
functions seem to be able to explain physical behaviors. He would sim
ply have rendered explicit the values that the living being carries out qua
orgamsm.
   For some animals, of course, sorti ng processes, thresholds, and dis
criminations appear as "specific," and we do i ndeed have a tendency to
speak of the members of these species as automata . Yet this does not mean
that these animals ca n be defi ned as " sticking " to the definition of the or
ganism, merely that this definition suffices for the relations we have with
them. With others, however, we maintain relations that exhibit and imply
what is generally cal led " learning." The functional identity of an ant seems
to define it relevantly, but rats can learn, and accept taming. And how
could one fai l to celebrate the achievement attested by this kind of learn
ing, including the possibil ity of domestication that is correlative to it,
when we humans ourselves, independently of our " domus," are merely
fai led mammals? We thus return to Whitehead's trust in the possibil ities
of education. This term also designates a " function," except that this func
tion cannot be approached qua enduring pattern, but only as the " becom
ing of a continuity." " Becomi ng conscious " is a functional ization of what
was never an enduring pattern, as is required by the possibility of educa
tion, and as is attested by novels.
   Endurance is the key term for the philosophy of the organism. It allowed
Whitehead to hope for a coherent conception of the order of nature, en
abling in particular the designation of the "misplaced concreteness " that
" material ism " has conferred upon physical abstraction. Yet Pandora's box
has now been opened, for with the atomicity of time it is henceforth the
specious present that becomes the prototype of "what is realizing itself." In
Process and Reality, moreover, it is right in the midst of the discussion of
Zeno's paradox that Wil liam James makes his appearance.
   The authority of William James can be quoted in support of this con
clusion [ the epochal theory of time] . He writes: "Either your experience is
of no content, of no change, or else it is of a perceptible amount of con
tent or change. Your acquaintance with reality literally grows by buds or
drops of perception. Intellectually and on reflection, you can divide these
into components, but as immediately given, they come totally or not at
all" ( PR, 6 8 ) .
   A new idea burgeons, lived continuity i s prolonged, but drop b y drop.
In Process and Reality, the quotation from James allows atom ic duration
to be associated wi th an " act of experience," that is, it also enables the
2 0 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




genera lization of the notion of an act of experience to all that exists. We
have not reached that point yet. However, we have reached the disjunction
between what realization obliges us to think and what endurance a llows
us to define. This disjunction will relegate the description of organisms to
the status of particular, special investigations. The " actual occasion " that
is real ized with a proper duration of an atomic nature belongs, for its
pa rt, to metaphysics.
                                                         C H A P TER T H I RTEEN




Entry i nto Metaphysics




          N THE PRESENT CHAPTER,
      I
                                        and in the immediately succeeding
        chapter, we will forget the peculiar problems of modern science, and
        will put ourselves at the standpoint of a dispassionate consideration
of the nature of things, antecedently to any special investigation into their
details. Such a standpoint is termed "metaphysical " ( SMW, 1 57).
    The way Whitehead introduces the chapter "Abstraction," the first of the
two chapters written after April 1 925, gives a good indication of the fact
that we have left behind the question of the order of nature, as modern sci
ence trusts it and designates its problem. Scientific investigations are al
ways particular in that, as mountain climbers envisage their wall from the
standpoint of the foothold it offers or fails to offer, their questions presup
pose, and reflect in case of success, specific modes of envisagement, associ
ated with the specific way i n which, on each occasion, "it has to work."
Success thus designates real ity by means of its enduring " relief," capable of
patience with regard to footholds, capable of repaying due attention. Now,
however, the subject is the " nature of things " in the most general sense,
that is, without reference to the question of the success or failure of such
and-such a particular mode of envisagement. The metaphysica l standpoint
may be said to be " dispassionate" in that its (passionate ) challenge will be
to construct concepts that will not favor or found any particular approach
but answer to what is required, both by the organism that endures and by
the one that comes undone, both by success and by betrayed trust, both by
electrons and by the person reading this sentence.
    Su bsequently, a nd particularly i n Modes of Thought, it is the term
" i mporta nce " that w i l l be used to express tha t in which an orga nism
2 0 2   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




succeeds, incl uding the success constituted by a mode of succession such
that each new occasion rea l izes the most inti mate conformity with the
past. The term " va l ue," for its part, will pertai n to metaphysics: a l l real
ization is value, the adoption of a position, thus and not otherwise.
   Importance and function are obviously linked: the function as we con
struct it, mathematica lly or by discursive reasoning, takes advantage of a
conformity maintained between the present and its past. It transforms
this conformity as a function of the present, and the future is then exhib
ited as the mere reproduction of the same in d i fferent circumstances.
Whether this function is physico-mathematical , biologica l ( the organ as
a wager on the importance of what affects it), or psychologica l ( the past
provid ing the present with its meanings) matters little. What counts is
that the function exhibits the accomplishment constituted by ma king the
present conti nuous with regard to the past.
   Here we must open a pa renthesis. Some have seen Whitehead's philoso
phy as a " panpsychism," a doctrine that attributes a " psychism" to all that
exists. This usua lly inspi res derision: so you think electrons "think like
we do "? Yet the importance, which I have emphasized, of the role played
for Whitehead by the type of psychology of which William James an
nounces the possibility might reinforce th is misunderstand ing. In a sense,
one might say that the specious present is the prototype of the actual oc
casion, which Whitehead is going to try to conceive as a metaphysician.
Yet this does not mean that Whitehead attributes a " psychology " to the
actua l occasion . If experience in the sense of William Ja mes could serve
as a prototype for the actua l occasion, it is beca use James's description
results from a del i berate project of " depsychologization " of experience in
the usual sense of conscious, intentional experience, authorizing a clear
distinction between the subject and its object. It is insofar as William James
rejected reflective consciousness and its p retensions to invariance, the
privilege of occupying center stage, that he rendered explicit what human
experience requires from metaphysics, and more speci fica lly what it de
mands that metaphysics resist.
   Conversely, it is perhaps psychology, among all the special, particular
investigations, that has the most vita l need of the resources that can be
contri buted by metaphysics in the sense that Whitehead defines it. In fact,
when Ja mes, fol lowed enthusiastica lly by Whitehead, ma kes conscious
ness a " function," prod ucing the specious continuity and the reflexive
sel f-expla nations that constitute us as subjects, continuous "authors " of
our multiple experiences, he knew that phi losophy was " a lso" necessa ry,
because the situa tions in which the possi bility may be experienced of dis
passionately exploring what reflexive consciousness passionately cla ims
                                           E NTRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 3




raise questions that the " serious," " professiona l " psychologist would re
ject as " philosophica l ." This is why I like to use the word " soul," which,
as the reader will have u nderstood , I by no means intend in a rel igious or
Kantian sense, as something invol ving the question of salvation or that of
d uty. It is with disqu iet or hesitation, with wandering, and even the pos
sibil ity of " l osing one's sou l " that I wou l d l i ke to associate this term.
Those are also the types of experience which, it seems to me , forced
Whitehead to conceive of rea l ity as real ization, on the basis of the con
trast between potentiality and actual ity.
    If the soul forces its question upon psychology, it is clearly not at all
because psychology, despite what its name indicates, has the soul as its
object. As " psychological," experience does not as such i mpose meta
physical questions, which are neutra l with regard to any special order. I t
pertains t o the order of nature, in t h e sense that it is an experience whose
point is to construct a shared knowledge, an experience that m ust there
fore be able to be " named," " described," " discussed," in short, qual ified,
qua psychological . Psychologists, like each of us when we analyze our
selves from a psychological standpoint, never cease fa bricating descrip
tions, interpretations, elucidations, in short, functions. The fact that these
are motives or intentions, rather than ca uses, is secondary: what is cru
cial is that the possibility of descri bing these motives and these intentions
presupposes their importance, in other words, obliges us to take an endur
ance for our axis of description. The " soul," in contrast, is not an object of
description as such. The singularity of psychology, which psychologists
can sometimes hardly bea r, impatiently or with nostalgia for the suc
cesses of their more fortunate scientific col leagues, is that having to deal
with the soul, it has to deal with that which can no longer allow the con
j ugation of endurance and success. A hard chal lenge, si nce it demands
that psychologists rid themselves of the appetite for what might, by its
endurance, be capable of being the " respondent" of its questions.
   I f an all usion to the " soul " may be vital for psychology, it is therefore
not in order to arrive at the truth of a properl y spiritual experience. It is
rather a question of practical " appetite," appetite for what this particular
science has to deal with. Here, meta physical investigation in Whitehead 's
sense is relevant because it accepts the quite particular interpretative
challenge of being neutral with regard to the possibil ities of footholds im
plied by enduring success. It may therefore suggest a form of humor with
regard to the success constituted by a foothold. And psychologists need
this humor, for the image of the mountain climber and her wall does not
work very wel l as far as they are concerned. One must i magine a tickl ish
wall, which offers or gives a foothold not, to be sure, as it wishes, but
2 0 4   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




nevertheless without it being possi ble for psychologists to attri bute their
success with certainty to the relevance of their q uestions. What is more,
this is a wal l that outmaneuvers the very meaning of "climbing," for it is
j ust as capable of submitting as it is of smothering the i nvestigator in its
embrace . Stop gritting your teeth in imitation of the mountain climber,
trying to define what you have to dea l with in terms that authorize you
to j udge it; instead, learn to commit yourself to becomings, even if, to do
so, you must resist all those who demand the possibil ity of judging. I f
metaphysica l neutrality could give psychologists the strength t o accept
what is suggested by their own experience, it will have answered the
most crying need of a science that pays a heavy p rice for its modern defi
nition, i ncl uding its duty to repudiate philosophy.
   The concepts articulated around the actual occasion thus have nothing
to do with a metaphysica l foundation of psychology, nor with a theory
of the soul, unless, of course, it is in the Leibnizian sense in which every
monad (every res vera, as Whitehead will say in Process and Reality) is a
" soul ." As intimately connected with a " dispassionate " (or generic) ap
proach, these concepts would be deficient, badly conceived , i f they could
serve to found one mode of experience against others, to guide one mode
of definition, to privilege one type of facts. Whatever the experience, defi
nition, and facts they highl ight, the point is to rediscover their possibility,
qua immersed within other possibilities of feeling, experiencing, and
thinking, in short, of becoming. In particular, metaphysica l concepts will
have to be neutra l with regard to the distri butions carried out by common
sense between what we know perfectly well and what we cannot believe:
they will have to constrain us to envisage everything that can be attested
by experience, and that can be cultivated in various ways, as a testimony
bearing upon "the nature of things." Experience is no longer " our" experi
ence but the concrete fact, which forces us to metaphysical creation.
   Of real ity as such, we recall that Whitehead , commenting on Berkeley
and the other speculati ve phi losophers whom Kant reduced to silence,
had affirmed that it is " process," and that we must understand the pro
cess in terms of an " underlying activity of prehension " and of " realised
prehensive events " (SMW, 70) . Whitehead seldom returns to his affirma
tions, but limits hi mself to proposing "elaborations" which, without con
tradicting them, sometimes completely replay their meaning. In this case,
it is clear that the underlying activity with rega rd to which there is ind i
vidual ization should henceforth refer to potentia lity, in contrast to which
there is real ization .
   It is right in the midst of the chapter devoted to the nineteenth century,
and to the notion of energy, whose conservation that century celebrated,
                                          E N TRY   I N TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 5




that Whitehead chooses to go more deeply into the q uestion of the con
trast between what is " underlying" and what is real ized, or individual
ized; in other words, he chooses to replay the meaning of that contrast
with regard to the new contrast between potentiality and actuality. Whereas
the text was dealing with the articulation between energy defi ned scien
tifically, in a quantitative mode, and the theory of the organism, Wh ite
head inserts the three paragraphs that Lewis Ford called "of the triple
envisagement," to which I have already a l l uded . Suddenly, the subject of
discussion will be "energy " in the sense of "eternal underlying activity,"
of which each ind ividual ization is a real ization.
    One can speak of this energy, or this eterna l activity, only in a bstract
terms, Whitehead specifies i mmed iately, for one must abstract from actu
ality, or what emerges as a real state of affairs. Eternity must therefore be
understood as what is presupposed by real ization qua temporal ization.
In other words, Whitehead is not trying here to construct a complete
definition of actuality, but merely to construe the contrast between pos
sibil ity and actual ity in a way that turns what is possible into " that which
underlies," that is to say, in a way that defines it as an abstraction. What
this abstraction omits, what defines actuality in contrast to potentiality, is
none other than " value." As Whitehead will never cease repeating, only
actua lity has value.
    Unlike Whitehead, who acts as though what he writes is clear, I will try
to approach the strange, obscure, and important text that describes the
"triple envisagement" in the manner of a commitment to still-indeterminate
expectations and consequences, a kind of conceptual wager that presages
a style, rather than a finished conceptua l construction.
   The consideration of the general flux of events leads to this analysis into
an underlying eternal energy in whose nature there stands an envisagement
of the realm of all eternal objects. Such an envisagement is the ground of
the individualised thoughts which emerge as thought-aspects grasped within
the life-history of the subtler and more complex enduring patterns. Also in
the nature of the eternal activity there must stand an envisagement of all
values to be obtained by a real togetherness of eternal objects, as envisaged
in ideal situations. Such ideal situations, apart from any reality, are devoid
of intrinsic value, but are valuable as elements of purpose. The individual
ised prehension into individual events of aspects of these ideal situations
takes the form of individualised thoughts, and as such has intrinsic value.
Thus value arises because there is now a real togetherness of the ideal as
pects, as in thought, with the actual aspects, as in process of occurrence.
Accordingly no value is to be ascribed to the underlying activity as di
vorced from the matter-of-fact events of the real world (SMW, 1 05 ) .
2 0 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H YS I C S




   In the next paragraph, Whitehead, who claims to be summarizi ng,
specifies that there are therefore three types of envisagement: what are
envisaged are eternal objects, possibilities of value with regard to the syn
thesis of the eternal objects, and finally the actual matter of fact, " which
must enter into the total situation which is achievable by the addition of
the future." After this rather enigmatic characterization, Whitehead re
peats once again, as if to hammer home his point, that in abstraction from
actuality, that is, the realization of that envisaged matter of fact, eternal
activity is divorced from value.
   It can hardly be said that the way this " triple envisagement" works is
intelligible. Whitehead's writi ng is a work i n progress, precisely in the
midst of the activity of envisagement. It is already possible, however, to
think some particular poi nts of his elaboration along with him, as it is to
specify my wager of reading.
   Clearly, the eternal objects have become a crucia l metaphysical con
cept, the correlate of what Whitehea d calls " envi sagement," and they
annou nce themselves in three d isti nct modalities. The first type of envis
agement implicates " a l l " the eternal objects and their " realm," which
Whitehead also calls " kingdom " or " domain." In the second type of en
visagement, the eternal objects appear as united, together constituti ng
" ideal situations." And in the third, it is the " aspects " of these ideal situ
ations that are the object of an i ndi vidualized prehension, and as such
they participate i n individual events, described as the real togetherness of
ideal aspects with actual aspects. A rather enigmatic analogy is proposed:
on the one hand, between " the real togetherness of idea l aspects " and
thought, and on the other between the individualized prehension of as
pects of the ideal situations and individual ized thoughts.
   Of course, when confronted by this perspective, as gra ndiose as it is
obscure, the possi bil ity of philosophical comparisons rushes to the fore
front: with Spinoza's substance and its individual ized modes, of course, as
Whitehead emphasizes, but also with the Intellect of Plotinus, a rather good
candidate for an envisagement without an envisaging subject. Not to men
tion the obvious comparison with a Platonic " ki ngdom " of Ideas: a threat
ening comparison, since it would define a relation of sovereignty of eter
nal objects with regard to actuality. If Whitehead had put a final poi nt
upon his career as a philosopher after Science and the Modern World, the
need for such comparisons would no doubt impose itsel f, but it so hap
pens that the perspective in question was to disappea r in Process and Re
ality. I therefore choose not to treat the " underlying eternal activity " as a
culmination of Whitehead's thought, which would call for a meeting with
other thinkers, but as a moment in his path .
                                           E N TRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 7




   Let us begin with what is most simple. As I have already said, value is
henceforth no longer associated with the organism insofa r as it endures,
but with actualization as such . "Val ue," henceforth an i ntegra l part of
meta physics, is indifferent to " importance," which, for its part, will be as
sociated with every pattern that succeeds in enduring, and that may be
privileged, as such, by a specia l i nvestigation. On the other hand, value is
now l inked i nseparably to the notion of envisagement. Envisagement is
the precondition for there to be va lue, but there is no value independent
of the actual " purpose" that will conclude this envisagement " by the addi
tion of the future," i ndependent of the individualization of what will be,
in contrast to what might have been.
   The choice of the term " envisagement " is in itself significant i n this re
gard . In Process and Reality, it is the verb " to envisage " that will appear,
implying the question of " who" is envisaging. We have not reached that
point yet, and " envisagement" translates one aspect of a process without
a subject. But the explanation Whitehead will give for his choice of the
verb is a l ready relevant for his choice of the noun. As he expla ins ( PR,
33-34), to associate eterna l objects with a "vision," or, worse yet, with an
" intuition," suggests a contemplative activity, that is, one bereft of yearn
ing a fter concrete fact. Eternity is not an object of contemplation, beyond
the concrete: the concrete is the only value. Whitehead therefore chooses
the verb " to envisage " as " safer," for this verb suggests an activity desig
nating as its va lue the actua lity to be promoted with rega rd to various
possi bilities, and therefore designates possibil ities as " deficient," as bereft
of value independent of their rea lization.
   Whitehead thus rejects, rather explicitly, any contemplative ideal, such as
the one that, in the post-Platonic trad ition, made intellect, intelligence, and
inte l l igible coincide. The ingression of eternal objects has nothi ng to do
with a participation in a higher, sovereign reality. Instead, it is associated
with a term that evokes a busy, hesitant, perhaps conflictual activity which
all contemplative philosophies, or those which, in one way or another, es
tablish a convergence between salvation, certainty, and coincidence of self
with self, would characterize as the wanderings of a distended, disoriented
soul, deprived of what orients it toward its authentic destiny.
   Perhaps only Leibniz, another mathematician, has adopted a perspective
on experience similar to Whitehead's. In his Philosopher's Confession,
Lei bniz proposes, as the only genera l piece of advice he has to give, to
always ask the question "Dic eur hie " (say why here). The point is to " say,"
not to " know." Leibniz demands that when we have to define a "purpose,"
we not obey general reasons, a conformity indifferent to circumstances, a
blind norm, but that we submit such generalities to the test of the "hie." In
2 0 8   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O PH Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




this case, one may use the verb " to envisage." Leibniz asks that we accept
that the way we define a situation is " purposeful," and that we envisage this
purpose as related to the situation ta ken as a "case," that is, in a mode tha t
is as concrete and as explicitly situated in the here and now as possible.
    Lei bn izian envisagement is a piece of mora l advice: it translates wha t
is " best," since we ca nnot ded uce our choices from any divi ne impera ti ve.
We ha ve no access to the reasons that determined the d ivine choice of
this world as the best one, but we can integrate into our decisions the fact
that it is this world tha t God has chosen. This advice therefore mea ns
"exist for this worl d ." Without promises or guara ntees, it is " better" to
adopt a stance that a ffirms this world, tha t exposes itself to this world,
rather tha n to p rotect oneself by a bstract genera l izations, however noble
they may be.
    Whitehead is no Leibnizian: for him, envisagement tra nslates wha t
must be attributed to the underlying activity itself if actuality is to be val ue.
And this concerns every actuality. It is quite obviously conscious thought,
the experience of hesitation between abstract possibilities, that exhibits
and requires a positive contrast between potentia lity and actua lity, but, as
Whitehead specifies, every occasion, even the most tenuous, fugitive wrin
kle differentiating general energy, has a value qua individua lization of the
eterna l activity, that is, it constitutes an individual purpose.
   Just as envisagement, in the metaphysica l sense, confers no privilege
upon human envisaging experience, "eternal objects " cannot be invoked
to found any kind of privilege of those cognitive activities for which Plato
requi red the Ideas-to judge, to sort, to evaluate in terms of legitimacy, of
fa ithfulness, of resembla nce-nor to appeal to any kind of a dynamics of
elevation or conversion. And therefore, as we now turn towa rd "Abstrac
tion," the first of the two new chapters enti rely written by Whitehead after
April 1 925, we will have to bea r in mind that the eterna l object, or idea lity,
certa inly designa tes what " transcends" actuality, but that transcendence is
thereby stripped of any "eminent value," to which the things of this world
would owe their legitimacy, or of any desirability orienting souls towa rd
their salvation. Tra nscendence, as exhibited by the experience of knowl
edge, is nothing other than what is demanded by immanence, the concrete
fact, so that none of the questions experience asks us may be reduced , de
nied, or d isqualified . Here, Whitehead adopts the approach that will sys
tematica lly preva i l in the construction of concepts in Process and Reality:
all the aspects of our most singular, most routine experiences, must be a ble
to be described as exhibiting that which, from the meta physical sta nd
point, is presupposed by all actua l ization.
   In any occasion of cognition, that which is known is an actual occa
sion of experience, as diversified by reference to a realm of entities which
                                           E N TRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 0 9




transcend that immediate occasion in that they have analogous or differ
ent connections with other occasions of experience. For example, a defi
nite shade of red may, in the immediate occasion, be implicated with the
shape of sphericity in some definite way. But that shade of red, and that
spherical shape, exhibit themselves as transcending that occasion, in that
either of them has other relationships to other occasions ( SMW, 1 5 8 ) .
   I t i s thus o n the basis o f " cognitive occasions," that is, of the experi
ences that ma ke us speak, descri be, a nalyze, and reason about experience,
that eternal objects impose themselves, but the privilege of cognitive occa
sions is not metaphysica l. Eterna l objects are not required by knowledge;
above all, they are not synonymous with a " pure" intelligibility tha t finds
the opportunity to manifest itself i n changing rea lity. They are, of course,
required by wha t we are aware of in knowledge, but, unless knowledge is
to be reduced to a phantasmagoria, they must be i mplicated in every real
ization. Even when they intend to ignore it in favor of the reassuring em
pirical statement " that red patch there," description, analysis, or reason
ing irreducibly imply a transcendence, that is, a set of references that
exceed " this" red . I cannot say " red " without, at the same time, implying
that it might have been blue, that it is " something" that is red, that other
things may have the same shade of red, tha t this " same" red may, or
might, be the object of other experiences.
   As I ha ve already emphasized, a color is not, in itself, an eternal object.
It is the experience of color that testifies to the ingression of an eterna l
object. Whitehead will ca ll the type of eternal object whose ingression is
exhibited by sense experience a " sensum." For him, the sensa constitute a
pa rticular class of eternal objects, and this particularity is due to the fact
that sense experience, for i nsta nce that of color, does not necessa rily i mply
the relevance of anything else. Here we find once again the characteriza
tion of the " sense object" in The Concept of Nature: the i ngression of a
sensum does not imply that other eternal objects make i ngression accord
ing to other specified modes.
   As sensation, color makes no specific reference to the trees, the pond, or
the bushes over there; it belongs to the event of experience. And therefore,
once it has gone, it is gone, whereas the landsca pe lasts and end ures. Of
course, one must, like Shel ley, be a " poet of sensation " to celebrate shim
mering and twinkling, the play of shadows and lights, without at the same
time describing trees or a time of day, but in such a case, if the contrast
between what is a nd what might be cannot be genuinely "envisaged ," it is
not beca use it does not exist, but, quite the contrary, beca use it dominates
experience, like a fragi le miracle, without guarantee or explanation. For
Whitehead, red is then accompanied only by the sense of color as possi
ble: " this" red, di fferent from all the others.
1 1 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETAPH Y S I C S




   If, however, contemplating the yellow of a field of wheat, my experi
ence implies other yellows already seen, or the yellow of Van Gogh's
wheat fields, this experience exhibits the multiple relations that the eter
na l objects maintain with one another. The same holds true when it comes
to the grey of those clouds, the chalky shade of the rocks of that castle, in
short, colors that do indeed belong to the cloud over there, to that castle
up on the hill . Or again, to cite Whitehead's favorite example, the touch
of blue in that pa inti ng, necessa ry for the pa inting to be what it is, that
ma kes it specia l : a sensation once again, but a complex sensation, not
only insepa ra ble from the play of forms and colors, but with a risky com
position that signs " this" pa inting.
   Only the injunction of empiricist censors ca n lead us to violently ignore
the many propositions that are irreduci bly articulated with the perception
of this field, these clouds, or this castle. It is the unlimited character of this
" many " that gives its meaning to the " realm" of " a l l the eternal objects." In
The Concept of Nature, a discerned event was as though linked to other
events defined as discerni ble, with the discernible bei ng, a t the limit, the
whole of nature as it decla res itself in an experience. Here, " realm" means
that an eternal object wi l l not be able to make ingression without all the
eternal objects being thereby mobil ized in one way or another.
   How can one spea k, in a l l genera li ty, of an eternal object? Whitehead
tries out two principles:
   The first principle is that each eternal object is an individual which, in
its own peculiar fashion, is what it is. This particular individuality is the
individual essence of the object, and cannot be described otherwise than
as being itself. Thus the individual essence is merely the essence consid
ered in respect to its uniqueness. Further, the essence of an eternal object
is merely the eternal object considered as adding its own unique contri
bution to each actual occasion. This unique contribution is identical for
all such occasions in respect to the fact that the object in all modes of
ingression is just its identical self. But it varies from one occasion to an
other in respect to the differences of its modes of ingression. Thus the
metaphysical status of an eternal object is that of a possibility for an ac
tuality. Every actual occasion is defined as to its character by how these
possibilities are actualised for that occasion. Thus actualisation is a selec
tion among possibilities. More accurately, it is a selection issuing in a
gradation of possibilities in respect to their realisation in that occasion.
This conclusion brings us to the second metaphysical principle: An eter
nal object, considered as an abstract entity. cannot be divorced from its
reference to other eternal objects, and from its reference to actuality gen
erally (SMW, 1 5 9 ) .
                                                E NTRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 1




   The eterna l object " i s what it is." A strange definition, with highly sin
gular conseq uences. The first of these consequences is that it is impossi ble
to describe an eternal object, or even to ta l k a bout it, " for itself," that is,
without reference to something other than itsel f. One will not rise back
up from the color to the sensum accord ing to a principle of resemblance
or analogy, for the sensum would then be somethi ng other than " what it
is"; it would also be the a nalogue or the model for something other than
itself. And something would have ha ppened to it: with the appeara nce
of the sense orga ns, it would have acq uired the current means to confer
their finality on these organs. The eterna l object would explain, or be
explained by, the color-sensa tion. Li kewi se, the intel ligible object "circle"
would explain, or would explain itself in, the mathema tical intellect.
   It is important to emphasize that Whitehead will never change his mind
on this point: an eternal object cannot equip any j udgment, found any rea
soning, confer its power on any privilege communicating with any " pure"
experience. It is not the intelligible, nor is it even i ntelligible, for i ntel ligibil
ity refers to an actual experience. It neither guides nor orients. I f it can it
self be said to be " pure " or " transcendent," it is in the sense of being impas
sible, radically indifferent to its own ingressions, radica lly foreign to any
discrimination between the pure and the impure, and even to any proce
dure of purification. And all this for the simple reason that it would then
be something more than wha t it is, since it could be characterized on the
basis of some of its privileged cases of ingression.
  In the essence of each eternal object there stands an indeterminateness
which expresses its indifferent patience for any mode of ingression into
any actual occasion ( SMW, 1 7 1 ) .
   We now come to the question of the relation of one eternal object to
other eternal objects. In fact, in Science and the Modern World, the ques
tion is of its relation to all other eternal objects. Here we will reencounter
the question of envisagement, for what there is envisagement of is never an
eterna l object, but always the eterna l objects, and first of all the " rea lm" of
all the eternal objects.
   When Whitehead speaks of the rea lm of eternal objects, he is not ta lking
about a static and ordered totality. This realm designates the systematically
complete, uniform, nonselective relationality of each eternal object with all
the others. Whitehead devoted a great dea l of effort to an attempt to char
acterize this type of relationa lity, proper to eternal objects. He sought to
define this realm in a way that would make possible the a ffirmation that
the choice of a determinate mode of ingression of a particular eterna l ob
ject implies a determinate mode of ingression for the complete tota lity of
all eternal objects, which Whitehead calls an " ideal situation." Each ideal
2 1 2   FROM T H E   PH I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E   TO   M E TA P H YS I C S




situation corresponds to a " gradation of possibilities," or an abstract hier
archy whose summit is occupied by the selected eternal object. The grades
of entry of the others "can be expressed only as relevance of value" (SMW,
1 62 ) . I will not fol low him in these technical considerations, not only be
cause this is one of those attempts in which Whitehead runs the risk of ax i
omatic formulation, rather than those of metaphysics, but also because
what is at stake in this formulation, the abstract hierarchy that constitutes
each ideal situation, will, as we shall see, raise a major problem, which may
explain why this attempt was to be abandoned in Process and Reality.
What matters here is what was to be formalized : envisagement qua eternal
activity. The realm may be said to be eternal, in contrast to the temporal
ization represented by rea lization, because, like the eterna l objects them
selves, it is indi fferent to what requires it. Nothing happens to the realm as
such, which is eterna lly what it is, indifferently expressed by any of the
ideal situations associated with the "second envisagement."
   Each realization implies the selective actua lization (third envisage
ment) of a " possibility of va l ue" correspond ing to an idea l situation, clas
sifying all the eternal objects. Let us think of the experience: " you who
are looking at me, but perhaps without seeing me," and of the number of
propositions that can be articulated wi th such an experience, of the num
ber of purposeful determinations with regard to the past, of the number
of implications, of " a nds," of "ors," of "and yets," of " and therefores," or
of " and ifs " : potentially, we have here the material for a novel (albeit not
necessarily a good novel ) . The ideal situation generalizes, in the meta
physica l sense, the thread of a l l the questions that can be raised by an
experience henceforth placed under the banner of " presence," as is attested
by novelists or psychologists when they celebrate experience instead of
reducing it to triviality.
   Of course, the perceptual experience " this red table" is clearly not as
loquacious, but, as we have seen, it nevertheless conveys with it an indefi
nite number of possibilities: the possibility of touchi ng, of leaning, of put
ting down, of admiring or displaci ng, and in The Concept of Nature, the
"complete genera l fact " ulti mately comprised " a l l of nature as actually
discriminated or discerned " in a sensory experience. What was important
in The Concept of Nature was that everything we are aware of should
have a respondent in nature. Imagination expla ins nothing; it is what
must be rendered conceivable. The important point here is the character
ization of experience itself, qua realization: individual realization is not
the same thing as substantial independence ! (SMW, 70 ) . Here, Whitehead
seems very close to Lei bniz, for whom it is possi ble to say that the whole
world " conspi res " in every state of each monad .
                                          E N TRY   I NTO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 3




   As we have seen, the fact that all eternal objects enter i nto the ideal
situation does not mean that there is " equality" between these eternal
objects. On the contrary, each idea l situation corresponds to a determi
nate hierarchical ordering among the indefinite multiplicity of orderings
that the realm can tolerate j ust as wel l . Each occasion thus realizes what
has been actualized as a particular, differentiated mode of ingression for
each eterna l object. Moreover, the ordering constituted by each ideal sit
uation will not only classify the eternal objects according to their mode
of i ngression but also qua excluded . All eternal objects are incl uded, each
correspond i ng to its more or less relevant contri bution to the value of the
actual ity, but some are i ncluded qua excluded, qua " not- being " with re
gard to that occasion. An actual occasion thus presupposes a synthesis,
or a togetherness, of being and not-being.
   By ma king exclusion a mode of inclusion, Whitehead d istances h imself
from Leibniz, that is, from a perspectivism that ca n play only on the scale
of differences between clear and confused . He has provided the ideal situ
ation with the means to affirm itself as a " possibility of value," which
should enable realization to be not a standpoint on the world, but in
volved in a world, thus and not otherwise. Thus, the experience of the
" poet of sensation " exhibits an idea l situation such that the particularity
of the sensa, the fact that they do not necessarily imply the ingression of
other eternal objects, becomes a singularity: the eternal obj ects whose
positive incl usion would imply the perception of a colored landscape are
incl uded qua excl uded . Conversely, the insistence of the future reflects
the inclusion of eterna l objects in a mode that requires the passage to
other individual izations, in which what is not-being may become being.
All the questions that may be inspired by an experience, all the experi
ences that prolong and interpret an experience, or all the variations in in
terest exploring a felt contrast between the d iscerned and the d iscernible
attest to modifica tions of the ideal situation, one eternal object succeeding
another at the summit of the hiera rchy, or an eternal object defined as
excluded finding itself included . Each ideal situation thus defines in an
abstract mode both a world and a " standpoint on the world," but the real
ized, concrete standpoint is stripped of any analogy with vision, reflection,
or conspiration. The standpoint is " prehensive," taking and seizing as much
as it rejects and excludes. It is " for a world," not "of a world."
   We are not done yet, and I will now approach the question of envisage
ment in a way that will be somewhat peculiar. I ndeed , I wish to empha
size that there is something in envisagement of the audacious movement
by which a cat, in the midst of a free fall, twists itself a round to land on
its feet. Like this movement, the third type of envisagement cannot be
2 1 4   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOS O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M ETAP H YS I C S




described i ndependently of the threat it enables Whitehead to escape.
Even i f the cat succeeds in escaping injury, it stil l experienced a fa l l . In
other words, my approach will attempt to problematize the triple en vis
agement which constitutes, if one may say so, the " a bstract " face of indi
vidualization properly so ca lled. I will try to characterize this abstraction
as a risky moment in Whitehead's thought, a moment in which White
head may be undergoi ng the consequences of this abstraction more than
he creates them.
    In fact, the fol lowing question arises: with rega rd to what is the eter
nal underlying activity an a bstraction ? I have insisted on l imiting the
eternal objects to the " how" of prehension in order to combat any confu
sion between this " how" and the concrete fact, or the entity such as it has
actualized itself, thus and not otherwise. Yet it must be admitted that
Whitehead's text is sometimes less clear, that it is not quite categorica lly
opposed to the interpretation that would make actuality a simple passage
to reality of the ideal situation itself.
    It is perhaps here, in the importance I confer upon the risk to which
this interpretation exposes Whitehead's thought, that I feel most intensely
my debt to Gilles Deleuze. For every reader of Deleuze is, by definition,
attentive to the d ifference between " vi rtua l " and " potentia l ." The " poten
tia l " is " made to explain " the real, and therefore places the explanation
under the banner of resemblance or tracing. The " possi ble" in this sense
calls for a realization that is in the first i nstance a selection: as such, each
possible is wel l defined, and all it is missing is rea lity. Realization is there
fore the selection of the one that will be realized . Of the virtual, in con
trast, one must say that it is not actual ized without changing " in nature "
( ta king on a di fferent " mode of existence " ) , a thesis Deleuze took over
from Bergson. This i mplies, first of all, that it cannot be conceived in the
image of its actualization, and that the latter can be no means be assimi
lated to a simple selection.
    When he tries to concei ve of eternal objects as a bstracted from all ac
tuality, Whitehead is situated in the vicinity of the vi rtual : the " real m " of
the eterna l objects must be said to be a coexistence without hierarchy, an
indifference to the d isjunction "either/or," assembled without real together
ness, for all real togetherness i ndicates actua lity. When, however, he de
fines "actual ization " ( not to be confused with Deleuze's) as a selection
among possibilities ( SMW, 1 5 9 ) , Whitehead constructs the figure of an
envisagement that appea rs as self-sufficient, whose result does i ndeed
risk lacking nothing but rea lity, and which would have the power to ex
plain that reality. This is also ind icated by the notion of " possibility of
value " : it seems to be missing only rea lization in order to be " va l ue." In
other words, the aspect of " underlying eterna l activity " consti tuted by
                                          E NTRY   I N TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 5




the triple envisagement seems to leave to rea lization only the somewhat
poor role of ratifying the selected possible.
    One might say, of course, that this difficulty designates the a bsence of a
theory of prehension, or taking into account. The problem is that the ideal
situation does not create the " yearning " for such a theory in the reader,
that it does not make its a bsence exist insistently, as that without which
idea l i ty would have no val ue. This is a serious objection, as is attested,
moreover, by the need Whitehead feels to repeat, as if to force his readers
to remember it, " no actua lity, no val ue." In fact, when the theory of pre
hensions arrives, when, in Process and Reality, Whitehead provides him
self with the means to go to the end of what this theory demands, the a b
straction constituted by an "eterna l underlying acti vity " will disappea r.
    It is not surprising that many contempora ry Whitehea d ians dream of
ridding Whitehead 's system of the eterna l objects, or else of conceiving the
possibility of ma king them emerge historical ly. As long as the distinction
between actualiza tion and rea lization in Deleuze's sense is not ra dica l,
that is, as long as Whiteheadian rea l ization can be interpreted as the mere
rea l ization of a predetermi ned possi b i l ity, the envisagement of eternal
objects risks red ucing the di fference between possibil ity of va l ue and
val ue to a ratification. And the question will become all the more crucial
when, in Process and Reality, God becomes an actua l being to whom the
envisagement of eternal objects perta ins. How can one prevent real ization
from being reduced to a mere choice between possible worlds that are
already idea l ly determined from the standpoint of divine envisagement ?
How can one fa i l to detect the old slight of hand that preva ils whenever
one claims to respect the freedom of others, while leaving them only the
freedom of choosing among solutions without participating in the con
struction of the problem?
    If the eternal objects do not bother me in Process and Reality quite      -



the contrary-it is, here once again, thanks to the distinction Deleuze pro
poses between virtual and potentia l . It is beca use this distinction ena bles
me to recognize the risk that it also al lows me to grasp, in what might
otherwise seem to be a thought in continuity, the extraordina ry, problem
atic mutation that was to surmount this risk. In a nutshell, or as a fore
taste, d i vine envisagement will ta ke its place at the very point where re
alization risked being understood as mere ratification. More precisely, it
will pa rticipate in the mode of existence that Deleuze, here fol lowing no
longer Bergson but the philosopher E tienne Souriau, confers upon the
vi rtua l : that of a problem to be sol ved or a work to be accomplished .
   I insist on this idea that as long as the work is in the workshop, the work
is in danger. At each moment, each one of the artists ' actions, or rather
from each of the artist's actions, it may live or die. The agile choreography
2 1 6   F R O M   T H E   P H I LOSO PH Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




of an improviser, noticing and resolving in the same instant the problems
raised for him by this hurried advance of the work; the anxiety of a fresco
painter knowing that no mistake will be reparable, and that everything
must be done within the hour left to him before the plaster dries; the
works of the composer or the writer at their table, with the time to medi
tate at leisure, to retouch, to redo [ . . . 1 it is nevertheless true that all must
ceaselessly answer, in a slow or rapid progression, the questions of the
sphinx guess, or you will be devoured . But it is the work that flourishes
        -



or disappears, it is it that progresses or is devoured (MEOF, 1 3 ) .
   The insistence of the problem does not implicitly contain the means
for its sol ution; the work's " idea " is not an ideal from which the artist
takes inspiration . It exists only through the risk it brings into existence,
by the fact that at every step artists know they are exposed to the risk of
betraya l, particularly when, through laziness, ease, impatience, or fear, they
believe they can decide on the path, instead of capturing, step by step, the
question posed to them at that step.
   Unli ke the mythica l Sphinx, the sphinx of E tienne Souriau does not
know the answer to the riddle. The " deficiency " of envisagement is then
no longer a lack, but designates the Deleuzian d ifference in nature be
tween the virtual and the potential, connoted by a risk and by a wait. A
risk has no determinate identity or stake before i t is actua l ly taken. A
wait is a wait for what wi l l answer, not for such-and-such an answer.
   I needed to present the risk to which, from my (committed ) point of
view, his concepts expose Whitehead, before turning to the elucidation
of the third envisagement, or the third aspect of eternal envisagement, for
this elucidation will be the " last word " of Science and the Modern World.
And I wish to understand this " last word " as a " twisting in extremis, " a
twisting which, as the reader wi l l have understood , is by no means suffi
cient to solve the difficulty associated with ideal envisagement, the fact
that it does not inspire the " yearning" for the concrete . It does, however,
reflect the fact that Whitehead has already discovered the need to resist
the slope down which his metaphysical construction was taking him.
   I have emphasized that the ideal situation prolongs the thesis of The
Concept of Nature, accord ing to which the " genera l complete fact" of
which we have experience is "all of nature." Yet what I did not emphasize
is the consequence of this kind of prolongation : you think you have pro
d uced a local standpoint, thus and not otherwise, but it is a world that
has been chosen. And it is this consequence that the third aspect of envis
agement will " pa rry," at the cost of a conceptual i nvention that testifies
by itself to what the concept of eternal underlying activity lacks: the
" yearning " for actuality, which alone is va lue. For in order to preserve
                                        E N TRY   I N TO   M E TA P H Y S I C S   2 1 7




this i ndividua l value, Whitehead will dare to introduce, in extremis in
deed, since nothing foretold it previously, a metaphysical " God ."
  Thanks to God, we may i ndeed say, between value such as it has mean
ing for experience and va lue such as it fol lows from the possibilities of
val ue that derive from the second type of envisagement, a mode of cha r
acterization will be avoided that would have relegated the first one to a
deficient approxi mation .
                                                         C H A P TER   F O U RTEEN




The Great Refusal




       [
       .   . 1 .   EVERY ACTUAL OCCASION     is set within a realm of alter
native interconnected entities. This realm is disclosed by all the untrue
propositions which can be predicated significantly of that occasion. It is
the realm of alternative suggestions, whose foothold in actuality tran
scends each actual occasion. The real relevance of untrue propositions
for each actual occasion is disclosed by art, romance, and by criticism in
reference to ideals. It is the foundation of the metaphysical position
which I am maintaining that the understanding of actuality requires a
reference to ideality. The two realms are intrinsically inherent in the total
metaphysical situation. The truth that some proposition respecting an
actual occasion is untrue may express the vital truth as to the aesthetic
achievement. It expresses the "great refusal," which is its primary charac
teristic. A n event is decisive in proportion to the importance (for it) of its
untrue propositions (SMW, 1 5 8 ) .
   Specialists are beginning to learn how to characterize, a t the level o f the
recordings of cerebral activity, the qualitative difference between one and
the "same " performance, according to whether it is due to a routine activity
or to a mind that hesitates with regard to what it is to do. It should be pos
sible to characterize many other di fferences: one walks "as one breathes,"
but the mountain climber's foothold, an "aware" experience characterized
by due attention, exhibits a risk that is usually not consciously formulated:
won't what this foothold trusts give way, will the relief on which i t de
pends be patient to its exploi tation ? And one must also d i stinguish be
tween this mountai n cli mber's a rt, i mplying a tra ined body and concen
tra ted a ttention, and other risky practices, which, for their pan, imply
                                                   T H E   G R E AT   R E FU S A L   2 1 9




conscious hesi tation . Unli ke the mountain climber's risky exploit, " aes
thetic accomplishment" does not have as a stake the risk of " being wrong,"
of seeing the realization of what had been produced as " untrue "-it will
not give way. What is at stake is the very contrast between true and untrue:
each proposition produced as " true " vibrates with the " great refusal " of
everything that, inseparably, will have been produced as untrue. " Pure"
sensation, this red, vibrates with everything it does not include, that it is the
red of this hood, worn by this little girl, who is carrying a big basket and is
headed down there, toward the forest . . . The mountain climber risks faIl
ing, but the artist risks betrayal. It is insofar as aesthetic accomplishment
exhibits the way that the untrue is produced as well as the true that this
accomplishment exhibits actuality as value.
   However, from the dispassionate viewpoint of metaphysics, the fascinat
ing differences between routine, cl umsy hesitation, concentrated attention,
and aesthetic risk yield to the generic problem raised by all the propositions
that every realization will render "true " or " untrue." And this is where the
problem arises. The ideal situation corresponds to a complete envisagement
of the eternal objects and their relations, that is, j ust as much to the determi
nation of what is included as " being" as of what is excl uded as "not-being."
If one had to admit that true and untrue propositions realize the distinc
tion between " being " and " not-being," what aesthetic accomplishment
demands of metaphysics, the " great refusal " qua vita l truth of an accom
plishment would find only a rather ironic answer. This vital truth is noth
ing other than the truth of the ideal situation, a selective one indeed but
hardly a " refusal ."
   But there is another answer, which demands that we confer all its weight
upon a detail in the quotation where Whitehead affirms the great refusal as
a vital truth of aesthetic accomplishment. Here, he speaks of untrue propo
sitions that may be predicated significantly with regard to an occasion, of
the real relevance of these same untrue propositions, and of their impor
tance for the event. From the viewpoint of the ideal situation, the restric
tions i mplied by these terms have no meaning: a l l the consequences and
implications of actualization, as articulated by the ideal situation, are rele
vant, even if this relevance is graded. From the viewpoint of experience,
however, the meaning of these restrictions is decisive. Adam chose to ac
cept tAe apple offered by Eve and to disobey God, but he could not choose
the drama of the Redemption . We may decide on a world, but the fact that
we decide on a world does not correspond to any actual experience in any
of the practices in wh ich the question of aesthetic accomplishment arises.
   It is here, of course, that the contrast between limited human knowl
edge and the infinite, divine viewpoint is usually proposed . The radical
2 2 0   F R O M T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




disj unction proposed by Leibniz between our experience, in which it is
 "as if" we decided, and the uni verse a s God has eval uated and chosen
it mobi lizes this contrast. We think we can name the reasons for our
choices, but these reasons a re only the result of a multitude of tiny per
ceptions, which, for their part, refer to the choice of God, to the universe
He has chosen, and not to " us." For Whitehead , however, this sol ution
constitutes a defeat for metaphysics. I nsofar as Leibnizian monads do
not al low the formulation of an actua l d i fference, belonging to the pres
ent, between what might be and what is realized, but merely reflect the
d ifference chosen by God, they imply, as Whitehead denounces, a serious
" incoherence." And in fact, what is denied in the na me of a metaphysical
system is what is presupposed by the very activity of thinkers, who must
think that what they enunciate is capable of creating a difference for
themsel ves and for others. However subtle Lei bniz may be, the surprisi ng
effects, vectors of peace and of l ucidity, to which his system is meant to
give rise, a re not included in this system.
    It is precisely this incoherency that Whitehead intends to reject when he
identifies value and actuality. If only actuality has value, it is val ue as our
experiences can manifest it, with the sense of novelty, of risk, of purpose,
all of which allude to what Whitehead calls "addition of the future," not a
va lue that would reduce our experience to a fiction or an ill usion--even if,
as Leibniz was careful to show, this ill usion were wel l constructed .
    To combat this threat, to confer an i rreducible character upon what is
demanded by the propositions rendered " untrue " by an aesthetic accom
plishment, their relevance, their significant character, Whitehead will have
recourse to God .
    The God of Science and the Modern World has nothing in common
with a God of religion, and particularly with the God of the Christians.
One of the very few anecdotes we preserve from Whitehead 's life, more
over, is a sketch played out in his fa mily, where he himself played the
part, not without irreverence, of God, who suddenly has a new idea to
invest a soccer ball with l i fe . He then comments on what happens with
his children ( the Son and the Holy Ghost, of course) , wonders whether
the idea was really all that good, decides to delegate his son to Redemp
tion, and so on. Everything concludes with a solid kick a pplied to the
unfortunate ba l l : the case of creation is truly hopeless. More seriously,
it is against the God of the metaphysicians that Whitehea d unleashes his
i rony and his sarcasm: aga inst the sad habit of addressing metaphysical
compliments to him ( SMW, 1 79), that is, constituting him as a " metaphysi
ca l reason," ma king him the supreme a uthor of the play, who ma y be re
sponsi ble for its success but also for its inadequacies. If Whitehead intro-
                                                   T H E   G R E AT   R E FU S A L   2 2 1




d uced God, it was indeed because the mode in which he needs what he
calls God to intervene escapes this hypothesis.
   In fact, God will only intervene at the end of the game, not as what
imposes itself in an eminent way but as what is required by what imposes
itsel f in an eminent way: the need to define a rea l d i fference between ac
tuality as value and the unlimited total i ty of the determinations and im
plications that correspond to the ideal situation . In short, God will be ex
plicitly required to characterize not envisagement in general but the third
type of envisagement as Whitehead has characterized it, writing in his
insertion of the triple envisagement a bout " the individualised prehension
into individual events of aspects of the ideal situation " ( SMW, 1 0 5 ) .
   S o far I have merely been considering a n actual occasion o n the side of
its full concreteness. It is this side of the occasion in virtue of which it is an
event in nature. But a natural event, in this sense of the term, is only an
abstraction from a complete actual occasion. A complete occasion includes
that which in cognitive experience takes the form of memory, anticipation,
imagination, and thought. These elements in an experient occasion are also
modes of inclusion of complex eternal objects in the synthetic prehension,
as elements in the emergent value. They differ from the concreteness of full
inclusion. In a sense this difference is inexplicable; for each mode of inclu
sion is of its own kind, not to be explained in terms of anything else. But
there is a common difference which discriminates these modes of conclu
sion from the full concrete ingression which has been discussed. This dif
ferentia is abruptness. By "abruptness " I mean that what is remembered,
or anticipated, or imagined, or thought, is exhausted by a finite complex
concept [ . . . 1 There is a limitation which breaks off the finite concept
from the higher grades of illimitable complexity (SMW, 1 70-1 7 1 ) .
   What h a s just been the object o f a "great refusal," in which the risk
proper to metaphysics vibrates, is the generalization of the thesis defended
in The Concept of Nature. There, event and incl usion were conceived
together. Not only was every event incl uded within other events, but it de
clared itself to be such in experience: to discern an event is also to have the
experience of the discernible, it is to have the experience of its meaning qua
included within other events that do not declare themselves otherwise than
qua signified . To state that the complete concrete fact is the totality of na
ture was to emphasize the way in which declared meanings and discerned
objects cannot, as language might ind uce us to think, be isolated from
what we are aware of as i mp l icit or discernible. It was thus to create the
contrast between concrete experience and the abstraction of the reasons,
takings-in to-account, and names in which we place our trust. This is the
sa me contrast Leibniz had proposed when he described the multitude of
2 2 2   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




indisti nct little perceptions that contribute to the roar of a wave, and a lso
the multitude of muffled thoughts that disquiet the thinker. For Leibniz,
this is a pedagogical example of the way the whole world conspires in any
experience, and it is also what Whitehead had accepted in The Concept of
Nature: if there is no reason to set limits to what the event declares in the
mode of the discernible, there is no limit to be set. Yet he has j ust con
cluded in extremis: what was not necessary for a phi losophy of nature is
necessary for metaphysics. Certain kinds of occasion exhibit, as their vital
truth, a limitation, a form of "abstraction " that must find its meaning in
the concept of " complete actual occasion." In fact, it is the occasion char
acterized as ful ly concrete that constitutes an abstraction, in the same way
as " nature." The " vital truth " of the great refusal indicates that the mind is
no longer "the ultimate," but that which obliges us to think.
   To understand an expl icit signification is a lso, of course, to experience
everything to which it a l l udes i mplicitly, and logicians must someti mes be
rem inded of this, as must those scientists who study the order of nature
and take adva ntage of the declared and stabi lized modes of prehension
that disclose the endurance of organisms. Yet it belongs to the metaphys
ics of the actua l occasion to let itself be obliged by " aesthetic accomplish
ment " in order to construct the deployed total ity req ui red by the value
of an occasion . This accomplishment exhibits an actual, decisive break
in the unli mited network of i mplications, an abrupt di fference that inter
venes in the midst of the unli mited totality of what discloses itself only as
signified. To put thi ngs in a grandiose way, the artist's gesture does not
concern the great breath of the world; rather, it is the world that holds its
breath as the artist begins her gesture.
   This breaking off from -an actual illimitability is what in any occasion
marks off that which is termed mental from that which belongs to the
physical event to which the mental functioning is referred [ . . . I the things
apprehended as mental are always subject to the condition that we come
to a stop when we attempt to explore ever higher grades of complexity in
their realised relationships. We always find that we have thought of just
this-whatever it may be-and of no more (SMW, 1 71 ) .
   Here, menta lity does not mean " subjecti vity," but it indicates how
Whitehead has undertaken to think of individual ization as a value. And
his solution is rather origina l . The di fference between a " physical " event,
an event qua " in nature," and the " mental functioning " that gives mean
ing to the complete actual occasion is none other than finitude. Qua
physica l, the event is on the side of the infinite, whereas the finite cha rac
ter of what is " j ust this a nd no more," as is required by the relevance of a
decision, corresponds to the menta l .
                                                  T H E   G R E AT   R E F U S A L   2 2 3




   The relevance of mathematica l physics thus depends on the possibility
of ignori ng the way the occasions obl ige us to conceive of a " break " :
"j ust this . . . and no more." Al though the spatio-temporal functions of
classica l physics say that one heavy body makes more d ifference for
another the closer it is to that other, they do not say that after a certain
distance it makes no difference, only that the di fference becomes more
and more negl igible. It is the physicist, not the body, who is supposed to
define what must be taken into account and what can be considered neg
ligi ble, ignored by approximation. Henceforth, however, mathematical
physics is no longer an adequate testi mony. Where its testimony is rele
vant, this relevance signifies that "what is termed mental " matters little,
makes no calculable di fference.
   As far as the way in which the living organism " holds" qua enduring is
concerned, it certainly exh i bits a selective character, as is ind icated by the
relevance of such technical terms as " detect," " react specifically to," " acti
vate," and so on . Yet it is a selection that endures: we have to do here with
what Whitehead henceforth calls " i ntermediate cases," which could be
described as forms of routine mentality, dominated by the reproduction of
a mode of foothold. In contrast, if one may spea k of a " history of mentali
ties," what becomes crucial is the way in which the di fference between
implicit and expl icit is defined on each occasion or in each epoch.
   "They should have realized that . . . . Since it was an implicit dimension
of the situation, why didn't they make it explicit? " All the scandal that the
professional mentality may inspire, as well as the very problem of what
may also be cal led the history of consciousness, consists in such questions.
Both the chal lenge of education and the career of the historian must
undergo their trial. Experienced teachers know the difference between the
student's first encounter with a new kind of mathematica l definition and
what that definition " says" to them. Historians know how pay due atten
tion to the difference between the questions they themselves, like each of
us, may ask the past, are inclined to ask the past, and those that were rel
evant for the people who lived in that past. More generally, the process of
" ma king explicit" may, of course, ind icate a risk of contingent misunder
standing and then appear as productive of exactness; it may reflect the
legitimate impatience inspired by the professional 's ruts. Yet it may also
be indiscreet or i ntrusive, giving rise to the embarrassment, anger, and
even violence of the person whose gestures, i mpl ications, and meanings
are being interpreted . Fina lly, it may a lso reflect a genuine innovation .
   A s the case may be, then, the implicit may b e what might just as well be
explicit, that whose rendering-explicit raises no other problem tha n that
of a "ca l l to order" that may be redundant or even malevolent, but it may
2 2 4   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




also be that whose rendering-explicit constitutes a form of intrusion, and
finally that whose "discovery " constitutes an event: "I had not realized
that . . . " When Einstein undertook to construct expl icitly the cond itions
in which we may spea k of simultaneity between two distinct events, it was
to create a problem no one before him had thought about. When sixteenth
century chemists undertook to make explicit the difference between them
and the alchemists, the creation was twofold . It concerned alchemy as well,
as they defined it in explicit contrast to chemistry, an alchemy that did not,
as such, exist prior to this operation. And for each student who encounters
a new mathematical being, the point is to learn to take into account a set
of d istinctions that by no means went without saying beforehand .
   In these cases, then, the contrast between the explicit and the implicit
should be assi milated to a genuine horizon. It is i n vain that Socrates acts
as though Meno's slave " a l ready knew " the irrationa l character associ
ated with the measurement of a square's diagonal : the concrete fact is
that the slave did not have the slightest idea of this fact. Socrates is well
aware of this but does not care, because it is i n fact to Meno that he
wanted to show his power while he forced the slave, step by step, to ad
mit everything his decla red knowledge was supposed to imply " i mpl ic
itly." This is why, after the last " You are right, Socrates," he coldly aban
dons his gui nea pig, who has not, for all that, become a mathematician.
If the slave had suddenly said "I understand ! " it was with him that
Socrates should have pursued the dialogue.
  I term this abrupt realisation the "graded envisagement " which each
occasion prehends into its synthesis. This graded envisagement is how the
actual includes what (in one sense) is not-being as a positive factor in its
own achievement. It is -the source of error, of truth, of art, of ethics, and
of religion. By it, fact is confronted by alternatives ( SMW, 1 76-1 77 ) .
   Error and truth, ethics and religion are united, in that the value o f the
experiences corresponding to them also consists in what they do not ta ke
into account " i n fact," a nd it is also in this that they oblige a reference to
the ideality requiring the third mode of envisagement proposed by White
head: what makes ingression is an ideal orderi ng of a finite degree of com
plexity. What exceeds this finite degree is situated beyond its horizon,
excl uded from the purpose and val ue associated with actuality.
   " M y demand is, that the ultimate arbitra ri ness of matter of fact from
which our formulation starts should disclose the same general principles
of real ity, which we dimly discern as stretching away into regions beyond
our explicit powers of discernment " ( S M W, 92-93 ) . Whitehead is now
in a position to satisfy this demand. The "great refusal " declared by our
achievements must be the starting point for a formulation that extends to
                                                T H E   G R EAT   R E F U S A L   2 2 5




every occasion . We have no access to an electronic occasion as such, we
do not k now everyth i ng that counts " for i t," qua positive factor i n its
accomplishment. Yet there is no metaphysical d i fferentiation between a
" physical " a nd a " cognitive " occasion, but rather a pragmatic one, re
spondi ng to the pragmatics of our definitions. An occasion may be qual i
fied as " physica l " i nsofa r as the becoming of the conti nuity to which it
belongs confirms the pragmatic releva nce of the definition Whitehead
gave of nature: by paying it d ue attention, we fi nd more i n it. As we have
seen, things get compl icated when it comes to psychology. And when, in
a typica l domestic scene, the man, infuriated by the "attention" his wife
pays to him, slams the door, his impatience exhibits and requires a " men
ta l ity." Yet if every occasion is characterized in terms of " purpose," qua
related to a limited horizon-not only this a nd not that, but for this l im
ited world, rather than for the indefinite world that "this" cannot help but
imply-every occasion also d iscloses an " ultimate arbitrariness."
   Thus as a further element in the metaphysical situation, there is required
a principle of limitation. Some particular how is necessary, and some par
ticularisation in the what of matter of fact is necessary [ . . . I we must
provide a ground for limitation which stands among the attributes of the
substantial activity. This attribute provides the limitation for which no
reason can be given: for all reason flows from it. God is the ultimate limita
tion, and His existence is the ultimate irrationality. For no reason can be
given for ;ust that limitation which it stands in His nature to impose. God
is not concrete, but He is the ground for concrete activity. No reason can
be given for the nature of God, because that nature is the ground of ratio
nality ( SMW, 1 78 ) .
   The God Whitehead has j ust introd uced i s simultaneously, and equiva
lently, a principle of limitation a nd a principle of concretion. He has noth
ing to do with the despotic God toward whom a l l explanatory cha i ns go
back : It was God's will, God's will be done. He a nswers to a need pro
duced by meta physics. Quite precisely, he is made necessary by the third
type of envisagement. The idea l situation explains only the physica l occa
sion, which is a mere a bstraction. The concrete occasion requires a lim
ited, i nd ividual ized horizon. God does not provide the reason for this
limitation, but he is named i n order to express its " a rbitrariness " in the
sense in which the very notion of reason, and the possibility of defining
" that" for which an account is being req uested, i mply a limitation. He is
that without which the "great refusal " could only be an i l l usion.
  The only alternative to this admission, is to deny the reality of actual
occasions. Their apparent irrational limitation must be taken as a proof
of illusion and we must look for a reality behind the scene ( SMW, 1 78 ) .
2 2 6   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N ATU R E T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




   This is indeed what Whitehead reproaches Lei bniz: to have proclaimed
that " there is a reason for everything," even the choice of God, who has
access to the sole genuine reality, to the infinite conspi ration of the uni
verse with each state of the monad, or, reversibly, to each state of the
monad as a standpoi nt implying an entire universe. If Lei bniz were right,
the true meaning of our experiences would be unlimited, " behind the
scene," and our choices would be mere appearances, with the divine
choice of this world as their hidden reason. Decision must therefore be
primordial, and our reasons must be relative to it. The possi bi lity of in
voking, l ike Lei bniz, the " reasons of God," even defining them as un
knowable, m ust become a metaphysical or a technical impossi bility. The
world cannot be deduced from a calculation, whatever the meaning of
the divine calculation may be. It decides itself.
   Here, then, we encounter once again Whitehead the mathematician, who
has not the least patience for those who wish to ignore the fact that every
question sets in place its " ultimate," that which cannot be questioned be
cause the question presupposes it. It is henceforth the question of metaphys
ics that is under discussion, the question of the nature of things, that is, of
their reasons, and of the ultimate presupposed by the construction of every
reason, whatever it may be. Every search for a reason presupposes a prob
lem, and every problem is a horizon. You may construct reasons, but not
the reason for the limitation of what you envisage with regard to the indefi
nite labyrinths of envisagea ble relations. You can ask people to explain
themselves, to explicate what they mean, or intend to do, or think that they
should do, dic cur hic, but remember that your question demands from
the other, and may inspire in the other, not a si mple explication but a dis
placement of horizon . You can show as much as you want in what sense the
(new ) reasons on the basis of which you ra ise your problem transcend the
particularity of the statements you intend to question: your reasons will still
respond to the problem as you pose it, and therefore to a horizon that is
also limited . Yet those who would take advantage of this li mitation to deny
the novelty of your reasons, to situate you within the " historical context"
that would explain your proposition, could never help but take their place,
a posteriori, within the enlarged horizon you have proposed. The "context"
they would invoke to situate you would be none other than the one which
your proposition has turned into its own situation, and which happens to
have been " patient" to the novelty you proposed, or even suscepti ble of
being infected by that proposition, henceforth accepted as plausible and
interesting. Only endurance, not origi nality, has discernible reasons.
   If there cannot be a metaphysical discourse that deals, by analogy or
otherwise, with God 's " reasons," this is not, therefore, a question either of
                                                  T H E   G R E AT   R E F U S A L   2 2 7




ignorance or of i naccessibility but a question of coherent definition. God
qua principle of l i mitation is that from which every reason derives, and
he therefore cannot have a reason himself. This, Whitehead concludes, is
why God is "categorically determined," required qua principle of limita
tion, but " meta physically i ndeterminate "-agai n Leibniz is wrong.
    Whitehead might have been able to " save" Leibniz, but his judgment is
without indulgence. In contrast, he chooses to attenuate his d ifference
from Spinoza . God, he suggests, might be concei ved as " q uali fying" a sub
stantial activity analogous to Spinoza 's infinite substance, with the attri
butes of Spinoza 's substance being a ssimilated to the domain of the eter
nal objects, as expressed by individual ization in a multiplicity of modes.
Tha nks to God , who is categorica lly determ i ned by this " tha nks to,"
Spinoza 's modes can then be freed from the suspicion that they constitute
mere " reflections" of the infinite. Of course, Spinoza finds himself sl ightly
modified by Anglo-Saxon humor. Possibil ity is no longer an i l l usion but
enters into the economy of infinite substance. As far as the idea of God is
concerned, it is no longer associated at all with a knowledge " of the third
kind," that of ideas that a re finally adequate. Q uite the contra ry, it is
called forth by the need for a n envisagement of the third type, that makes
" i nadeq uacy " i rreducible, that is, by the contrast between the ideal situa
tion and " its" rea l ization, whose va l ue demands its limitation.
    Whitehead's God, a speculative wonder, i s therefore firmly bound to
the refusa l of a metaphysica l speculation that denies what we a re wel l
aware of. The creation of the l imited horizon al lows the a ffi rmation o f
what is implied b y every purpose: the asymmetric character of relations.
My p rehension of you and your prehension of me cannot, from any
standpoint, be redefined in a way that would make their hidden harmony
explicit, two sta ndpoints reflecting the same world with a common pur
pose. My thought is individual ized, a thought of " that," not of a l l the
impl ications and conseq uences of " that" as you may enterta in them. This
is the para digmatic empiricist affirmation: there is no beyond to the fact
that we clash against the i rreducible, obstinate fact of a world which, far
from espousing our variations of interest, may oppose to us the firm dis
continuity of its angles-thus, and not otherwise, no further. Let us listen
to Whitehead in the class he gave on April 1 6 , 1 92 5 :
    I enter a room. The room does not enter me, in any sense at all. Our
experience is always that of entering into the world, not into the world as
supported by oneself in any sense at all ( EWM, 2 8 7 ) .
  It is a lso from this empi rical sta ndpoint that w e c a n sense the possible
instabil i ty of Whitehead's fi rst fully metaphysica l construction. Doesn't
the brea k that ma kes the di fference between idea l i ty and the set of
2 2 8   FROM   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   OF   NATURE   T O   M E TA P H Y S I C S




propositions true and untrue " for the occasion " place novelty under the
banner of passivity ? Endurance may depend on the set of non sequiturs
that real ize and are rea lized by a finite standpoint. Yet can originality be
red uced to a mod ification of this set ? In short, is the restriction really
appropriate to what we understand by " va l ue " ?
   This problem obviously has much in common with that of the abstrac
tion risked by Whitehead : God , as a principle of limitation, is part of
that a bstraction, and does not, as such, ena ble a remedy for its primary
defect, the fact that it does not inspire a " yearning" for a theory of pre
hension. On the contrary, he underl ines this defect, because thanks to his
intervention, envisagement seems to be able to do without the question
of prehension to an even greater degree. Now that the cat has fal len on
its feet, however, it is possible to inspire, aga inst the movement proposed
by Whitehead, the yearning for something else and to specify the sense in
which this movement, which has been from the organism to the actual
occasion, cal ls for another movement, which may, as the case may be,
designate another ultimate.
   The link between value and restriction was constructed in metaphysical
terms, but it had first been formulated in the context of the philosophy of
the organism, insofar as the organism's success is its endurance. An organ
ism " end ures" in the sense that it exhibits functions that are fundamentally
asymmetrical to its environment: here, value is equivalent to j udgment,
and the "intolera nt" organism maintains, as long as it is able to endure, a
remarkably sta ble and simplifying j udgment that defines what counts for it
in its environment and how. Yet the fact that this connection was taken up
again at the level of the metaphysical categories m ight well introduce the
shadow of an "as if'� when it comes to our subjective experience. What of
our i mpression that " having a purpose " is of the order of "taking initia
tive" ? What of our claim-it's called freedom-to be, in one way or another,
"the cause of ourselves " ? And "trust," for which the point, in this case, is
no longer to find a respondent in the order of nature but which is presup
posed every time experience takes the risk of experimentation: can it be
supported by a reference to God as ultimate l imitation ?
   Of course, if the point was to make metaphysical speculation commu
nicate with wisdom, all these objections would collapse by themselves,
becom ing so many versions cal ling for the necessary " detachment from
the sel f" that usually coincides with wisdom . The same would hold true
if we had to do with that practica l aesthetics proposed today by the so
called " sl iding sports." To keep one's hold or to lose it: at each wave,
surfers risk themselves, without any ill usion of control, risk ing their pos
sibility of enduring, of fitting with the wave, at the critica l point where
                                                   T H E   G R E AT   R E F U S A L   2 2 9




only the sensitive, exact insertion of one motion within another can earn
the patience of a brea king wave.
    However, to the world as a breaking wave corresponds the spiritual
ized body, the detachment from the ego, not the art of problems tha t
orients the research of Whitehead the mathema tician. Mathematicians
do not seek to "endure," to styl ize their bodies, gestu res, or soul in a way
that would ena ble them to provide a minimum hold to the trials suscep
tible of desta bilizi ng them. Thei r trust is of a different type, not " they will
not get me," this wave, this i l l usion as a vector of pain, this attachment
that exposes me, but " what transformation do they demand of me ? "
this possi bility that would be so easy for me to ignore, this murmur of
experience tha t I could easily d isqualify, this incoherence I would have no
difficul ty in making people forget, or that I could eleva te, with impunity,
to the status of a riddle or a mystery before which reason must accept to
bow down.
    The speculation of Whitehead the mathematician, because it can be said
to be "control " the construction of a coherent, adequate discourse, m ust
provide a foothold, offer the maximum foothold to what might destabilize
it. At no time may it be transformed into a vector of norms, a norm of slid
ing elegance or wisdom, because a norm, in this case, is too tempting a way
to eliminate, to simplify, or to j udge what might otherwise pose a problem.
    This is why I was able to compare Whitehead's solution, the definition
of the third type of engagement, to the desperate twist that a cat carries
out in order to complete its fa ll on its feet. It may be this twist that enables
Whitehead to adopt Spinoza 's substantia l acti vity, but one may also won
der if it is not the seduction of this substantial activity that had first in
spired his wager: to risk the a bstraction consti tuted by ideal envisage
ment. For ultima tely, Whitehead is closer to Lei bniz than to Spinoza , in
the sense that Lei bniz has not turned the "as ifs " with which he populates
his metaphysics into a path toward wisdom. If there is a link between
metaphysics and wisdom, for Leibniz as for Whitehead, this link cannot
bypass trust in the possibility of a " peace " that must be fashioned actively,
intel ligently, not achieved by some process of conversion. Like Leibniz,
Whitehead worked in this world, for this world, and in a way that any
sage might judge " perverse " : without bri nging to existence a truth that
would have the power of conquering idolatries, passions, and illusions,
but in direct contact, without a beyond, with our polemica l habits. Meta
physica l experimentation, neutral with regard to what matters, has no
other goa l than to produce "elbow room " aga inst the identification of
passionate incoherence with a virtue, of the fight against error with a mo
bil izing slogan, and of thought with a deduction.
2 3 0   F R O M   T H E   P H I LO S O P H Y   O F   N AT U R E   T O   M E TA P H YS I C S




   Yet if this wager, of making the prerequisite for peace not a purification
that subtracts but a creation that constructs, that adds and complicates
things, must be adequately descri bed in metaphysical terms, limitation
must not be the last word . If the activity of Whitehead, a mathematician
who became a philosopher, is to find its meaning in the terms of his own
meta physics, real ization cannot be described as a restriction.
   Sometimes, i n the course of this text, I have been unable not to antici
pate, and to use the word " decision," which Whitehead was to use in Pro
cess and Reality to name the " breaking off" that turns the occasion into
the affirmation of a " thus and not otherwise." When he named the " great
refusal," Whitehead himself could doubtless not help but be inhabited by
a syntax that makes the occasion the producer of its limitation. No doubt
he was aware, when writing Science and the Modern World, that his con
cept of an occasion was merely a first approximation. And perha ps the
use of the word " decision," in Process and Reality, indicates that he has
henceforth provided himself with the means to ful ly affirm the meaning
William James conferred upon this term: that of a l iving moment that
produces its own reasons.
   Decisions, for him who makes them, are altogether peculiar psychic
facts. Self-luminous and self-justifying at the living moment at which they
occur, they appeal to no outside moment to put its stamp upon them or
make them continuous with the rest of nature. Themselves it is rather who
seem to make nature continuous; and in their strange and intense function
of granting consent to one possibility and withholding it from another, to
transform an equivocal and double future into an inalterable and simple
past (DO, 1 5 8 ) .
   With James, Whitehead refused to make continuity primary; that is, he
also refused to al low the occasion to be deduced from the whole. Every
continuity is a result, a succession of resumptions that are so many " pur
poses," deciding the way the present will prolong the past, give a future to
this past and make it " its " past. Yet the way James characterizes decision,
"granting consent to one possibi l i ty and withhold ing it from another,"
could not be adopted as such, for it contains too many unknowns. It had
to be constructed, in a way that enables every production of existence to
be characterized as a decision. It is the actual occasions themselves that
will affirm, no longer merely " j ust this, and no more," but " thus and not
otherwise."
   Everything m ust therefore be redone. Everyth ing will be redone in the
course of the writing of Process and Reality.
            PA RT T W O




Cosmology
                                                         C H A P TE R   FIFTEEN




Hie C i rcu l i , H i c Saltus




            E CAN    and we may, as it were, jump with both feet off the
            ground into or towards a world of which we trust the other
            parts to meet our jump and only so can the making of a per
fected world of the pluralistic pattern ever take place. Only through our
precursive trust in it can it come into being.
   There is no inconsistency anywhere in this, and no "vicious circle " un
less a circle of poles holding themselves upright by leaning on one an
other, or a circle of dancers revolving by holding each other's hands, be
 "vicious."
   The faith circle is so congruous with human nature that the only expla
nation of the veto that intellectualists pass upon it must be sought in the
offensive character to them of the faiths of certain concrete persons.
   Such possibilities of offense have, however, to be put up with on empiri
cist principles. The long run of experience may weed out the more foolish
faiths. Those who held them will then have failed: but without the wiser
faiths of the others the world could never be perfected ( SPP, 230-23 1 ) .
    This text, a veritable profession of fa ith, is probably one of Wi lliam
James's last writings, and the way it connects trust, leap, and circle of
fa ith no doubt constitutes the best introduction to what Process and Re
ality com m its its reader to. Whatever path of approach to Process and
R eality one chooses, this path presupposes a leap far from the sol id
ground of our sel f-evi dence. It is a very curious leap, involving both mo
bilizing experience a nd putting thought to the test. A speculative leap.
    Philosophers have long since learned that speculation is a temptation
that philosophy owes itself to resist. We must reject any recourse to an
2 3 4   CO S M O LOGY




" i ntel lectua l intuition " that assumes the possi bility of a di rect access to
a h igher order of truth, accepting the finitude of the human cond ition.
Thi s-after all, no profit is too smal l-ena bles us to hunt down in others
the ill usory bel iefs that we ourselves have renounced . Whitehead is not
unaware that he is swi mming against the current: aga inst the " progress"
that has made the di fference between (outdated ) speculative philosophy
and the philosophy that is finally modern. Right from the outset of Pro
cess and Reality, he assigns his undertaking the " first task " of defining
the " speculative philosophy " he is going to practice, but the definition he
gives it is not likely to reassure the sceptics.
  Speculative Philosophy is the endeavour to frame a coherent, logical,
necessary system of general ideas in terms of which every element of our
experience can be interpreted ( PR, 3 ) .
   A n excessive program i f ever there was one, whose totalitarian nature
might, a priori, inspire fear. If a system were to be capable of deducing
everything we a re lia ble to be aware of, it would rea l ize the wildest
dreams of a bsol ute knowledge. Except that when expressing this fear, I
replaced " interpret " by " deduce," which means that I have attri buted to
the system the power of a theory, a power that Whitehead refuses to it.
What he has j ust defined is not a power, but a demand concerning the
genera l ideas that are to be assembled . They will have to succeed in not
selecting, that is, in not j udging, measuring according to a norm, or dif
ferentiating between experiences whose objects a re legitimate or i l lusory.
This does not mean, however, that the experiences involved with the
production of measures, the crea tion of criteria , and the differentiation
between the illusory and the legitimate must be denounced . However, for
the " necessity " proper to the speculative system to have a sense, they
must lose their privileged import.
  Thus the philosophic scheme should be "necessary," in the sense of
bearing in itself its own warrant of universality throughout all experience,
provided that we confine ourselves to that which communicates with im
mediate matter of fact. But what does not so communicate is unknow
able, and the unknowable is unknown; and so this universality defined by
"communication " can suffice ( PR, 4 ) .
  In a note-notes a re rare in Process and Reality-Whitehea d specifies
that the "doctrine" he has j ust stated concerning " what does not com
municate " is a pa radox, and, in a rather atypica l way, he a l lows hi mself a
touch of irony: " I nd ulging in a species of fa lse modesty, 'cautious' philos
ophers underta ke its definition."
  In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had undertaken to put every
thing we are aware of in perception " i n the same boat." The mind wa s
                                            H I C   C I RCU L I .   H I C   S A LT U S   2 3 5




the ultimate then, that which is presupposed by all perception. The proj
ect is now prolonged; for the point will be that this scheme, by its very
working, affirms itself to be capable of interpreting " any element of ex
perience " in the same wa y as long as the la tter communicates with an
immed iate state of affairs, that is, as long as there is an actual experience
rather than a possibil ity of experience ("if only we could . . "). However,.



the subj ect of discussion is no longer perceptive experience, and the mind
is therefore no longer ultimate. What is in question is that of wh ich we
have experience-joy, grief, freedom, responsibility, as well as swa llow,
stone, or sun. And this ra ises a new problem, for here the tota lity ca nnot
be defined by reference to what does not belong to it.
   Whitehead knows quite precisely what awaits every attempt at defini
tion in this case: has he not, with Russell, encountered the paradoxical
class of bei ngs who, l i ke Epimenides, the Cretan who ( truthfully ? ) defined
all Cretans as lia rs, belong to the set they define in a way that contradicts
the possibil ity of that definition ? To define the set of experiences that
communicate with an immed iate state of affairs i n a way that opposes it
to a nything else would again fa ll victim to the same paradox, for the mere
fact of producing that " a nything else " qua having the power to assert it
self as " other," escaping any possibility of actual experience, makes it fall
back into the set. There is a placing-in-communication with an immed iate
state of a ffa irs because there is an actua l experience, the experience of this
very power. Hence the paradox: the set includes what cla imed to define it
excl usively.
   The speculative leap does not announce an entry into logical paradox,
but a farewell to the power of logical definition, for it is the power Epi
menides the Cretan assumed to define " the set of all Cretans" that creates
the paradox. Likewise, it is the " prudence" of the philosophers who think
they can designate the class of what is knowa ble, or, as Wittgenstein sa id
in the Tractatus, of " that of which one may spea k," that makes them slip
into an infinite labor of mourning in which " that of which one may spea k "
n o longer h a s much importance, compared with what one must learn to
keep silent a bout.
   To interpret will thus not i mply a definition of the set of what can be
interpreted, or of the cond itions that a uthorize belonging to that set. On
the contrary, the system's necessity reflects a commitment that ma kes all
the constra ints weigh on the interpretation itself, which takes up the
cha llenge of having actua lly to place all experiences on the same level,
whether or not they a re able to define their object, that is, to a ffirm them
all qua obliging interpretation . By this commitment, Whitehead by no
means opposes to the philosophers' " prudence " a source of knowledge
2 3 6   CO S M O LOGY




whose necessity would transcend all definition. Right from the openi ng
paragraph of his work, he limits himself to affirming that the k nowledge
produced by speculative philosophy as a method is " i mportant."
   No term would seem to be more vague that this one: importa nt. And
yet it practically constitutes the "cipher," or the trademark of the concepts
proposed by Whitehead 's "speculative phi losophy," and it will confer its
singular style upon the " leap " or j ump of the imagination to which the
reader of Process and Reality is invited. For this word in fact designates
what cannot be defined by anything else; it is an " ultimate genera lity "
proposed b y its own system .
   Importance is a generic notion which has been obscured by the over
whelming prominence of a few of its innumerable species. There are per
spectives of the universe to which morality is irrelevant, to which logic is
irrelevant, to which religion is irrelevant, to which art is irrelevant. By this
false limitation the activity expressing the ultimate aim infused into the
process of nature has been trivialized into the guardianship of mores, or
of rules of thought, or of mystic sentiment, or of aesthetic enjoyment. No
one of these specializations exhausts the final unity of purpose in the
world. The generic aim of process is the attainment of importance, in that
species and to that extent which in that instance is possible (MT, 1 - 1 2 ) .
   A circular si tua tion : in order t o present itsel f, the undertaking that
begins with Process and Reality uses a term upon which it will confer a
meaning without which its way of presenting itself is hard to hear. One
must always begin a circle somewhere, but there is nothing dizzying about
that. It is enough to accept that, in any case, no one ever really begins with
the beginning. Even currents of thought that seem axiomatic "start out "
from their principles only subsequently, and more to verify their formula
tion than to " discover " thei r consequences. No doubt because he knew the
demands of a truly axiomatic construction, Whitehead does not try to save
appearances. Serious readers may complain that they cannot make heads
or tails of his approach. What matters is that at the end of the day one may
finally go back to the beginning, that the snake can bite its tail. Here, in
deed, is the fina l sentence of Process and Reality:
  In this way, the insistent craving is justified-the insistent craving that
zest for existence be refreshed by the ever-present, unfading importance of
our immediate actions, which perish and yet live for evermore ( PR, 3 5 1 ) .
  What has happened between the book's beginning and its end ? The
vocation of speculative phi losophy qua productive of " important" knowl
edge has not been modified, but the phrase has been laden with all that is
required by the seemingly obvious fact that certa in objects of knowledge
can be " i mportant." It is the expression " to be i mporta nt" that is primary,
                                             H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A lT U S   237




and i t is on its basis that we may try to define why it is importa nt, to
what extent, and accord ing to what criteria . And of course, these efforts
are themselves " i mportant " ; there is no reason to denounce them, and
especially not to disqualify those " species " consti tuted by ethics, logics,
rel igion, art . . . . Yet it is important to strip them of their power of limita
tion, to fight agai nst their clea r propensity to denounce what, to spea k
with Wi lliam James, is " repugna nt to them." And so, speculative phi loso
phy, for its part, will not be able to prod uce any l i mita tion; it will not be
able to " dea l " with anything that can be defined as an " object," whether
that obj ect falls under the definitions of logic, ethics, rel igion, or art. The
" zest for existence" wi l l have been " refreshed," but not by the proposal
of a special aim defini ng the meaning or vocation of that existence. What
Whitehead hopes to have accomplished is, quite the contrary, to have
el iminated the specific definitions which, by trying to explain what mat
ters, that is, to found importance accord ing to special categories, reduce
our insistent, craving need that " it matter " to the trivia lity of the "guard
ianship" of a chosen definition.
    This craving matters. It must therefore be j ustified, but as the reader will
have understood, this cannot happen by contrast with something else. In
particular, it cannot be retranslated in terms of va lue, ethics, or freedom,
such that what happens to a rock, a swallow, or an electron may be said to
be " without importance." Where The Concept of Nature demanded that
everything we are aware of in perception be placed in the same boat, we
can say that the " verification of the scheme," or the test of its necessity, will
be that "all that communicates with experience " may matter. This, more
over, corresponds to the sudden halt imposed upon the definitional power
of logic. Whatever may be the subtle delights of discussions of the relations
between the statement " the cat is on the rug" and this cat that is on this
rug, whether the state of affa irs can verify the statement or remains sepa
rated from it by an impassa ble abyss, the fact is that " this" cat and " this"
rug matter little. It is enough to have a cat, whichever it may be, and a
carpet, whichever it may be, each one defined by its belonging to the sets
designated by the words "cat" and " rug." Both cat and rug, because they
present themselves as capable of being defined in isolation, in a way that
authorizes belonging to a well-defined set, confer a privileged role upon
logic and are therefore inappropriate for metaphysical statements. And the
same obviously holds true of reasoning of a deductive type.
   It has been remarked that a system of philosophy is never refuted; it is
only abandoned. The reason is that logical contradictions, except as tem
porary slips of the mind-plentiful, though temporary-are the most gra
tuitous of errors; and usually they are trivial. Thus after criticism, systems
2 3 8   COS M O LOGY




do not exhibit mere illogicalities. They suffer from inadequacy and inco
herence. Failure to include some obvious elements of experience in the
scope of the system is met by boldly denying the facts. A lso while a philo
sophical system retains any charm of novelty, it enjoys a plenary indul
gence for its failures in coherence. But after a system has acquired ortho
doxy, and is taught with authority it receives a sharper criticism. Its denials
and its incoherences are found intolerable, and a reaction sets in ( PR, 6 ) .
    The warrant of universality that a philosophical system bears with it i s
an effect of its worki ng, which i nevita bly implies the question of what
matters in a given epoch . When what a system has fai led to incl ude takes
on enough importance for this failure to be experienced as intolera ble,
the necessity collapses, and the system becomes a rbitrary. And the same
holds true when its incoherencies become intolerable. As we have seen,
Whitehead cha racterized his own speculative system by its ambition for
coherence, logic, and necessity, an ambition that is obviously insepa rable
from the diagnosis he has j ust laid down with regard to what makes a
phi losophical system be abandoned . This does not mean, however, that
his a mbition is that his own system should never be a bandoned . Indeed,
unl i ke logic, neither necessi ty nor coherence can be defined in terms of
wel l-specified demands. This is why logic is what one m ight call a " minor
vi rtue," which certa inly entails demands, but not obl igations. As soon as
there a re specifications, arrangements can a lways be made. In contrast,
coherence, like necessity, obl iges thinkers to think against the assurances
of language, against any meaning that presents itsel f as " going without
saying," and their abil ity to do so cannot be a bstracted from the way
their epoch enables them to think.
   " Coherence," as 'here employed, means that the fundamental ideas, in
terms of which the scheme is developed, presuppose each other so that in
isolation they are meaningless. This requirement does not mean that they
are definable in terms of each other; it means that what is indefinable in
one such notion cannot be abstracted from its relevance to the other no
tions. It is the ideal of speculative philosophy that its fundamental notions
shall not seem capable of abstraction from each other. In other words, it is
presupposed that no entity can be conceived in complete abstraction from
the system of the universe, and that it is the business of speculative phi
losophy to exhibit this truth. This character is its coherence ( PR, 3 ) .
   Once again, a circle: w e had started out from " ideas," but the quotation
leads brutally to the " entities," ta ken to be in the " system of the universe."
The ideas will, of course, have to allow us to define speculatively both
what an entity and the "system of the universe " are, but they also define
themselves as mere " entities " among others. Thei r relation of reciproca l
                                              H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   239




presupposition merely exhibits what is, speculatively, to be thought. And
once aga in, the circle is not logical, in the sense of those paradoxical state
ments in which thought " feels" that it is spinning its wheels. It is " prag
matic," in the sense that it brings the " matter" of speculative philosophy
into existence, what it risks, that toward which it leaps " with both feet off
the ground," with trust but with no solid certainty.
   It is usually said that the measure of the solidity of an intellectual con
struction is the solidity of its wea kest link. Yet this argument presupposes
the possibility of putting each link to the test separately, a nd it is precisely
against this possibility that Whiteheadian coherence affirms itself. Recip
roca l presupposition replaces the i mage of linking by that of Wil l i a m
James's revolving circle of dancers, w h i c h " makes true," or verifies, what
an isolated dancer would have refuted . The circle enables each movi ng
body not to fal l , al though the vertical projection of its center of gravity is
situated dra matica lly outside of its susta i ning base. Likewise, the ambi
tion of speculative coherence is to escape the norms to which experiences,
isolated by the logical, mora l, empiricist, rel igious, and other stakes that
privilege them, are subject. The point is to leave behind the sol id ground
designated by these stakes and take the risk of ignoring each dancer's cen
ter of gravity. Speculative philosophy must, in its very production, bring
to existence the possibil ity of a thought " without gravity," without a privi
leged direction, that " neutra l " metaphysical thought of which Science and
the Modern World had al ready risked the adventure.
   The dancers' spin is only possible because each of them trusts the others
" precursively " at the moment when they accept that their own body is put
off balance: they all accept to no longer define themselves by their own
means but by supposing the others, in the precise sense in which, taken in
isolation, these others would be quite incapable of giving what is asked of
them. None is a guarantor, as a pillar would be. Each one presupposes the
others. Likewise, the speculative concepts or " fundamental ideas," because
they cannot be rooted in any privileged experience, must circle with each
other. Taken together, they must affirm what speculative thought " trusts "
to think " without support." Coherence is what creates the specific space
of the spec ulative circle, what engages the " trust" without which there
is no leap, and what dema nds of the leap tha t it lea ve with both feet
the sol id ground of our special ized interests. That toward which there is
a leap must be expressed in neutral, " generic" terms, not with the clarity
that our interests always confer on the statements that correspond to
them.
  The verification of a rationalist scheme is to be sought in its general suc
cess, and not in the peculiar certainty, or initial clarity, of its first principles.
2 4 0   CO S M O LOGY




In this connection the misuse of the ex a bsurdo argument has to be
noted; much philosophical reasoning is vitiated by it ( PR, 8 ) .
    I n fact, the " first principles " a rticulated i n the scheme Whitehead pres
ents at the beginning of Process and Reality " do not speak of anything."
The scheme " speaks itself," as the production of a thinker struggling with
the question of coherence, a veritable abstract machine, carefully stripped
of any reference to the privileged cases in which we expect every phi los
opher: truth, responsibility, freedom, mind, matter, and so on . The scheme
is asignificant. To try to understand it " for itsel f" presents the same kind
of difficulty as trying to understand an i mmobile machine, where one
doesn't know from which end to look at it.
    Yet coherence itself, which obl iges the thinker and which the scheme
makes preva il, would, if it were an end in itsel f, be bereft of importance,
for what it cannot render explicit is precisely that in which it matters. If
the principles must be stated in generic terms, no leap is generic. In order
for imagination to leap, it needs to trust that something will come to meet
it. The knowledge produced by the coherent scheme must be actually " im
portant." Indeed, everything changes when the schematic machine is set
in motion, when its multiple movements produce the twofold discovery of
the articulation between its components and its effects on the situations
and statements it transforms. A radica l contrast, beca use, although the
scheme is mute, the sta tements or applications it induces are the warrant
of universality that Whitehead associates with necessity. And they will be
such a warrant by separating abstractions from their claim to universality.
Every abstraction, every right conferred upon a general ity, will communi
cate with an immediate, concrete state of a ffa i rs. One never has a right,
one takes it, and the question is not to criticize the taking but to correlate
it with what it produces.
    This is the case, for instance, with the " a rgument from the a bsurd,"
whose deplorable use in philosophy Whitehead criticizes, whereas it is an
essential resource for mathematical creation . Its use presupposes the
right, when faced by a contradiction, to try to find out which of the
premises of the reason i ng, or, most often, which of the premises laid
down by the tradition that the thinker inherits, is "guilty," as i f each one
could be modified separately. It is not a matter of criticizing the right that
philosophers thus clai m but of correlating it with its predictable effect:
each new philosophy becomes the one that was announced, despite, and
even by vi rtue of, its defects, by the lame ensemble of its predecessors,
until i t, in its turn, is abandoned .
    In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead hi mself had made use of the
argu ment from the absurd, but the aim was not to lend his reasoning the
                                           H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 1




authority of logic, or to confer upon it a consensual evidence. The aim
was to make a bsurd ity felt. " That's absurd! " is a cry that commits us, a
" cause" that will force us to take the least prudent " risks." In Process and
Reality, by contrast, there is no longer any " ca use," or else everything has
become a cause: every element of experience must be understood and
i nterpreted . And, to the greater perplexity of his readers, Whitehead has
put his own doctrine i nto action. Whereas in the course of writing his
book, he varied most of his definitions, he never proceeded to the slight
est self-criticism, or the least explanation of the contradiction to which a
definition would have led if it had not been modified. He limited himself
to "clarifying," by inserted additions, the way i n which the function of a
notion had to be understood because of its " relevance " for other notions.
And this is so even i f this "clarification " in fact modified the global
economy of the system in formation .
    According to Lewis Ford, the initiator of the compositional ana lysis
of Whitehead's work, up to twelve layers of successive writing may be
d istinguished in Process and R eality. In contrast to what was the case in
Science and the Modern World, we no longer have do only with more or
less massive and countable add itions, but also with raw, continuous in
terventions, the work of successive rereadings that wager on the possibil
ity tha t a given i nsertion, here, in the middle of this paragraph, will suf
fice to make the text's meaning slide for the reader as it "slid" for the
a uthor when he reread: " Yes, I agree, but . . . "
    And this time, the wager was won. Most readers and commentators
have assigned to the work as a whole a meaning which, according to Ford,
is that of the " last" layer, at the cost of wondering why Whitehead thought
it well to create so erratic an itinerary, why a given expectation or conse
quence, which certainly had to be produced, will indeed be affirmed, but,
perhaps, one hundred and fifty pages further on. Without doubt, no book
has ever been more inseparable from its index. And as far as I know, it has
not happened to any other book to undergo the strange treatment that the
American philosopher Donald Sherburne reserved for Process and Reality.
Tired of guiding his students through this labyrinth, he chose not to re
write it but to sort it and organize i t, and he published " another " book,
A Key to Whitehead's "Process and Reality," which is entirely made up of
rearranged fragments of Process and Reality. Some of its pages constitute a
mosaic whose pieces come from ten different pages of the original work.
   Sherburne wanted to turn Process and Reality into a book with which
one could " become acquainted," but the recomposition to which he pro
ceeded entailed a rather surprising change of nature, both of the text and of
its author. An author endowed with a well-defined thought, his own, sets
2 4 2   COS M O LOGY




forth his ideas, but what has disappeared is the back-and-forth between
concepts, and between concepts and empirical experience, the movements
of thought entangled in one another, one of which never becomes apparent
without appealing to others that have not yet been deployed. What the
readers miss is the test constituted for them by the perpetual implication of
what is explained within what explains it. What has been erased is the au
thor's incessant return upon his trade: Whitehead, rereading his own text,
operating not by yes or by no, but always by "yes, but." Instead of an au
thor discovering new, unforeseen problems, we must speak of an author in
the process of becoming, fashioned by the text he is fashioning. The author
has become anonymous, in the sense that he makes the distinction between
author and reader undecidable. The hand that writes the insertion is not
that of the author correcting himself, but that of the reader fashioned by
reading, or else that of the author-reader undergoing the series of thought
events that happen to him more than he produces them.
   If Whitehead is simultaneously the a uthor and reader of his own text,
the reading for which this text calls seems to me to be the one that turns
the reader into a uthor, inserting and prolonging, and zigzagging, like the
author, from "yes, but " to "but then." Even Lewis Ford , that parad igmatic
reader, seems to have undergone this highly particular effect. He could
not learn to distinguish and place in chronological order the insertions,
transpositions, reorganizations ( here, the vocabulary of historians of the
genome could be highly useful), without at the same time underta king to
prolong, that is, to modify. More generally, if the community of White
headians is indeed, as Deleuze wrote, a " sl ightly secret school," it is be
cause it cannot manifest i tself publicly under the academically prescri bed
form of doctoral dissertations competing for the most exact reading or
the tightest interpretation . As long as Whitehead's text remains alive, it
will transform its readers into coauthors, accepting the adventure of the
imagination to which the text calls us.
   Unlike my choice in the case of Science and the Modern World, there
fore, I do not see any great advantage in organizing my presentation
around a tale of the succession of Whiteheads at work in Process and
Reality. I will go even further, not hesitati ng to appea l to such later writ
ings as Adventures of Ideas ( 1 93 3 ) or Modes of Thought ( 1 93 8 ) . For the
movement of a coherence that discovers itself by inventing itself cannot
be narrated : it is pursued. And this is what I wi l l try to do, even when, on
several occasions, this pursuit will imply a " tale" of what has caused a
mutation in a mea ning or an articulation, a tale that will be my i nterpre
tation . In fact, when Whitehead went back to his work in the mode of
"yes, but " that a uthorized him to carry out i nsertions without rewri ting,
                                            H I C   C I R C U L I .   H I C   S A lT U S   2 4 3




he probably would often not have been able to " tel l " what had made him
"change his mind ." He had become capable of " feel ing " a new aspect of
the indefinable, that is, just as much, by contrast and retroactively, to feel
the definition of a notion as too " isola ted " from the others, or too slanted,
und uly privi leging certain types of experience.
   Philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical
first principles. Weakness of insight and deficiencies of language stand in
the way inexorably. Words and phrases must be stretched towards a gen
erality foreign to their ordinary usage; and however such elements of
language be stabilized as technicalities, they remain metaphors mutely
appealing for an imaginative leap ( PR, 4 ) .
   I n fact, the way I have j ust interpreted the composition o f Process and
Reality constitutes in itsel f an " i maginative lea p." Whitehead never ex
plained himsel f. He refused boredom, as Lewis Ford deplores, and con
sidered it boring to " start all over agai n," to write in order to say more
clearly what he had alrea dy understood . Yet as I have al ready empha
sized, other reader-interpreters, such as Jorge Luis Nobo, wager on sys
tematic unity, and become ind ignant at the fact that one could prod uce
the hypothesis that Whitehead is lazy, deceptive, and even mendacious
when he a ffirms in the preface to Adventures of Ideas the unity of the
undertaking of his three books, Science and the Modern World, Process
and Reality, and Adventures of Ideas. The differences, Whitehead affirms,
reflect the fact that each of these books completes wha t was omitted or
simplified in the other ones. Yet the argument is a bit weak . It is undeni
able that there is continuity, and it goes back much further than the three
books j ust mentioned . In the preface to Science and the Modern World,
Whitehead specifies that this book is the product of thoughts and read
ings pursued for years, without a ny intention of publication ( the author
thus excuses himsel f for the a bsence of reference to his sources, which
is indeed rather remarkabl e ) . But a s I have a l ready emphasized, to say
continuity is not the same as to say " ready-made thought," reeled off as
books provide the occasion, del iberately simpl i fying or omitting some
questions to spare his rea der. Whitehead never spared his readers, and
my reading wager, including narrativizations of what happened to White
head in the course of his writing, is intended to present a " becoming of
continuity."
   My read ing wager is thus that Wh itehead was not lying when he spoke
of the unity of his undertaking, but that, to an equal extent, he refused to
lie by erasing the traces of his i tinerary. The " boredom" he rejected is that
which is the price of the production of mendacious fiction, which wants
authors to establish the portrait of a world they claim to have understood
2 4 4   COS M O LOGY




once and for a l l . As far as possible from certai n ded uction, the text as I
will read it will come to exhibit what Whitehead, as we shall see, under
stands by a " route of occasions " : each occasion must be defined as " hav
ing to take i nto account," " heir," and " obliged," but each occasion has to
decide, for itself and for everything that will subsequently have to take it
into account, its own mode of accou nt. Each has to decide how it will
ha ve been obl iged by what it, de facto, inherits. " Yes, but. "
   To refuse to be bored when writing also means trusti ng the reader, that
is, trusting the becoming, undecidable in any case, that will decide " how"
the reader will read you, on the basis of what demands, that is, of what
experiences. The readers, for their part, a re thus called upon to leave be
hind the status of an ignoramus, faced by an a uthor who says what it is
appropriate to think. They have to head, in their turn, " down the road,"
a road on which thought stumbles at every step, and must invent itself all
over again. Yet throughout Process and Reality the point is indeed to re
invent, and first of a l l to reinvent, while prolonging it, the tradition in
which the book ta kes its place. A tradition which-and this is a test for
the contemporary reader-Whitehead does not hesitate to identify with
rationa lism.
   That we fail to find in experience any elements intrinsically incapable
of exhibition as examples of general theory is the hope of rationalism.
This hope is not a metaphysical premise. It is the faith which forms the
motive for the pursuit of all sciences alike, including metaphysics.
   In so far as metaphysics enables us to apprehend the rationality of
things, the claim is justified. It is always open to us, having regard to the
imperfections of all metaphysical systems, to lose hope at the exact point
where we find ourselves. The preservation of such faith must depend on
an ultimate moral intuition into the nature of intellectual action-that it
should embody the adventure of hope. Such an intuition marks the point
where metaphysics-and indeed every science-gains assurance from reli
gion and passes over into religion. But in itself faith does not embody the
premise from which the theory starts; it is an ideal which is seeking satis
faction. In so far as we believe that doctrine, we are rationalists ( PR, 42 ) .
   The author who diagnoses the point where metaphysics passes over
i nto religion is obviously not religious. Just as whirling dancers do not
need to be reassured that they will not fa l l by sprouting a third leg, for
insta nce, and restoring relevance to the laws of gravitation on each iso
lated body, phi losophers do not need to appea l to religion in order to
preserve their faith, unless they wish to found their hope, provide it with
a guarantor, and constitute it as an exclusive premise. Thus, if rational
ism becomes tha t on which hope in this world depends, it will justi fy
                                            H I C   C I R C U L I .   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 5




i mperatives and j udgments: " We must, or else despair will reign ." White
head, for his part, intends to trust movement as such, that is, at the same
time, to confer upon it its maximum amplitude, freeing it from the limits
a lways entai led by the concern for foundations. The hope of rationalism
concerns experience, not any kind of rel igious Beyond . The beyond of
experience is always merely i nsurance against the loss of that hope.
  Philosophy destroys its usefulness when it indulges in brilliant feats of
explaining away ( PR, 1 7 ) .
   If w e are rationa l ists, a n d because w e a re rationalists, w e m ust also
be empiricists, and take the demands of empi ricism to their extreme: to
accept as a constraint to deliberately abstain from the great resource
of philosophy, " explaining away," that is, by eliminative j udgment. This
"exploit " is not only a n act of violence committed against what we are
aware of, but also a betrayal of the rationalist hope. The power of hierar
chizing, of red ucing things to an i llusion, of disqualifying, rectifying, i n
short, the power t o j udge that makes the " masters " of thought, then takes
the place of the adventure of reason. The ideal no longer seeks satisfac
tion, at its own peril, but demands satisfaction.
   The regime of read ing and writing by which ideas are explained and
transformed will thus oscillate between what Whitehead calls the " ratio
nal side " and the " empirical side," two sides that render explicit the obli
gations associated with coherence and necessity.
   Logic and coherence express the rational side. As we have seen, the point
is first to refuse all arbitrary disconnection between principles. It demands
a refusa l of the principles that would derive their authority from privi
leged cases, to which they apply so clearly and d istinctly that they seem to
be necessary and sufficient: that is, capable in and of themselves of defin
ing that to which they apply. This is the case, for i nstance, with the two
substances, "extended " and " thinking," in Descartes: the authority of the
principles that define each of them needs nothing other than itself to ex
ist, and, a bove all, they do not need each other. This makes a virtue out of
what is, for Whitehead, a radical i ncoherence. " Cartesian dualism " is a
failure of thought, for its principles a re i ncapable of accounting for the
reason why a world that would be either purely material or purely spiri
tual would be inconceivable.
   What belongs to the " empi rical side" is what provides verification for
the scheme, the success against which Whitehead asks to be eval uated .
From the viewpoint of his interpretations, the scheme must be applicable
and adequate, and it is the practical coupling between adequacy and ap
plication that gives meaning to the need for a system " that bears i n itself
its own warrant of universality."
2 4 6   C O S M O LOGY




  Here "applicable " means that some items of experience are thus inter
pretable [ i n terms of the scheme], and "adequate " means that there are
no items incapable of such an interpretation ( PR, 3 ) .
   The d ifference between applicability and adeq uacy i s announced i n
terms that evoke logic, but in a rather paradoxical way. Indeed , the state
ment that there is no case that escapes interpretation is logica lly equiva
lent to the statement that every case is subject to interpretation, which, it
seems, makes the affirmation that some cases a re i nterpreta ble redundant.
The distinction between appl ica ble and adeq uate is therefore not logical ,
b u t practical.
   The demand for adequacy is the aspect of the empirical side that is di
rectly correlated with the rational side. It obl iges philosophers not to i n
voke any ca use a llowing them to elimina te, forget, treat as an exception,
or disqualify an element of experience. In particular, the scheme must be
able to embrace the very thing that would be invoked in the mode of a
challenge, contradiction, or scanda l : but what do you do with "this "? In
contrast, the a ffirmation "there exists   .  " is the aspect of the empirical
                                               .   .



pole that is correlated with the success of the scheme and with its verifica
tion. Applicability demands that some elements of our experience actualIy
lend themselves to the imaginative leap to which the wordi ng of the
scheme made a mute appeal, prod ucing by that very fact the experience of
their relevance. The cond ition of applicability, when it designates a set of
cases privileged by a metaphysical system, is always fulfilled . It is ful filled
equally well by any science, for every science makes the functions it pro
poses correspond to states of affa irs that exhibit what the function defines
in terms of the articulation between varia bles. Yet when it comes to the
" ra tional adventure ," the freedom with which each science "camps" on its
pri vileged examples, consti tuting them as a territory, becomes a trap.
Appl icability cannot communicate with any normative or even pragmatic
privilege. It cannot correspond to the identification of situations that " lend
themselves" to application ( as is the case, for i nstance, with the paradigms
described by Thomas Kuhn ) . Applica bility must be verified by an inven
tive dynamic, which creates the transformations of meaning and the
stakes required by adequacy.
  The adequacy of the scheme over every item does not mean adequacy
over such items as happen to have been considered ( PR, 3 ) .
   Let u s take, for instance, a statement that seems typica lly t o make na
ture bi furcate: "atoms truly exist ! " Here, one may be tempted to carry
out an act of censorship: "atoms, whether in the sense of Democritus or
in the sense of physics, a re not a n element of our experience, and must be
excl uded." Yet by the sa me movement, the experience of all those who
                                            H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 7




actively implicate atoms in their reasoning, and have succeeded in bring
ing them to "explain themselves," for instance, in saying how many there
are in 5 . 92 gal lons of hydrogen, would be censored. For physicists, chem
ists, engineers, the fact is that atoms henceforth " communicate " well
with their experience. It would be an attempt at disqua l i fication, at
tempting to catch the speakers in the act: they don 't know what they 're
saying, they believe what the scientists claim . . .
   In contrast, the statement " atoms truly exist" can and should be linked
to the pragmatic difference that its enunciation in a given situation is sup
posed to make, to the way it is intended to be taken into consideration. If
physicists are confronted by sociologists, who seem to them to shed doubt
on the objectivity of physical real ity, the statement can, in particular, com
municate with an experience of perplexity or shock, and atoms will surge
forth here not in the sense that they are implicated in a specialized reason
ing, but in their capacity as representatives of an "objective reality " : " You
cannot deny that atoms truly exist, independently of human knowledge! "
This challenge a lso communicates with an actual experience, but unlike
the chemist minding her own business, which relies on the possibility for
atoms to be counted, this experience reiterates the mode of differentiation
that made nature bifurcate, a mode which, with the " philosophical pri
mary qual ities," had made it bifurcate well before the physicists and
chemists found a way to make atoms intervene effectively and irrevocably
in their practice.
   If the scheme is adequate, it is thus the link between "you cannot
deny . " and "independently of human knowledge " that it will address
     .   .   .



and constitute as an example of application. And what is then at stake in
this applica tion is no longer the atoms of the physicists, the chemists, and
the engineers. Those atoms by no means exist independently of human
knowledge, since they have only been taken into account insofar as they
have surmounted the tests set up by these scientists, as they have satisfied
demands intended to make the difference that matters for scientists, be
tween free interpretation and interpretation veri fied in a reliable way by
its consequences. Quite the contrary, the point will be to present the
situation-j ust as concrete, but completely distinct-that has given its
meaning and passions to the strict separation between that which, exist
ing independently of human knowledge, should impose agreement be
tween humans and that which, dependent on such knowledge, would
forever be a source of conflict and ill usion.
   Here, then, think ing with Whitehead means learning to celebrate at
oms, but to celebrate them aga inst the bifurcation of nature with which
they are associated, against the breakage of the constitutive link between
2 4 8   C O S M O LOGY




these atoms and the insistent, passiona te urgency of the scientists who
have succeeded in creating the possibility of transforming them i nto inte
gra l and rel ia ble protagonists in their practices. These scientists were part
of an adventure of hope, trusting the possibi l i ty of defeating skepticism:
they and the atoms they succeeded in constituting as the respondents of
their statements require a description that does not stop where habitual
language stops. Whereas we usually have a choice between looking at the
moon while forgetting the finger pointing a t it, or looking a t the finger
and disqua lifying what is designated as releva nt merely to this designa t
ing gesture, the point is to succeed in affirming at the same time both the
finger and what this gesture requires and presupposes, and what this
gestu re gives us to perceive.
   Every science must devise its own instruments. The tool required for
philosophy is language. Thus, philosophy redesigns language in the same
way that, in a physical science, pre-existing appliances are redesigned. It
is exactly at this point that the appeal to facts is a difficult operation. This
appeal is not solely to the expression of the facts in current verbal state
ments. The adequacy of such sentences is the main question at issue. It is
true that the general agreement of mankind as to experienced facts is best
expressed in language. But the language of literature breaks down pre
cisely at the task of expressing in explicit form the larger generalities
the very generalities which metaphysics seeks to express ( PR, 1 1 ) .
   Philosophy is an experimenta l practice like physics, but it experi ments
on la nguage, tha t is, it devises concepts that will have no meaning unless
they succeed in bringi ng to existence those d imensions of experience that
usual statements can ignore, since these statements are insepa ra ble from
specialized thought. Such dimensions are req uired by the general ities of
metaphysics, as it endeavors to achieve neutra lity with rega rd to any spe
cia l ization. In both cases, scientific and speculative, experi mentation
ma kes " truth " and " p roductive practice " correspond. Whereas the exis
tence of atoms, for physicists, chemists, and engineers, has been " veri
fied " by a practice that produces situations in which those a toms have
received the power to impose themselves agai nst the hypothesis that they
are a mere i nterpreta tive fiction, the " truth " of Whiteheadian concepts,
from the events and objects of The Concept of Nature to the speculative
scheme of Process and Reality, is insepara ble from a transformation of
experience. This is wha t Whitehead ca lls " imaginative rationalization."
   We habitually observe by the method of difference. Sometimes we see
an elephant, and sometimes we do not. The result is that an elephant,
when present, is noticed. Facility of observation depends on the fact that
the object observed is important when present, and sometimes is absent.
                                             H I C   C I R C U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 4 9




   The metaphysical first principles can never fail of exemplification. We
can never catch the actual world taking a holiday from their sway. Thus,
for the discovery of metaphysics, the method of pinning down though t
to the strict systematization of detailed discrimination, already effected by
antecedent observation, breaks down. The collapse of the method of rigid
empiricism is not confined to metaphysics. It occurs whenever we seek the
larger generalities. In natural science this rigid method is the Baconian
method of induction, a method which, if consistently pursued, would have
left science where it found it. What Bacon omitted was the play of a free
imagination, controlled by the requirements of coherence and logic. The
true method of discovery is like the flight of an aeroplane. It starts from
the ground of particular observation; it makes a flight in the thin air of
imaginative generalization; and it again lands for renewed observation
rendered acute by rational interpretation. The reason for the success of this
method of imaginative rationalization is that, when the method of differ
ence fails, factors which are constantly present may yet be observed under
the influence of imaginative thought ( PR, 4-5 ) .
   The transformation o f experience must always be produced. I n other
words, the applications of the scheme are always local . They designate cases
which, at the moment when the plane lands, may seem to be privileged, but
the privilege is nothing other than the possibility thereby gained of a new
type of verification: the imaginative leap. " Imaginative rationa l ization " thus
makes Whiteheadian necessity correspond to a dynamics in which, accord
ing to the expression of Deleuze and G uattari, " to penetrate is to create."
   Correlatively, " reason " no longer corresponds here to any " principle of
parsimony " : the applications, as numerous as one may wish, will have to
take place in the concrete mode of "one by one." Never, therefore, accord
ing to Whitehead, will philosophy give to thought what navigational satel
lites have given aviation: an exhaustive and neutral coverage of the field of
experience. Deduction will never replace discovery, for the latter implies,
each time, a becoming that transforms both the person doing the describing
and what is described . The scheme does not dictate, but it " calls," and the
cal l always requires the elucidation of the concrete meaning of the situation
for the person exploring it, that is, an effective transformation by which the
problem raised by this situation ceases to be general, referring to questions
of right or legitimacy, to become "commitment," exhibiting the kind of im
portance it claims. The concepts devised by Whitehead are therefore in a re
lation of mutual presupposition with the "flight of experience," or the itiner
ary of an interpretation that constructs as it goes what is required by the
dimensions of experience it becomes capable of discerning, and whose im
portance it becomes capable of affirming.
2 5 0   C O S M OLOGY




  The primary advantage thus gained is that experience is not interro
gated with the benumbing repression of common sense ( PR, 9 ) .
   Whitehead's phrase is ambiguous: is common sense what represses or
what is repressed ? Most philosophers would opt for a repressive com
mon sense, but for Whitehea d, common sense is wha t is capa ble of
a ffirming " what we know" wi thout a l lowing itself to be bothered by the
question that poisons modern philosophy: " What can we know ? " ( MT,
74 ) . Specula tive philosophy, wh ich has the vocation of uniting imagina
tion and common sense ( PR, 1 7), thus pursues, with other means, the de
fense of common sense undertaken since The Concept of Nature agai nst
the repressive power of abstractions a nd the authority given special ized
theories, which makes our knowledge bifurcate.
    It goes without saying, however, tha t the " fl ight of experience " which
Process and Reality tries to induce through, with, and against language
has no critical or demystifying vocation with regard to the special ized
la nguages. The point is no more to set up immediate experience against
atoms tha n it is to establish the objectivity of the sciences against the zest
for existence, as refreshed by the importance of our immediate actions.
The point is to trace a " line of flight" with regard to these oppositions that
a re optimally expressed by philosophica l language. In particular, the gen
eralities at which Whitehead a ims cannot, therefore, leave intact any
" fact" that presupposes the grea t dividing line between subject and object,
upon which most phi losophical languages comment even when they seem
to justify it. Yet this flight has nothing to do with the takeoff of an inspira
tion, with the efficacy of an emergent conviction that sweeps away opposi
tions by the power of a general " vision," be it mystica l, poetic, or dia lecti
ca l. To be sure, the Whiteheadian scheme is, for Whitehead, a " matrix," but
here we must not understand matrix in a vital or fluid sense, as the spon
taneous source of a living thought beyond dea d oppositions. " Ma trix"
must be understood in the sense of mathematics: a device mute in itself,
representing nothi ng, calling for a leap of the imagination, tha t is, having
meaning only through the transformations, always " this" transforma tion,
produced by its " a pplications."
  The use of such a matrix is to argue from it boldly and with rigid logic.
The scheme should therefore be stated with the utmost precision and
definiteness ( PR, 9 ) .
   Whitehead h a d defined the ambition o f speculative phi losophy by
necessity, coherence, and logic. In the name of necessity and coherence,
logic, as we have seen, was stripped of its power to define, that is, also to
sort. Yet here it is in its rightful place, coupled with a udacity. Logic only
gi ves orders when it places thinkers in difficulty, when it obliges them to
                                             H I C   C I RC U L I ,   H I C   S A lT U S   2 5 1




go farther, when it forces them to create, i n cases where they thought they
could prolong an already formulated situation. The adventure of rational
ity i n Whitehea d 's sense, i n the sense of an i deal seeking satisfaction,
affirms the most radica l divergence from the critical or logical positi vist
ideal, which, since the latter is j udicial, does not seek but rather demands
satisfaction . And this divergence will find its full unfolding in what seems
to have been one of Whitehead 's last conceptual creations in the adven
ture of Process and Reality: the audacious, logical transformation of God
into an actual entity endowed with a " consequent nature." Another circle:
the truth of Whitehead's God presupposes that upon which this God will
confer his metaphysical j ustification, that is, the audacity and trust that
may al low destructive contradictions to be surmounted. Here, speculative
creation can be a udible only in its very movement: in that it presupposes
the realization of what is i ntended by its concepts, the elimination of the
" benumbing repression " that suggests that we carry out a heroic sorting
process, separati ng what is " rationally j ustifiable" from what is " vital." At
the cost of eliminating that which we might need, but which, we should
admit, is a matter of mere fiction.
   One might nevertheless fear the total izing character of the circle de
vised i n this way: the phi losopher would be the person through whom
the rea l i ty of what exists finall y accedes to i tself or to a finally coherent
explanation. Except that this expla nation is openly factitious, fa bricated
in a philosophical way, and in an experimental mode. It is only i mportant
to the extent that it succeeds, where the multiple experiences whose
scheme runs the risk of i nterpretation will patiently allow themselves to
be infected by the translations it carries out of them, and will accept the
contributions it proposes to them as important.
   The circle never stops turning. As a generic notion, importance i mplies
that the very meaning of what exists is proposed in pragmatic terms-the
production of what matters . But the i mportance of this proposition can
only claim a pragmatic j ustification-is the transformation of experience
produced by this proposition important?
   In literal terms, pragmatism thus proposes not so much a new definition
of truth as a method of experimentation, or construction for new truths.
To experiment is to consider theory as a creative practice. This is why it is
no longer a question of knowing what is true, but how truth comes about.
And this question is itself inseparable from another one: what does the
truth do? A true idea, in the pragmatic sense, is an idea that changes some
thing in a satisfactory way in the mind of the person thinking it. The true
idea is not only what one believes, does, or thinks, it is what makes us
believe, makes us act or makes us think (WJEP, 59 ) .
2 5 2   COSMOLOGY




   Pragmatism as a method for the production of new truths is no doubt
the key to the construction of Whitehead 's cosmology; yet this construc
tion is not the advent of the truth of the cosmos but merely one of its
"exemplifications." The production of speculative phi losophy belongs, in
its constra ints and its hopes, to a " particular human special ty," which is
certainly importa nt, but loca l : the adventure of rationa l ism. The starti ng
poi nt is thus "conti ngent" insofar as it designates its " milieu " : both wha t
obl iges Whitehead to think and what enjoins hope. Of course, Whitehead
seems to return toward a ma nner of thinking held to be i rrepa ra bly out
dated, but the movement he proposes, beca use it affirms itsel f to be an
adventure, produces the mime of a return operation. The " fl ight of expe
rience " reawa kens and activates wha t modern philosophy had renounced
in order to be a ble to attribute to truth the ability to defea t skepticism. It
constructs " true ideas," but thei r truth is exhibited as rela tive to this flight
and to the obligations (coherence, adequacy ) that make it exist. Correla
tively, the knowledge that the scheme should produce, and therefore the
transformation of experience it should induce, are not a reencounter with
a truth on which we have turned our backs but the production of a new
truth . This i mpl ies, in a circular way, the parad igmatic case for which
Whitehead 's scheme will have to exhi bit its appl ica ble character: it should
give mea ning to the production of new truths.
   A new exhi bition of the circle: the scheme proposes the ca tegories of a
world, but the categories do not define a rea lity independent of the pro
cess that produces this proposition. Wha t exhi bits a rea lity is the propo
sition and its effect, tha t is, the working of the scheme, the flight tha t is at
the same time tha t of experience and tha t which transforms experience,
and the point is thus less to define them tha n to bring them to existence.
The ca tegories make us think in a way that exhi bits the rea lity of which
they propose the definition. Whereas rea l ity becomes philosophica l, phi
losophy becomes rea l ization. Or, as Deleuze and Guatta ri proposed,
philosophy in this sense is doing for thought what a synthesizer does for
listening: "making audible the sound process itsel f, the production of
that process [ . . . I Philosophy is no longer synthetic j udgment; it is l i ke a
thought synthesizer functioning to make thought travel, make it mobi le,
make it a force of the Cosmos " ( M P, 424 ) .
   A s the reader will have understood, when describing how Whitehead's
scheme works, I have also presented my approach, the one dictated to me
by an author who becomes a reader, returning indefatiga bly to what he
has written in the mode of " Yes, but . . . " If the writing of Process and
Reality entangled " flights of experience" by Whi tehead himself, every
reading of Process and Reality can constitute, in i ts own way, an entangle-
                                           H I C   C I RC U L I ,   H I C   S A LT U S   2 5 3




ment of fl ights of experience, both experiencing and putting to the test the
scheme that induces it. Each flight is singular. The ones Whitehead carried
out as an author have the peculiarity of having produced, in their very
itineraries, the scheme that should constitute the matrix for the totality of
"Whiteheadian flights." Those we can attempt, more than sixty years after
his death, should not have understa nding what Whitehead thought as
their prima ry goal, but rather experiencing and putting to the test what it
means to " think with Whitehea d " i n our epoch, which he did not know,
   This flight has already begun, for The Concept of Nature and Science
and the Modern World are, in this perspective, certainly part of the same
history, and they report the first " landings " of the Whitehead ian flight. We
will, moreover, have occasion to revisit sites we have a l ready explored :
the question of l iving beings, that of bodies, that of perceptive experi
ence, and, of course, that of the bifurcation of nature, for they designate
what fi rst incited me to think with Whitehead, the possibility of descri b
ing in a different way the terrains popul ated by the abstractions to which
philosophica l thought has granted the power to j udge experience. Other
stagings were certainly possi ble, in particular those that would have al
lowed a more systematic reference to the keywords of philosophical tra
dition or to the treatment to which Whitehead subjects his predecessors.
But these would be other flights, produced by other readers, whom White
head had guided through other questions. No reading of Whitehead
such is my wager--can be " neutral ." All must combine experimentation
and putting to the test, thereby prolonging the adventure of an ideal
seeking satisfaction.
                                                            C H A P TER   S I X TEEN




Th i n k i ng under the Constra i nt of Creativity




          N ALL PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY
      I
                                             there is an ultimate which is ac
       tual in virtue of its accidents. It is only then capable of character
       ization through its accidental embodiments, and apart from these
accidents is devoid of actuality. In the philosophy of organism this ulti
mate is termed "creativity " ( PR, 7 ) .
   The ultimate, i n Whitehead 's sense, cannot, as w e recal l , b y any means
be identified with any form of transcendence, in the sense that any kind
of sublime or intrinsically unthinkable cha racter would be attached to it.
If there is transcendence, it is a " technica l " tra nscendence. The ultimate is
not the j udge of problems and opinions, but is rela tive to the way the
problem is framed and therefore li able to cha nge along with the problem.
This is why the Whiteheadian ultimate, whatever its avatars, will always
communicate with what is "without reason," not in the sense of the point
of col lapse of all reason but in the sense in which every reason is a solu
tion to a problem and cannot therefore transcend the " fact" that the prob
lem was raised in this way and not otherwise, communicati ng with some
determinate designation of the ultimate, and not with another.
   The Concept of Nature and Science and the Modern World already
designated distinct " ultimates," presupposed by all the statements corre
sponding to the problematic space that was to be constructed . In The
Concept of Nature, the ultimate designated the " mind," so that to nature
had to correspond a concept that would make it the " respondent" ca l led
upon by each of the " acci dental incarnations " of the mind, that is, by
each of the footholds that succeeded, implying, at least at a first a pproxi
mation, that d ue atten tion has been pai d to this nature. In Whitehead's
              T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N ST R A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 5 5




first metaphysica l construction, at the end of Science and the Modern
 World, God appea red as the ultimate, the foundation of all concrete ac
tua l i ty, in the double sense of the ultimate a rbitrary and of the ultimate
principle of determination: that which i s presupposed by any construc
tion of reason, and which we therefore ca nnot define in terms of reason.
The ultimate i rra tiona l i ty constituted by the existence of God was to be
followed, in Process and Reality, by what is neither rational nor irrationa l
as such, but has, with regard to this opposition, the neutrality of meta
physics. Whitehead baptizes this ultimate as "creativity."
    Creativity was a l ready presupposed by the definition of specula tive
phi losophy: it is what is presupposed and exhibited by the " i maginative
rationality " associated with the "flight of experience." As an ultimate, how
ever, it is not what will j ustify specula tive philosophy, nor what the latter
m ust thi n k . As is a ttested by Process and R eality's subtitle, "An Essay i n
Cosmology," it is t h e cosmos t h a t is henceforth t o b e concei ved. Not,
however-especially not-in the form of a " cosmic creativity." If White
head had made the reference to the cosmos his " ultimate," it would have
constituted a genuine tra nscendence, that in the name of which the actual
may be j udged, that which demands that thought recognize the d iffer
ence between cosmos and chaos, and place itself in the service of cosmos.
The ultimate would then consti tute, behind the scenes, the secret of rea l
i ty. This is why "crea tivity" is a bove all not " cosmic." In itself, it has no
d iscriminating character. Wi th regard to i t, everythi ng that happens must
be sa id in the same mode: that of the accident.
    Crea tivity thus has the neutra l i ty of metaphysics, and obliges the phi
losophy tha t defines it as " ultimate " to ta ke the risk that is proper to
empiricism : to a ffirm all tha t exists, all tha t happens, all that i s created
qua i rreducible to a reason higher than the decision to exist, to happen in
this and in no other way, to affirm a nd exhibit such-and-such a va lue and
no other. And i f everything we have to dea l with a t each i nstant, i nclud
i ng ourselves, must be said to be first and foremost a n " accident" of cre
ativity, a l l that is to be thought, i ncluding the hypothesis that we have
to do with a cosmos, must first be greeted with eq uanimity as a new a nd
interesting exemplification of crea tivity.
   "Creativity " is another rendering of the Aristotelian "matter," and of the
modern "neutral stuff. " But it is divested of the notion of passive recep
tivity, either of "form," or of external relations; it is the pure notion of
the activity conditioned by the objective immo rtality of the actual world
a world which is never the same twice, though always with the stable
element of divine ordering. Creativity is without a character of its own in
exactly the same sense in which the Aristotelian "matter " is without a
2 S 6   COSMOLOGY




character of its own. It is that ultimate notion of the highest generality at
the base of actuality. It cannot be characterized, because all characters are
more special than itself. But creativity is always found under conditions,
and described as conditional ( PR, 3 1 ) .
    In a sense, crea tivity as Whitehead has j ust presented it seems to pro
long the " eterna l activity " tha t Science and the Modern World had placed
under the banner of a triple envisagement. Yet the fra ming of the prob
lem has changed. Eterna l activity presented itself as an abstraction, and
as such was qualified by what it shou ld give mea ning to, by the possibili
ties of va lue, in contrast to the actua l ity that is value. Creativity, for its
part, is bereft of qualifications. In particular, we must avoid associating
it with a n underlying i mpulse. Its "activity " has nothing to do with the
power of a river, that always ends up destroying the banks that imprison
it. Creativity is " activity," but activity affirms, simultaneously and insepa
ra bly, the river a nd the banks without which there would be no river,
whether i t overflows or not.
    However, it wi ll be objected, creativity, according to Whitehead, can
only be descri bed as "condi tioned." And "condition " is never very fa r from
"expl ication " : the condition then allows the deduction of what is subject
to it. The river's course can be deduced from the rel ief of its banks. If, how
ever, in addition, wha t conditions creativity a lways entails " the stable ele
ment of divine ordering," how can we avoid reducing creativity to some
kind of more or less tracta ble materia l, whereas intelligibility, legitimacy,
rationa lity, and right refer to what conditions it?
    Let us leave the " divine ordering " in indeterminacy for the moment,
and limit ourselves to noting that it does not contradict what, in The Con
cept of Nature, was cal led " passage," both of nature and experience. Let
us affi rm right off the bat that the entire conceptua l construction pro
posed by the metaphysica l scheme of Process and Reality is an answer to
this problem : to express in concepts wha t condi tions crea tivity, in a mode
that does not make the condition a principle of explanation; to create the
concepts that make what is produced under a condition converge with
what produces its own reason. And it is this problem that Whitehead
begins to solve when he selects the terms that wi ll intervene in the fi rst of
the four series of ca tegories included i n the scheme, the " ca tegory of the
ultima te." This selection is risky, for these terms, if they ca me to com
municate in a privi leged way with special ized characteristics, including
those that correspond to the cosmic hypothesis, would sea l the defeat of
the attempt.
  "Creativity," "many," "one " are the ultimate notions involved in the
meaning of the synonymous terms. These three notions complete the
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   CONSTR A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 5 7




Category of the Ultimate and are presupposed in all the more special
categories.
   The term "one " does not stand for "the integral number one," which is a
complex special notion. It stands for the general idea underlying alike the
indefinite article "a or an," and the definite article "the," and the demonstra
tives " this or that," and the relatives " which or what or how." It stands for
the singularity of an entity. The term "many " presupposes the term "one,"
and the term "one " presupposes the term "many." The term "many " conveys
the notion of "disjunctive diversity "; this notion is an essential element in the
concept of "being." There are many "beings " in disjunctive diversity [ . . . J
   " Creativity " is the principle of novelty. A n actual occasion is a novel
entity diverse from any entity in the "many " which it unifies [ . . . J
   "Together " is a generic term covering the various special ways in
which various sorts of entity are "together " in any one actual occasion.
Thus "together " presupposes the notions " creativity," "many," "one,"
"identity," and "diversity." The ultimate metaphysical principle is the ad
vance from disjunction to conjunction, creating a novel entity other than
the entities given in disjunction. The novel entity is at once the together
ness of the "many " which it finds, and also it is one among the disjunctive
"many " which it leaves; it is a novel entity, disjunctively among the many
entities which it synthesizes. The many become one, and are increased by
one [ . . . J
   Thus the "production of novel togetherness " is the ultimate notion
embodied in the term " concrescence." These ultimate notions of "produc
tion of novelty " and of "concrete togetherness " are inexplicable either in
terms of higher universals or in terms of the components participating in
the concrescence. The analysis of the components abstracts from the con
crescence. The sole appeal is to intuition ( PR, 2 1 -22 ) .
   A s we can see, Whitehead proceeds with the greatest precaution. The
creator of axioms is at work, demanding as general as possible an ar
ticulation between the primary terms of his system, those that are pre
supposed by metaphysical statements and will never be explained by
them. At this stage, therefore, it is i mpossible to explain, for every expla
nation will imply the primary terms. It is nevertheless possi ble to accen
tuate, and, in the present case, to accentuate the contrast between the
many, placed under the banner of d isj unction, and the one, placed under
the banner of conj unction ( togetherness ) . The fact that we ha ve to deal
with primary terms means that one will never ask why there is a con
j unction, that is, how i t comes about that the many can become one.
What will have to be characterized is the " how," which Whitehead re
lates d irectly, qua " relative," to the " one." This certai nly indicates that
2 5 8   COSMOLOGY




there cannot be a genera l " how," that is, that every conj unction is, as
such, " new."
   Creativity is the principle of novelty, and a l l the primary terms White
head a rticulates have the vocation of giving meaning to this definition.
Thus, the fact that the many are characterized by disj unction excludes a
"together" that would explain the unity of their synthesis, or their together
ness produced by the new unity. And the fact that the latter, once pro
duced, shou ld be added to the many in the mode of disj unction excl udes
any dominant position of the synthesis with regard to what it synthesizes.
Every synthesis is " new," and everything must be started all over again
every time.
   Novelty thus has no need of being defended : it is generic. All production,
whatever it is, constitutes, by the same token as any other, an "accidental
incarnation " of creativity. The "many " have become "one" in this way, and
not otherwise. No higher universal will al low the resorption of this " fact."
In other words, creativity, which is neutral, is not to be celebrated . On the
contrary, it induces a rather peculiar humor. For both the "calculating
thought" denounced by Heidegger as " forgetfulness of being " and its own
meditative remembrance a re testimonies to creativity. Creativity is j ust as
much affirmed by the reasoning that Bergson condemns as the spatializing
negation of duration as by the harmonic intuition of that duration .
   Whitehead ian humor is formidable, and deeply annoying, because it
cancels any dramaturgy of thought. In his terms, when Bergson writes, for
instance, that " time is an invention or it is nothing at all," the invention of
this grandiose a lternative should be saluted as new, as a purely Bergsonian
"cry." In contrast, the possibility of taking the a lternative itself seriously,
or of conferring upon it the ability to close the philosophical debate, may
be ignored . It is the cry itself that bears witness and is added to the terms
of the opposition it articulates. What Bergson calls " invention " is not cre
ativity but creativity "on condition," the conditions that correspond to the
specialized categories designating what he calls " intuition."
   The fact that creativity, as an ultimate, cannot be conceived as such,
that we can never characterize it " in itself" but a lways on condition, that
we can descri be it only as cond itioned : all this by no means constitutes
"limits of thought " in the sense that the term " l imit" wou ld imply the
possibility of transgression or the evocation of The One for whom such
limits do not exist. What is unknowable is unknown, and any pretended
transgression will constitute another accidental "creature " of creativity,
cond itioned by the terms that define the limit that, in this case, matters.
Instead of a l i mit, it is fitting to speak of an obl iging constraint. As an
ulti mate, creativity obliges the thinker to a ffirm that all the verbs used,
              T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   TH E   C O N STR A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I TY   2 5 9




" to characterize," " to have to deal with," " to descri be," themselves pre
suppose creativity. As soon as a situation matters enough for us to be
tempted to see in it an " example of creativity," the generic terms " one"
and " many" will have been specified, and thought will be conditioned by
special ized categories, those that matter for this situation . Once again,
this specification is not a screen, and does not sepa rate us from an inacces
sible truth. It is neither a source of nostalgia nor an object of denuncia
tion, nor, above all, the instrument of a critique of the fal lacious character
of a l l explanation. If creativity intervened as a critical instrument, it would
be characterized, ena bling such-and-such a position to be defended against
such-and -such another, whereas both a re j ust as much its accidents. As a
constra int, the neutrality of creativity thus has as its first effect to turn us
away from the temptation always constituted for thinkers by a position
that a ffi rms itself to be " neutra l," defining them as " not participa ting "
in a deba te, which they will then be a ble to adjudicate. In Whitehead's
speculative ph i losophy, there is no position of adj udicator, or else every
"creature of creativity " is the carrying out of an adjudication, and adju
dicators themselves are the one as unifying the many.
   Correlatively, creativity obl iges us to think of conditions. There is not,
nor can there be, any tension between creativity and condition ing, nor
even between novelty and explanation, for novelty is inseparable from
the way something is expla ined by something, the way a being is cond i
tioned by what Whitehead often calls its " socia l environment." Nothi ng
is more al ien to Whitehead than the strategy of Descartes' " radical doubt,"
which underta kes to make a clean sweep of a ny inference that could be
recognized as ficti ve or mendacious but forgets a l l that is presupposed by
this very approach, incl uding the fact that his decision and his research
presuppose, at the very least, words to formulate the legitimate reasons
to reject, one a fter the other, everything that is no longer to be believed .
Descartes' doubt requires the special ized social envi ronment which, most
creati vely, it undertakes to j udge.
   The data upon which the sub;ect passes ;udgment are themselves com
ponents conditioning the character of the ;udging sub;ect. It follows that
any presupposition as to the character of the experiencing sub;ect also
implies a general presupposition as to the social environment providing
the display for that sub;ect. In other words, a species of sub;ect requires
a species of data as its preliminary phase of concrescence [ . . . 1 The spe
cies of data requisite for the presumed ;udging sub;ect presupposes an
environment of a certain social character ( PR, 203 ) .
   You think you a re free to interrogate what you have to dea l with, like
a j udge demanding an explanation . And you come to ask yourself i f the
2 6 0   COSMOLOGY




explanations you constantly, and successfully, provide refer to a world
whose reasons it renders explicit, or if they merely refer to your own inter
pretations. But it is you yourself who, by interpreting, prod uce yourself
from this world which you interpret. And the very act that produces you
qua j udging bears witness, by itself, to the fact that the d isj unct many
you gather under the unity of a judgment were indeed ( socially) lia ble to
turn you into a j udge.
   "I'm the one who asks the questions ": in fact, however, it is already the
dissolved self of the one being questioned that speaks through his tor
turer ( D R, 255 ) .
    Perhaps i t i s the experimental sciences that constitute the most dramatic
example of this co-creation between judgment and social environment. It
is in reference to these sciences that Kant celebrated as the " Copernican
revolution " the "discovery " that it was not fitting to learn from nature as if
it was a master, that the knowing subject was rather submitting it to the
question, like a judge interrogating a prisoner according to the categories
that allow offense and delinquent to be identified . Kant might well have
believed he had stabilized the relations between subject and object, giving
the sciences their horizon, that of a monotonous el ucidation of the way in
which the object is indeed, once and for all, determined by the categories of
the subject, but scientists cannot, any more than judges or torturers, pre
vent their decree from being taken up into new adventures. Whatever may
be the reasons mobil ized by the judgment, or the claims that accompany it,
these reasons and these claims will come to be added to the indefinitely
proliferating cohort of the many available for a new unification, condition
ing a new creation. The very justifications they will invoke in order to claim
to transcend apparent diversity toward what conditions that diversity will
condition the creative advance, adding to the disparate diversity that will
constitute the problematic terrain for new syntheses.
    In fact, Kant was extremely creative: he had to be, in order to turn Gali
leo, the prototype of the scientist who has carried out his Copernican revo
lution, into a " knowing subject" testifying to a generality. If there is one
case that exhibits itself a vector of novelty, it is indeed the case of the two
fold " prod uction " of a Galileo discovering that he is capable of telling the
difference between fiction and scientific statement, and a new type of data
( " experimental " ) that confers this capacity upon him. The production of
Galileo the experi menter, and of his data, is inseparable from the new envi
ronment constituted, as soon as they are produced, by "the experimental
laboratory," that is, in this case the new type of apparatus that conditions
this double production, the inclined plane that transforms the way a ball
rolls into an ( " objective" ) argument judging away what is then nothing
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N STR A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 1




more than Aristotle's "opinion." And the entire experimental adventure of
physics, even if it can be placed under the banner of the ever-renewed
" face-to-face " between " judge" and " na ture," which this judge summons
to answer his questions, a lso narra tes the fa brication of the increasingly
sophisticated social environments required by that face-to-face. In so-called
high energy physics, the face-to-face in question needs years of preparation
and demands a meticulous articulation between an indefinite number of
instruments, the creation of languages intermed iary between " data " and
theories, the mobilization of hundreds of researchers, the invention of a r
guments suitable for convincing politicians and inspiring the public, and so
on. Yet the most elementary judgment, the one carried out by a (condi
tioned ) pigeon when it pecks at circular forms and not the others, also re
quires an indefinite and disparate number of stabilized relations, a hybrid
social environment intermingling the pigeons and the psychologists who
undertake to pass judgment on the pigeon's capacity to judge.
    As a principle of novelty, creativity does not impose any limit on expla
nation but merely suggests that explanation not forget the social environ
ment that simultaneously conditions it, and conditions what is proposed
as explica ble. This does not mean, however, that an explanation is " rela
tive " in the sad sense in which relativism announces the ironic and disen
chanted equivalence of a l l explanations, hel d to be eq ually fictitious. For
this would sti ll be to appeal-only to declare it impossible-to an ideal
that cannot be stated by any language obliged by creativity, and that does
not communicate with any actual experience. What is unknowable is
unknown . "The only appeal," Whitehead concl udes, " is to intuition " : not
to Bergsonian intu ition, which resists intellectual constructions, but to
the constructed intuition I have characterized as the " fl ight of experience."
Yet this flight a lso exempl ifies creativity in a way that is cond itioned by a
"social environment" : the environment constituted by the scheme, and
the demands for coherence to which it responds.
    In Process and Reality, the call to intuition will be produced in a way
that counteracts a ny confusion between creativity as an ul timate relative
to the problem articulated by the scheme, and any romantic figure of
emergent, spontaneous creativity " without a reason ." To avoid such con
fusion, it is not enough, as I have emphasized, to a ffirm that creativity is
always conditioned. The image of a pipe channeling the great creative
flow, adjusting its emergent activi ty in a passive way, would still be pos
si ble. We must affirm the impossibil ity of distinguishing between passive
cond itioning and active prod uction . And it is this affirmation that will be
sounded by the "ontological principle," taking up the pa radigmatic ratio
nalist cry: " noth ing happens without a reason ! "
2 6 2   COSMOLOGY




  According to the ontological principle there is nothing which {loats
into the world from nowhere ( PR, 244 ) .
    Officially, the ontologica l principle corresponds, within the scheme, to
the eighteenth category of explanation. As its na me ind icates, however, it
is by no means one category among others, and it receives, moreover, a
large number of distinct formulations in the course of the text, conferring
on it a differently accentuated relevance each time. The version I have
j ust cited is opposed to the appeal to a " spontaneity" that comes from
nowhere. This is also the aim of the formulation that a ppears in the eigh
teenth category, but this time it forbids, in a more explicit way, that cre
ativity or any other generic principle be invoked by way of a reason .
  This ontological principle means that actual entities are the only rea
sons; so that to search for a reason is to search for one or more actual
entities ( PR, 24 ) .
  Since an actual entity is always " this" entity, n o reason can have a gen
era l value. The ontologica l principle thus implies that there is no stable
difference between expla nation and description, but only distinctions
dea ling with what matters, and with the environments required by what
matters . Correlatively, other formulations emphasize, for their part, that
what must " be explained " exhaustively in terms of " its " reasons, that is,
the way in which " the many become one," is a " decision."
   The ontological principle asserts the relativity of decision; whereby
every decision expresses the relation of the actual thing, for which a deci
sion is made, to an actual thing by which that decision is made ( PR, 43 ) .
   The ontological principle declares that every decision is referable to
one or more actual entities, because in separation from actual entitles
there is nothing, merely nonentity- " The rest is silence " ( PR, 4 3 ) .
   A s a " category o f explanation," the ontologica l principle may seem to
concern "our" sea rch for reasons, ask ing us not to refer to genera lities,
to abstractions, to anything that claims to transcend " this" world-or, at
least, not to do so in ignorance of the fact that in no case will we arrive,
in this way, " beyond empirical appearances." The ontological principle
thus takes on an "epistemological " import, demanding that every expla
nation exhi bit itself as a testi mony to creativity, that is, to this extent,
contingent, accidenta l, and properly " democratic." No explanation can
lay claim to a higher instance of j ustification than what makes a d iffer
ence for it, what matters for it. Yet when it comes to " decision," the prin
ciple takes on a truly ontological import, an import that will deprive the
rationa list cry " nothing is without a reason " of all its epistemological
power, as it will oppose any possibil ity of esta blishing communication
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N STRA I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 3




between " reason " and "submission to a deduction." Everything has a
reason, but everything is equally decision. Rational ity is usua lly cele
brated, or criticized, because it intends to subject everything that happens
to reasons. Whitehead is fully rational ist, but he takes this rational i ty to
the l imit, and therefore makes it change its nature.
  To ensure the divorce between reason and submission, however, it is not
enough for reason and explanation to divorce, as is shown by the Lei bniz
ian operation: the divorce between reason and human explanation did
not prevent Lei bniz from invoking a God to make reason and explanation
converge. The divorce will be actual, however, if among the reasons that
ma ke a being exist, there appears the decision of this bei ng itself. Among
the actual beings that a re the only reasons, the ontological principle will
include the actua l entity that " decides for itself" : thus, and not otherwise.
  The ontological principle can be expressed as: All real togetherness is
togetherness in the formal constitution of an actuality ( PR, 32 ) .
   For Whitehead, " reason " does not communicate with " submission." A
being becomes determined by determin ing its reasons: such is the mean
ing of what Whitehead ca lls " the formal constitution of an actuality."
Whereas the notion of submission impl ies that the " reasons" have in
themsel ves the power of determining what they will be the reason of, this
power, accord ing to the ontologica l principle, must itself have a reason :
only in the process of constitution of the entity of which they will be
reasons a re reasons a rticulated, " put together," in a way that confers
upon each of them its determinate power.
   Let us think, for instance, of a judge's decision . This decision must be
based on multiple considerations, and yet the j udge is anything but sub
missive, for it is the decision itself that has assembled these considerations,
and presented them in a way that makes the judgment their consequence.
Yet this does not make j udge's decision arbitrary. It is "conditioned," but
it is the judgment itself that determines the relation between the decision
and what conditions it. Whitehead can therefore accept that everything
has a reason, that nothing happens without a reason, that nothi ng "comes
from nowhere " : yet all the while specifying that, of course, nothing is a
reason independently of the way in which a decision produces it qua the
reason for this decision or this actuality.
   Every decision is thus explained by its reasons, and as such it exempli
fies creativity, the way in which " the many become one." Creativity has
then nothing to do with a form of " s upplement of soul," of " subjective
eva l ua tion " of what is given, adding a touch of origi nality to what al
ready holds together. It is presupposed by this very " holding-together."
2 6 4   C O S M O LOGY




Nothing holds together independently of a decision, which is played over
again each time with regard to the " how," with rega rd to the way it will
hold together.
   The ontological principle will place the rational pole of Whitehead's
system under a constraint that forbids it any facility, any shortcut to the
transcendence of what might claim to be indubitable, to go without saying,
holding together by itself, without risk, without adventure. The principle
will demand reasons, while forbidding that the slightest authority be con
ferred upon reasons. If you're looking for a reason, you are looking for an
actual element that conditions creativity, but don't forget that the very
way this element cond itions creativity affirms this creativity j ust as much,
for it is the decision through which what has produced itsel f as "one " has
produced its reasons that has determined the actual role played by this
conditioning.
   In a sense, an actual occasion is causa sui ( P R , 8 6 ) .
   Neither creativity a s a n ultimate, nor the ontological principle have as
sumed their full i mport independently of the process of writing Process
and Reality. The smart reader, who has not forgotten the "divine order
ing," a stable element cond itioning creativity, will have already understood
that this process of determination must have involved the question of God .
If the ontological principle is to take on its full import, God will have to
figure among the actual entities "that are the only reasons," for otherwise
he would be metaphysically useless. What is more, like all other entities,
God will have to " make a difference " without having the power to define
the difference he will make. In fact, in the conceptual adventure constituted
by the writing of Process and Reality, the ontological principle is insepara
ble from the construction of the concept of God, until the final decision, in
which Whitehead will propose a divine experience that would be, in its
way, the "conseq uence " of the constitutive decisions of the (other ) actual
entities. We will return to this point, but let us emphasize already that
without this decision, an eventual "d ivine ordering " would have consti
tuted an infraction against the ontological principle. In order not to corre
spond to a form of transcendental "togetherness," this ordering will have
to have actual entities as its reasons; that is, these entities will have to be
reasons for God . But this is possible only i f God himsel f becomes, produc
ing these reasons as " his" reasons.
   Perhaps we can imagine Whitehead at the mo ment when he came to
conceive of this major phi losophico-theological innovation. He did not
and this is a constant element of his position-wa nt any part of a creator
God . Moreover, when he decided to ma ke creativity the " ultimate " af-
             T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O NSTR A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 5




firmed by his system, he had a l ready been forced to a bandon a possibil ity
he had envisaged in 1 926, in Religion in the Making: that of God as a
" principle," " idea l entity," or " formative element," that is, an a uthority
bereft of individual ity, a name for an aspect of the creative advance of the
worl d . Since creativity is the ul timate, none of its aspects can any longer
be named, that is, privileged . God can no longer be a principle, and if
Whitehead needs him, he wil l have to be conceived, l ike everything else,
as an "accident of creativity."
   Whitehead had thus arrived at the hypothesis, which subsists in many
pages of Process and Reality, that God m ight be actual and not temporal,
required as a " reason " for the actuality of new possibilities, and identi
fied as such with the eternal envisagement of all ideal possibilities. Sud
denly, however, he decided to ta ke the decisive step.
   Opposed elements stand to each other in mutual requirement. In their
unity, they inhibit or contrast. God and the World stand to each other in
this opposed requirement. God is the infinite ground of all mentality. The
World is the multiplicity of finites, actualities seeking a perfected unity.
Neither God, nor the World, reaches static completion. Both are in the
grip of the ultimate metaphysical ground, the creative advance into nov
elty ( PR, 348-3 49 ) .
   The very cry o f coherence resounds here. Retroactively-for i t i s always
retroactively that a position is sensed as incoherent-the nontemporal God
who has j ust disappeared can indeed be diagnosed as a poor solution; a
strong-arm move or an ad hoc response, since this God has no other role
than to respond to a difficulty. For Whitehead, an actual but nontemporal
God had no other " reason" than to act as a remedy for the confrontation
between two kinds of reason: those designated by the ontological princi
ple, referring to the actuality of decisions already taken, "objectively im
mortal," and those that imply a reference to what is possible, without
which our experience could never be interpreted adequately but merely
red uced�ven if, according to Spi noza, such reduction is the path to wis
dom. Coherence, however, is little concerned with wisdom, but it demands
the reciprocal presupposition: if we need God, he must need us. The " deci
sion " to endow God with a consequent nature will thus mark the passage
from the voluntarist postulate to the positive articulation of reasons: con
frontation becomes reciprocal presupposition .
   God can no more be conceived independently of the World than the
World can be conceived independently of Him. A moment of properly
Whiteheadian decision, but also of perplexity: will everything have to be
rewritten ?
2 6 6   C O S M O LOGY




   In the subsequent discussion, "actual entity " will be taken to mean a
conditioned actual entity of the temporal world, unless G od is expressly
included in the discussion. The term "actual occasion " will always ex
clude God from its scope ( PR, 8 8 ) .
   This "warning " brutally concludes a d iscussion ( inserted late) o f how
the divine works. In the history of phi losophical literature, it proba bly
constitutes the most discrete signa l of a major conceptua l upheaval ever
emitted . Whitehead refused to get bored, and no doubt renounced verify
ing every occurrence of the term "actua l entity." For some of them, from
now on, can bea r j ust as much upon God as upon actua l occasions, since
God is no longer merely a nontempora l accident of creativi ty, but, l i ke all
other entities, a "creature of creativity." Rather than proceeding to an
exha ustive sorting process, Whitehead thus limited hi mself, where it was
importa nt, to pointing out explicitly that God is included in the sta te
ment. In the other cases, " by default," it is better for the reader to think
exclusively of the entities that belong to the " temporal world."
   Not until the fifth part of Process and Reality will Whitehead deploy
freely, poetica lly, almost prophetica lly-what his own creation has made
of h i m . We w i l l get to this, but here the point was, fi rst and foremost,
to poi nt out a spectacular example of creation, carried out under the
twofold constra int of the ontologica l principle and the appetite for co
herence. To ma ke God a creature may constitute a revolutionary idea for
theology. Here, this mutation imposes itself as a conseq uence of White
headian speculative working cond itions. It may be why Whitehea d did
not show off this i nnovation . Instead, we can easily imagine Whitehead
perplexed, wondering whether he will be forced to intervene and make
corrections every time God a ppears in a textua l stratum dating from the
time when he was a " nontemporal accident," then ma king up his mind in
accorda nce with the " formul a " of Melville's Bartleby, celebrated by De
leuze: "I would prefer not to."
   Each original is a powerful, solitary Figure that overflows every ex
plainable form: it launches flaming bolts of expression, which mark the
obstinacy of a thought without images, of a question without an answer,
of a logic that is extreme and without rationality. Figures of life and of
knowledge, they know something inexpressible, they live with something
unfathomable. There is nothing general about them, and they are not
particular: they escape knowledge and defy psychology. Even the words
they pronounce overflow the general laws of the language ( "the presup
positions "), as much as the simple particulars of speech, since they are
like the vestiges or the projections of an original, unique, primary lan
guage, and they carry all of language to the limit of silence and of music.
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N ST R A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 6 7




There is nothing particular about Bartleby, nothing general either: he is
an Original (CC, 1 06 ) .
  A n original never wants t o b e an original, unless w e a re t o pl unge i nto
the masq uerade of Oedipal conflicts . Creators should never wish them
selves to be " creative," a lthough it is sad to have to repeat this some
times. It is proba ble that Whitehead-who-refused-to-be-bored, but who,
every time he tried to explain himself, made the proliferation of "yes,
but " and "but then " start up aga in at some point of his explanation, did
not want to " defy psychology " or impose upon his reader the terror of
an unfathoma ble experience. I f he did not j udge it to be important, or
perhaps even desirable, to take his reader by the hand, it is probably
because what he fi rst wanted to communicate was the contrast between
what "can " be communicated and what speculative language, beca use it
must prod uce the genera l izations which every special ized language does
without, " must" communicate: the i mpossibility of ever defining what
one " means."
   The point is that every proposition refers to a universe exhibiting some
general systematic metaphysical character. Apart from this background,
the separate entities which go to form the proposition, and the proposi
tion as a whole, are without determinate character. Nothing has been de
fined, because every definite entity requires a systematic universe to supply
its requisite status. Thus every proposition proposing a fact must, in its
complete analysis, propose the general character of the universe required
for that fact ( PR, 1 1 ) .
   It pertains to speculative propositions to " make us feel " what is, in fact,
a generality that bears upon every proposition: it pertains to them to pro
pose not a fact, opinion, state of a ffairs, or even a vision of the world, but
the universe required by thought itself prod ucing that proposition, a uni
verse whose general, systematic character is none other than the very
experience of thought as a " leap," productive both of the thinker and of
what is to be thought. Speculative propositions do not designate a world
that exists prior to them, but, quite the contrary, they bring into existence
what Deleuze and Guattari cal l an " i mage of thought," in the sense that
such an image coincides with a " thought without images," that is, without
a stopping point that makes words and things communicate in a satisfac
tory way. No longer the thought of someone a bout something, but thought
experiencing itself as anonymous, as if prod uced not by the thinker but by
its very movement.
   According to Deleuze and Gua tta ri, a n " i mage of thought " is not
described but is produced in the very movement in which thought ex
ceeds the images tha t fixate i t, to itself become production-sensation, an
2 6 8   COSMOLOGY




"a bstract machine" prod ucing concepts that i nhabit what is, in itself,
neither thought nor thinkable, the " plane of imma nence."
    The plane is like a desert that concepts populate without dividing up.
The only regions of the plane are concepts themselves, but the plane is all
that holds them together. The plane has no other regions than the tribes
populating and moving around on it. It is the plane that carries out con
ceptual linkages with ever-increasing connections, and it is concepts that
carry out the populating of the plane on an always renewed and variable
curve.
    The plane of immanence is not a concept that is or can be thought but
rather the image of thought, the image thought gives itself of what it
means to think, to make use of thought, to find one's bearings in thought
[ . . . ) The image of thought implies a strict division between fact and
right: what pertains to thought as such must be distinguished from con
tingent features of the brain or historical opinions (QPh, 3 9-40 ) .
   " Creativity " would thus b e a Whiteheadian name for what Deleuze
a nd Guattari ca l l the " plane of immanence ." On this plane, an event as
seemingly important as a radical mutation of the concept of God is merely
a new linkage, of which Whitehead is not the a uthor but the operator,
who does not share his writing between before and after, but merely im
poses the emergence of new folds i n the ever-va riable curvature of a
chapter, a pa ragra ph, or even a sentence. While the insertions populating
the text multiply, thought loses the certa inty of its images to experience
what it means to think.
  If philosophy begins with the creation of concepts, the plane of imma
nence must be considered prephilosophical, not in the way in which one
concept may refer to others, but in the way concepts themselves refer to
a non-conceptual comprehension (QPh, 43 ) .
   The plane o f imma nence designates the imperative-that which insists
and demands to be thought by the philosopher, but of wh ich the philoso
pher is not in any way the creator. The plane does not command con
cepts, and does not connect them without them making its curvature
va ry. This is why the appropriate name for the plane of imma nence that
haunts the philosophers' thought may mutate. It is not that what ha unts
them has "cha nged," like one changes one's mind; rather, the zone of con
nection that constituted the site for this name has been brutally i ntro
verted, imposing new operations of l inkage, causing the emergence of new
accentuations of what is insistent. Thus, we can affirm that "organism"
was the first name for the Whiteheadian plane of immanence. It desig
nates the moment in which " what pertains to thought" can be ca l led
" trust." The organism is insepa ra ble from the diagnosis of the modern
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N S T R A I N T   OF   C R E AT I V I TY   2 6 9




epoch, insofar as Whitehead trusted that this epoch was to pass away,
and it does i ndeed carry out a new d istribution of fact and right. Trust is
insepara ble from thought as such: it does not refer to an opinion, whether
historical or subjective. Nor will it ever be reducible to some functioning
of the brain. The bra in will never explain trust, for every explanation, by
the brain or by something else, first of all manifests in principle the trust
of those who have undertaken to explain. Trust can be killed by disquali
fyi ng words, by dominant opinions, by the accidents of l i fe, but trust
itself is not accidenta l . Trust is on the side of " right," of what is presup
posed by every explanation.
    The organism is a way of expressi ng this trust, because it conj ugates
existence and success . Nothing is " no matter what," secondary, epiphe
nomenal, superstructure, anecdota l, with regard to something more gen
eral. Everything that exists, in the sense that we can undertake to describe
it, or even to explain it, has first, and prior to any explanation, succeeded
in existing. Our trust exhibits the success to which we owe our existence
as thinking beings, a success that nothing guarantees. It has the cha racter
of a wager, but a wager with nothing beyond it, on the basis of which it
could be dissected . The orga nism expresses the task of thought: not to
j udge, but to learn to appreciate.
    And perhaps because it is the orga nism that made him a creative
thinker, Whitehead will continue, in the first layers of the writing of Pro
cess and Reality, to baptize his philosophy as a " philosophy of the organ
ism." Yet the concepts that, since April 1 925, have come to populate the
plane have produced what the distribution between fact and right k nown
as " organism " could not realize. The plane has taken on a new and
highly curious curvature. Henceforth, it must be i mpossible for the d istri
bution between fact and right to communicate with a j udgment, even if
the latter merely a ffirms the wager of " trust." The speculative movement
must refer every right to an accident of creativity, and celebrate every fact
together with all that it implies, as the conditioning of the creativity to
which it bears witness.
    Retroactively, the organism could not be conceived independently of
the universe that it required, but it required it i n a way that was merely
impl icative and i ncapable of explaining itsel f. It may equip the thought
of an educator inventing new ways to address thi rsty young souls that
school threatens to turn into professionals. All that matters then are the
"good habits" to be acq uired , those that should enable students to resist
the dead abstractions that come from the discipli nes. But Whitehead
could not describe in terms of habits his own soul, which undertook to
awaken the ha bit of aesthetic enjoyment in his students' souls. Nor could
2 7 0   C O S M O L O G Y




he apprehend these souls i n the process of becoming, i n the terms in
which he taught them to apprehend the living, limited, and intolerant
va lues that a factory succeeds in perpetuating. He could only trust them
and teach them to trust, to dare the lea p whose possibility the organism
does not state. In short, Whitehea d, for whom education was an adven
tu re, cou ld no more descri be himself i n terms of his educational project
than Epimenides the Creta n could classify himself within the set of lying
Creta ns he defined. The concept of orga nism was meant to answer the
cha llenge of education, but it was mute about why this cha llenge would
ma ke itself felt at a l l .
   " Habit" was, however, never t o assume a pej orative sense i n White
head. Above all, the criticism to be addressed to the professiona l must
not be confused with a critique of habits. And if the orga nism, because its
inspiration is biologica l and proposes " keepi ng its hol d " as what is at
sta ke, is inadequate, it is beca use it does not seem to leave any other al
ternative in the face of professiona l habits than the project of mak ing
them " lose their hold," which is certainly q uite tempting but ultimately
catastrophic, for this is exactly what professiona ls think: if they " let go "
of their abstractions, they are lost. Yet the " applications" to which the
specu lative scheme appea ls a re, again and aga in, questions of the habits
to be adopted . The di fference is that these habits exhi bit a trust that is no
longer paradigma tica l ly that of an educator, but may be that of a partici
pant i n the adventure of mathematics, in which the art of an imagination
obl iged by coherence is cultivated as such.
   In this case, Process and Reality dema nds, in the minor key of an
(origina l ) habit to be acquired, what Deleuze and Guattari descri be in a
somewhat d izzying way.
   Thought "merely " demands motion that can be taken to infinity [ . . . I
What defines infinite motion is a coming and going, because it does not
go toward a destination without already turning back on itself [ . . . l It is
not, however, a fusion, but a reversibility, an immediate, perpetual, in
stantaneous exchange, a bolt of lightning. Infinite motion is twofold, and
there is only a fold from one to the other. It is in this sense that it is said
that thinking and being are one and the same thing. Or rather, motion is
not the image of thought without also being the matter of thought. When
the thought of Thales leaps forth, it returns like water. When the thought
of Heraclitus becomes polemos, it is fire that returns upon it [ . . . I the
plane of immanence has two faces, like Perseus and like Nature, like Phy
sis and like Nous. This is why there are always a great many motions
implicated in one another, folded up within one another, insofar as the
return of one instantaneously relaunches another one, in such a way that
             T H I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   CONSTR A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I T Y   2 7 1




the plane of immanence never stops weaving itself, like a gigantic shuttle
( QPh, 40- 4 1 ) .
   Each concept calls for a leap of the imagination, but none of them is
privileged, none can be a roused or experienced without other motions
surging forth, each of which may be at the starting point and/or at the
point of arriva l . Every starting point is contingent. Every point of arrival
is a stage on the way. All that counts is the incessant weaving between
the two faces that this motion bri ngs i nto existence as it weaves itself:
Thought and Nature, Nous and Physis. It perhaps belongs to Whitehead
to have made reversibi l i ty-the immediate, perpetual, i nstantaneous ex
change between what thought intends and its return upon itself, its be
coming " matter for thought "-the very thing that is to be inhabited , of
which the habit is to be acquired . . . by applying the scheme. The two
fold wager of a transformation of the sciences of nature and of the aims
of education has thus not d isappeared, but constitutes one starting point, or
else one point of arrival among others, for a motion that brings into exis
tence simultaneously a " Physis" in which thought matters, and a "Thought"
that no longer belongs to the thinker.
   The ancient doctrine according to which "no one crosses the same
river twice " is generalized. No thinker thinks twice ( PR, 2 9 ) .
   Simultaneous contraction and d i l ation: if n o thinker thinks twice, the
two faces we call Nous or Physis are required to think a thought. God
and the world, both under the sway of the gigantic shuttle of the creative
advance.
   However, is it possible to i nhabit a thought i n the form of a Mobius
strip, where one cannot explore one face without finding oneself on the
other ? Can one l ive i n the world of Escher, i n which two hands draw one
another? Anglo-Saxon humor: it is a habit to be acquired, it suffices not
to allow oneself to be trapped by the paradox of thought thinking itself.
For this paradox, inducing the experience of a d izzyi ng, uninhabitable
mise en abyme, by no means i nd icates a limit of thought coll iding with
itself, but is due to the i nadequate a bstraction of a reflection that claims
to grasp its proper conditions. The fact that my itinerary takes me back to
the other face, which it presupposed but to which it cou ld not accede, the
fact that my hand d raws what is drawing it, are only d izzying for the
third party I have introd uced surreptitiously: the person who contem
plates the opposing faces of the Mobius strip, or sees those two hands,
each of which is drawing what draws it. There is no third party i n White
head's system: there is only itinera ry, fl ight, movements, or gestures . And
the thinking experimentation on thought corresponds, again and again, to
this pragmatic question: what difference in experience could be produced,
2 7 2   C O S M O L O G Y




what new regime of habit could be experienced i f, in principle, 1 a ffirm
that everything that pertains to thought, all the rights it claims, a l l the
hopes it nourishes, are so many testimonies to the " reality " that is its
problem, so many req uisites for the construction of the solution to this
problem ?
   The fact that habits to be acqui red come up for discussion again and
aga in is all the more important in that it is easy to confuse a philosophy
that defines crea tivity as an ulti mate, with a phi losophy i nha bited by
what is attested by the adventure of creators . The image of Whitehead ian
thought is not the i mage of Deleuzian thought. It does not place the cre
ator under the banner of an imperative that irresisti bly dista nces him
from all the others, all those who are satisfied by opinion, by the securi
ties of routine, by words as they are proposed to our perceptions: a
world that is most often reassuring, saturated with cul tura l arti facts that
orient us, giving rise to due attention without our even having to be aware
of it. This is why Whitehead, the thinker of crea tivity, will never celebrate
the creator in the heroic mode of radical risk and extreme soli tude to
which Deleuze sometimes yields.
  Philosophy, science and art want us to tear open the firmament and
dive into chaos. Only at this cost will we vanquish it. A nd I have thrice
crossed the A cheron, victorious. The philosopher, the scientist and the
artist seem to return from the land of the dead ( Q Ph, 1 90 ) .
   From a Whiteheadian viewpoint, the proposition i s slightly exagger
ated . Creatures confronting chaos take for granted a respecta ble number
of conditions : the endurance proper to electromagnetic regularities, to
molecules, to cellular meta bol ism, and finally to the body, which, even
when submitted to terri ble trials, must ma inta i n certain crucial habits . . .
Not to mention an entire inherita nce of things and items of knowledge,
some of the components of which will eventua lly be subverted, but never
all of them at the same time. Not to forget, finally, all that creators have
learned that ma kes them able to " d ive" without being swallowed . A d ive
cannot be improvised, but demands equipment. Unlike those who may
happen to " sink " into chaos, creators are those who know that what they
experience "matters," and that they will be able to recount something of
what has ha ppened to them, that is to come back . . . even from the land
of the dead.
   Madness, the destruction of consensus, the terrible and somber truth
of chaos from which opinion tries to defend itsel f thus do not belong to
the i mage of Whiteheadian thought. The fact that " I " is "another" will
not, by its proximity to madness, make vibrate the thought of the man
for whom " no thinker thinks twice" is perfectly inhabitable, for whom
              TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N STRA I NT   OF   C R E AT I V I TY   2 7 3




the " I " is an i nteresting habit, an ingred ient of the link ceaselessly re
created by each act of thought, by each new d istribution produced be
tween thin kers and what they think.
   Correlatively, it is not so much the problem of risk as it is the impor
tance of the fact that one can " come back from the land of the dead "
that wil l establish itself as what obliges us to think. What ma tters is not
that a mathema tician l i ke Cantor " went mad "-such things ha ppen
but that, unlike Cantor, other mathematicians have been able to find i n
their community those who have accepted t o inhabit the new possibilities
that they have brought back . The solitude and misundersta nding to
which the creator may give rise are not a privileged testimony to creativ
ity, for creativity also acts as a constra int when it comes to thinking
about rejection, misunderstanding, or else recuperation, the way in which
what the solitary adventure has "brought back " from chaos is trans
formed into a consensual " acquisition."
   As a mathematician, Whitehead was never tempted by the iconoclastic
gesture that intends to make a clean sweep of the past. He knows the
extent to which mathematica l creation requi res the past, even when it
may present itself as a brea k . And the very adventure of writi ng Process
and R eality i ntroduces a process that exhibits the d ifference between in
tuition, or vision in the sense that Plato associated it with mathematica l
truth, and the work of fashioni ng concepts. Such concepts dema nd a leap
of the imagination, of course, but none of them " make an image," none
holds all by itself, because a l l are " conditioned " by a process that pro
duces its own trials, the questions that never cease reviving it, making
new demands surge forth that impose a problem where an answer had
been form ulated. This process does not req uire the figure of a creator
or a visionary, confronting what exceeds the categories of thought or of
perceptions, but testifies instead to a practice to which phi losophers may
owe their existence. When Whitehead defined the phi losophica l tradition
as a series of " footnotes " to the text of Plato ( PR, 3 9 ) , what he designated
was indeed a tradition that requi res reading and writing. What are phi
losophers other than those who read other phi losophers ? But they read
them in a way that will communicate with writing, that will make them
add, subtract, modify, and i nsert the " footnotes " that make a text mu
tate. Including, for instance, a l ittle note " i nterpreting " the contemplative
vision of ideas as a " leap of imagination."
   When Whitehead makes creativity the ultimate, therefore, he does not
particularly celebrate creators. Thinking under the constraint of creativ
ity has nothing to do with a heroic adventure, and crea tivity demands
nothing. Whatever we do, whether we l ive in the most reproducible of
2 74   COS MO lOGY




routines or whether we cross the Acheron, each moment of our lives is
equally and impartially the creature of creativity. But also, and perhaps
above all, thinking under the constrai nt of creativity has nothing to do
with the vision of a " creative cosmos" that might, as such, become the
subject of our descriptions. Such a vision is not ba nished, of course, but
it does not belong to the register of applications of Whitehead 's scheme,
of his " verification," for the visionary flight then seems to be the only
thing that matters, and not its landing " for renewed observa tion ren
dered acute by rational interpretation " ( PR, 5 ) . Similarly, Whitehead 's
God, as an accident of creativity, cannot be isolated from the adventure
of the successive revisions of the categoreal scheme that will end up i n
its definition. It neither expresses nor calls for a vision. It i s the scheme,
i ncluding God, that ca lls for verification, experimentation of the d iffer
ence it prod uces upon our habits of thought, incl uding those that are
religious.
   When he committed himself to the adventure of a speculative cosmol
ogy, then, Whitehead did not aba ndon the definition of philosophy he
had proposed in Science and the Modern World: if we cannot think with
out abstraction, it is important to revise our modes of abstraction. And,
for instance, it is important not to abstract creators from the equipment
on which they cannot help but rely when they undertake to cross the
Acheron, and from the equipment they provi de themselves in order to be
able to "come back."
   Perhaps, then, humor is one of the ways of cha racterizing the transfor
mation Whitehead intends to produce upon our habits. The habits of
professiona ls are bereft of humor: what questions their mode of abstrac
tion is either j udged to be insigni fica nt-reduced to ignorance of what
is demanded by science or rationa lity-or as enda ngering civilization
many scientists speak of a " rise in i rrationality " when they sense that the
questioning of what they propose can no longer be rejected by a shrug of
the shoulders. The habits to be acquired, what creativity appea ls to as a
constrai nt, would be, compared to professional habits, like a wa l l of dry
stones compared to a cement wa l l . Cement rejects the i nterstices i n which
the weed grows that will one day crack it open. The dry stones, for their
part, can of course be d isplaced, and the weed that d isplaces them might
certai nly be tempted to abstract from the fact that without the stone the
earth i n which it grows would not have held. But the wa ll of dry stones is
not defined against the interstices; the latter belong to it j ust as much as
the stones that make it up. Thinking what imposes itsel f as obvious
under the constra int of creativity, Whitehead 's wager is that we can learn
modes of abstraction that enable us to celebrate together both the obsti-
             TH I N K I N G   U N D E R   T H E   C O N S TR A I N T   O F   C R E AT I V I TY   2 7 5




nate stones and the interstices that will transform them into precondi
tions for what will eventua l ly d isplace them.
   Thus, Whitehead will avoid all the words susceptible of d isqualifying
the type of order presupposed by opinion. The cha rge of contempt in
these words, the absence of humor, and the somewhat misplaced heroism
they suggest, add nothing to the risk ta ken by thin kers when it comes to
this particular thinker who, at this insta nt, has produced this proposition
that turns this opinion into that whose point is to experience its abandon
ment. Yet these words risk insulting the world, the immense, heteroge
neous popul ation of " opinions " tha t endure in the interwoven and pre
carious relations of " trust," or mutual presupposition. In the process, they
risk cementing against them an all iance that wil l confirm that the histori
ca l truth they propose is unbearable to self-righteous people or to the
"system."
   Yet the point is not to condemn those by whom the scandal arrives. The
words they use are not theirs, but those suggested to them by the modes of
abstraction of our time. Whiteheadian humor, demoralizing the great op
positions, the binary choices between adherence and polemic, is addressed
to our time, simultaneously dominated by professiona l modes of j udg
ment and fascina ted by heroic protests. This humor does not attack, for
the point is not to know who the good guys and who the bad guys are.
The point, i mpersonal and cosmologica l, is that of the " trick of evi l ."
   Each task of creation is a social effort, employing the whole universe.
Each novel actuality is a new partner adding a new condition. Every new
condition can be absorbed into additional fullness of attainment. On the
other hand, each condition is exclusive, intolerant of diversities; except in
so far as it find itself in a web of conditions which convert its exclusions
into contrasts. A new actuality may appear in the wrong society, amid
which its claims to efficacy act mainly as inhibitions. Then a weary task
is set for creative function, by an epoch of new creations to remove the
inhibition. Insistence on birth at the wrong season is the trick of evil. In
other words, the novel fact may throw back, inhibit, and delay. But the
advance, when it does arrive, will be richer in content, more fully condi
tioned, and more stable. For in its objective efficacy an actual entity can
only inhibit by reason of its alternative positive contribution ( PR, 223 ) .
  M y readers have now been warned . If they are fascinated b y the heroic
grandeur of refusal, and despise compromises; if they deplore the fact
that the rad ical demands of every new position are recuperated by what
was supposed to be subverted; if " to deconstruct" is a goa l in itself for
them, and scandalizing self-righteous people is a testimony to truth; if
they oppose the pu re to the impure, the authentic to the artificial; if they
2 76   C O S M O LOGY




cannot understand how the most " unplatonic" of philosophers situated
himself as a " footnote " to the text of Plato . . . Iet them close this book.
Never will they see celebrated in it the power of a truth that is verified by
the destruction of fa lse pretenders. They wi l l therefore find in it only dis
appointments and reasons for contempt.
                                                          C H A P T ER   S E V E N T EEN




The Risks of Speculative I nterpretation




      r HILOSOPHY DOES NOT INITIATE          interpretations. Its search for
         a rationalistic scheme is the search for more adequate criticism,
         and for more adequate justification, of the interpretations which
we perforce employ [ . . . 1 the methodology of rational interpretation is
the product of the fitful vagueness of consciousness. Elements which
shine with immediate distinctness, in some circumstances, retire into pen
umbral shadow in other circumstances, and into black darkness on other
occasions. A nd yet all occasions proclaim themselves as actualities within
the flow of a solid world, demanding a unity of interpretation. Philoso
phy is the self-correction by consciousness of its own initial excess of
subjectivity (PR, 1 4-1 5 ) .
   Speculative philosophy must a i m a t neutra lity, not i n the sense that
neutra lity, objectivity, and rationa l i ty are associated i n the experi mental
sciences, but as an immanent practical obligation that condemns it to the
most risky interpretation. From this perspective, every statement that
presents itself as " neutral," in the scientific sense of " a uthorized by a sta te
of affairs," is not only eminently selective, but also specifica lly partial.
The clarity of the reference is not only detached from da rkness, but also
reflects the excess of subjectivity that leads us to deny that darkness.
When the subject faces the object, when, for i nstance, it defines itself as
pure i ntentional i ty, it silences, with passion, violence, and purifying bias,
the confused totality of what Leibniz called " little perceptions," i ndefinable
but as i nsepa ra ble from distinct perception as the cloth from the fol d that
qualifies it.
2 7 8   COSMOLOGY




   Correlatively, the neutra lity aimed at by speculative philosophy bea rs
witness to a cosmos to the same extent that, by its undertaking, it presup
poses the possibility for consciousness of affi rming the dark a nd the dis
tinct, the cloth and its noteworthy folds. I f consciousness must be cor
rected of its excess of subjectivity, the correction m ust not proceed in the
name of a demanding i mperative but i n terms of a possibil ity which, as it
is suggested, becomes inhabitable by this very fact. Otherwise, it might
wel l become a new case i l l ustra ting the " trick of evi l ."
   To speak of suggestion is not to speak of precautions, prudence, or
slow, controlled progress. These are the characteristics of a practice ar
ticulati ng the hunter and the prey that is to be caught unawa re or else to
be directed toward the enclosure in which it will finally be held prisoner.
It matters little i f, at that moment, it panics, charges, tries to regain its
freedom, or yields to the despair of the vanquished : it is too late. White
head by no means intends to obl ige his readers, step by step, to admit
that they a re progressively reduced to submission, unable to object, sum
moned to accept without knowing any longer where they should have
rebelled, where they could have escaped . By no means does he proceed
like Socrates the d ia lectician, whom his adversaries compared to an elec
tric ray, anesthetizing his adversa ries and numbing their a bi l ity to resist.
Quite the contrary, he never ceases to utter verita ble enormities, leaving
his reader, at each i nstant, the freedom to laugh, to smi le, but also to ex
perience what it means to be able to laugh or smile where a dramatic al
terna tive held sway.
   Thus, those who might be tempted to raise the question of the legiti
macy of speculative thought will receive the following answer, cava lier to
say the least:
   The scheme is true with unformulated qualifications, exceptions, limi
tations, and new interpretations in terms of more general notions (PR, 8 ) .
   The scheme i s " true " : whatever the definition o f truth may b e that a
philosophy honors, this a ffirmation is so "enormous" that it literally d is
arms thought. It is not unti l, and unless, the movement has been engaged
that confers a meaning upon the a ffirmation that the i mport of this re
striction becomes important. Whitehead appea ls to a future when the
l imits of the scheme will ma ke themselves fel t, that is, when the specula
tive interpretations of which i t is the matrix will become judgment, when
application will impose silence, in short, when the genera l ities articulated
will produce the experience of their inadequacy. In that future, the scheme
will have rendered one of the most importa nt services of which it is
capable: to have brought about the disclosure of unformulated limita
tions, to have made percepti ble the insi stence and the interest of experi -
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 7 9




ences that i mpose, in return, the qual ification of this scheme, exhibiting
its selective character.
   In this way, moreover, Whitehead goes on to praise the phi losophical
systems of which he is the heir. It is true, for i nstance, that, as Kant main
tained , the way concepts work constitutes an essentia l aspect of percep
tual experience. Kant's ana lysis of experience, as a subjective process that
produces objectivity, thus designates a genera l idea that ma kes Kant an
important philosopher. Whitehead inherits the idea of experience as con
structive functioning, but he calmly reverses the order in which this func
tioning works: the process he will describe produces subjectivity from
objectivity, and not vice versa . This is a homage to Kant, for
   The order is immaterial in comparison with the general idea ( PR, 1 5 6 ) .
   I t is highly unli kely that today's Kantians will appreciate the homage
in question, any more than historians of philosophy will appreciate the
"cavalier" perspective Whitehead adopts on this matter. Yet as we have
seen, Whitehead is j ust as " caval ier" with his own thought, and with what
was the truth of his i ntentions when he was writing such-and-such a
paragrap h . In fact, there is only one case in which he rea lly points out a
disagreement, and this, rather curiously, is when the philosopher i n ques
tion is no doubt the one who was closest to him: Lei bniz, a mathemati
cian like him, and who, like him, gave primacy to coherence.
   There is a book that should be written, and its title should be The
Mind of Leibniz ( MT, 3 ) .
   The way Whitehead condemns Leibniz, again and again, for what he
describes as a genuine fault, a " magician's trick " ( preesta blished har
mony ) must be understood as that of one mathematician attacking
another mathematician, reproaching him with being content with a
" trivia l " solution, in the sense of mathematics, to what should have been
" the problem," that is, the question of the solidarity of a l l that exists. Yet
in a l l the other cases, Whitehead accepts, and he prolongs "with a sl ight
modification"-that is, in a way that makes the apparent casualness
communicate with a genuine fa brication. He creates what can be associ
ated with a " caval ier perspective."
   One ca lls "cavalier perspective" a perspecti ve that combines two con
trad ictory properties: a scenography in relief, and the conservation of the
principal d imensions of the object placed in perspective. The most distant
parts will be "seen " as d istant, and yet their size will not be reduced in
comparison with that of the nearer parts. Whitehead superbly ignores the
dilemmas of the history of philosophy, the attempt to understand a philo
sophical system from an immanent viewpoint contemporary with itself,
while relating it to a historical filiation by which the sta kes pursued by
2 8 0   COSMOLOGY




the philosopher a re situated . The western " adventure" of rationality, as
Whitehead inherits i t, is not a " history " but a succession of " planes" that
make ideas that matter su rge forth, and whose importance must be pre
served such as it is, independently of the intentions we may attri bute to
those who have produced them. The cavalier perspective, ignoring i nten
tions, deliberately abstracts from what might impose a choice between
faithfulness ( return to the " real " Kant) and assignment to an obsolete
past ( i n Kant's time . . . ) .
   The freedom with which Whitehead captures and retranslates the
" general ideas " of his predecessors, at the risk of making them undergo
mutations of meaning, no doubt puts to the test the " excess of subjectiv
ity " that can transform a phi losophical work into " doctrine," with regard
to which the question of faithfulness or opposition fi rst ari ses. Yet this
freedom is first and foremost that of a phi losopher-mathematician, for
whom philosophy, like mathematics, is creation.
   Mathematicians celebrate their crea tions as " genera lizations," which
succeed i n ridding a definition of its excessive attachments to a particular
case. And this success is not a j udgment upon what mathematicians of
the past thought or believed, for in mathema tics definitions do not trans
late intentions or convictions, but possi bilities of operating, of ra isi ng
problems, of producing new cases of solution. The cavalier perspective in
philosophy thus suggests that philosophy, like mathematics, is adventure,
but it does so in a way that leaves phi losophers perfectly free to go their
way wi th a shrug of the shoulders: how ca n someone be criticized who
renounces so ra dically all the justifications in terms of which others de
fend themselves agai nst the threat of disqualification? They will therefore
not feel themselves constrai ned to dig defensive trenches around a threat
ened i nterpretation. Not only does Whiteheadian practice discourage this
reaction, but phi losophers who do not d rop the book while concluding
 "He's crazy, there's no use continuing " have already undergone a modifi
cation that ta kes away their taste for becoming a censor. This is no doubt
why Whi tehead's work has remained marginal in the aca demic world,
for rea ders find themselves " d i sarmed ," deprived of that paradigmatic
academic weapon, the critical commentary.
   The risk of be ing rejected by the academic community does not raise
a " cosmic " problem, to the precise extent to which such rejection is re
flected by an indi fferent shrug of the shoulders, not intensi fied by any
j ustification whereby the rejecters would become worse than they were,
more intensely dependent on a position demanding the destruction of
what enda ngers it. But the risks of speculative i nterpretation become
very different when Whitehead no longer has to deal with phi losophers
that is, with interlocutors who a re, in fact, ra ther used to shrugging their
                      T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E T AT I O N   2 8 1




shoulders and to having their statements cause others to shrug theirs
but with interlocutors engaged by a conviction that rejects the possibil ity
of indifference. In this case, the question of adequacy is raised in a com
pletely d i fferent, much more risky way.
   In fact, mathematica l humor does not suffice when i t can resemble
ironic renunciation, when what Gil les Deleuze honored as the " truth of
the relati ve," which it ma kes perceptible, can, predictably, be percei ved as
the caval ier affirmation of the relativity of all truth. A humorous refor
mulation can certa inly retranslate any pretense while neutralizing it, but
it can do nothi ng against the concern of those who, upon seeing their
convictions retranslated, have the impression that they are being made
fun of, that one refuses to hea r them out, that they a re being transformed
into a bull driven mad by the pirouettes of the bullfighter's cape. And this
concern may be transformed into hatred i f no adequate response is made
to the "cry " : but all ways of unifying, all ways of becoming "one" with
regard to the many are equivalent !
   This cry can be " specialized," but for Whitehead, a l l specializations af
firm one and the same thing. They all bear witness to the inadequacy of
a thought that would reduce real i ty to chaos, to the pure multiplicity of
disparate free acts, an a bsurd dream, a ta le told by an idiot, ful l of sound
and fury, and so on. Each cry demands the recognition that it i mports,
and there is a speculative obl igation to give meaning to that demand.
   However, the problem is not solved for a l l that. When it comes to cor
recting the excess subjectivity of creators who propose themselves as
marginal or subversive, it is rather relevant to make the " cosmic i mpor
tance " of their work communicate with the " socia l effort" that its recep
tion will impose . Yet when it comes to convictions that i rreducibly asso
ciate thei r i mportance with a pretense to exclusivity, such a " cavalier
perspective " can no longer be placed under the banner of humor, contrib
uti ng a sma l l correction to the excess of subjectivity. It risks a fronta l col
lision. What will collide is the fact that, as such, the cosmic perspective
proposed by Whitehead cannot " verify " any cry in particular: a l l the spe
cies perta ining to a genus a ffirm that genus without a hierarchy. Both the
anti-Dreyfusards, for whom the Army and the Nation were wel l worth
the sacrifice of one innocent, and the Dreyfusards, for whom a l l that mat
tered was the triumph of Justice and Truth, a ffirmed and presupposed a
cosmos. And also those who will say, it is important not to place these two
affirmations on a n equal level, to make expl icit a difference between anti
Dreyfusards and Dreyfusards.
   In other words, speculative interpretation must take the risk of disap
pointing. Discreet but without hypocrisy, Whitehead was to propose a test
somewhat similar to the one i mposed by the ra bbi, who, according to the
2 8 2   COSMOLOGY




story, when confronted with two contradictory theses, declared each one
right in turn, and answered his students, who had objected that both pro
tagonists could not be right at the same time, that they too were right.
This latter " Yes, you too are right," apparently so cavalier, is a quiet test,
offering students an opportunity, but also leaving them free to go away
with a shrug of the shoulders, abandoning that cowardly i mpostor.
   In Religion in the Making, published in 1 926, Whitehead first took the
risk of a speculative interpretation of what inspi red passion for exclu
sivity much more intensely than philosophy or science. Philosophers a re
used to indifference, while scientists are interested only rather second
arily in " d i ffusing " their knowledge, the essential part of thei r passion
being focused on the questions they share with their colleagues. In con
trast, the question of religion, and more particularly the question of the
Christian religion, is indissolubly linked to that of "conversion." Can one
be a convinced Christian, and accept that faith in God " matters " in a way
that is merely specific?
   Religion in the Making is a transitional work, some of whose statements
Whitehead apparently even regretted . Yet this work is very interesting, in
that it allows us to " follow" the way Whitehead answers the challenge
of ci rcumstances . It consists of the text of four lectures given in Febru
ary 1 926 at King's Chapel in Boston, once again in the context of the
Lowell lectures, as was the case for Science and the Modern World. This
time, however, it was religion that Whitehead was to discuss before his
audience.
   In his preface, Whitehead does not omit to mention, as usual, that he is
applying the same procedure to religion as the one that he had applied in
1 925 to the sciences, in the lectures that gave rise to Science and the Mod
ern World. Yet the " sa me," in Whitehead, should never be taken quite seri
ously. In contrast, the invariant that is to be taken seriously is that, ad
dressing a new type of audience, it is the members of this audience he
must address, and it is the primary terms of the practice that unites them
that he must celebrate adequately . . . while reinventing them, of course.
The risks to which the situation he has accepted will expose him are so
many engagements.
   The limitation of God is his goodness ( RM, 1 5 3 ) .
   This statement, which occurs i n the text a lmost without warning, is
not compatible with the God of Science and the Modern World, for God,
as a principle of limitation, cannot have any limitation . It could, however,
have been signed by Lei bniz, for whom God 's choice of creating this
world, and not j ust any other, must answer to a reason: i f we do not want
to insult God by attributing to him the arbitrariness of despots, He can-
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 8 3




not, by definition, wish a nything but the best. Coming from Whitehead's
pen, it may well be that this statement signifies " taking up a hypothetical
position," the k ind of position he would like to construct, but the means
to which he must formulate.
   In fact, Whitehead's position will be a rticulated around the question of
the moral order, that is, the d istinction between good and evi l . It is im
possible to add ress people of Christian fa ith without insulting them if
one cannot give this distinction an i rreducible meaning, which cannot be
dissolved into the humor of neutral ization. The point is thus not only to
ma ke room for this distinction, but to give it i ts full import. Since God, as
the unqualifiable principle of a l l limitation, could not qualify good and
evil , it is the entire construction of Science and the Modern World that
must be reassembled in a new coherence, at the cost of transforming the
definition of God from top to bottom. This is indeed the " same" proce
dure of thought as the one that constra ined Whitehead to atomize be
coming, in order to give meaning to the possible.
   Of course, the d istinction between good and evil must be created, not
accepted as is. In this case, Whitehead takes up the great rational ist tradi
tion that refuses to believe that evil can be desired for evil 's sake. All that
exists produces its own value, and all values are positions, to be described
positively. The distinction between good and evil cannot, therefore, be a
radical opposition. It may, however, entai l the consequences of a position
for its environment: physical suffering or mental suffering, where it mat
ters l i ttle whether they designate others or one's own person. Between
people who cannot help doing what they feel they should not do and who
suffer as a result, and people who make others suffer, the d ifference is en
tirely relative, concerning only the definition of the environment, accord ing
to whether it includes, or fails to incl ude, the person who causes the suffer
ing. If he read it, Whitehead would have approved the world of Erewhon
invented by Samuel Butler, in which the sick are punished and the crimi
nals cared for, as being perfectly reasonable. In any case, whether the sub
ject is evil or illness, the problem is the same: how can they be understood
without end ing up in a position which, by making God responsible for
good, should also lead to holding him responsible for evil and suffering?
   The fact of the instability of evil is the moral order in the world.
   Evil, triumphant in its enjoyment, is so far good in itself; but beyond
itself it is evil in its character of a destructive agent among things greater
than itself [ . . 1 Evil is positive and destructive; what is good is positive
                .



and creative [ . . . 1
   This instability of evil does not necessarily lead to progress. On the
contrary, evil in itself leads to the world losing forms of attainment in
2 8 4   C O S M O LOGY




which that evil manifests itself [ . . . 1 For example, a species whose mem
bers are always in pain will either cease to exist, or lose the delicacy of
perception which results in that pain, or develop a finer and more subtle
relationship among its bodily parts.
   Thus evil promotes its own elimination by destruction, or delegation,
or by elevation. But in its own nature it is unstable. It must be noted that
the state of degradation to which evil leads, when accomplished, is not in
itself evil, except by comparison with what might have been. A hog is not
an evil beast, but when a man is degraded to the level of a hog, with the
accompanying atrophy of finer elements, he is no more evil than a hog.
The evil of the final degradation lies in the comparison of what is with
what might have been. During the process of degradation the compari
son is an evil for the man himself, and at its final stage it remains an evil
for others [ . . . 1
   There is a self-preservation inherent in that which is good in itself. Its
destruction may come from without but not from within. Good people
of narrow sympathies are apt to be unfeeling and unprogressive, enjoying
their egotistical goodness. Their case, on a higher level, is analogous to
that of the man completely degraded to a hog. They have reached a state
of stable goodness, so far as their own interior life is concerned. This type
of moral correctitude is, on a larger view, so like evil that the distinction
is trivial ( RM, 95-9 8 ) .
   Whitehead does not accept distinctions without transforming them.
Not only does he not construct a distinction in content between " good "
and " evil," but he risks a comparison between those who know what the
good is, those in whom the question inspi res no doubt, and those " com
pletely degraded," who no longer even suffer from thei r debasement. The
elimination of evil has destroyed " things greater than i tself," but the
j udgment brought to bear upon these relative magnitudes is purely im
manent: it is a ssociated with the comparison between what is and what
might have been. When the witnesses to what m ight have been disappear,
it should be noted, this situation can be descri bed in terms of the theory
of the organism. If the good were to be defined by its endurance, "a sta
ble state of goodness," it would depend, like a sta ble state of degradation,
only on the patience of the environment: the maintenance of a unilateral
position, insensi tive to the possibly destructive character of the infection
associated with it, a lien to hesitation, that is, to what is possible.
   God is not directly necessary for understanding the order of nature,
what is affirmed as " good in itsel f," of which hogs, "good people of nar
row sympathies," as well as the " professionals" of Science and the Mod
ern World, constitute so many examples. He will, however, be necessary
                      T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U LATI V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 8 5




to affirm how a suffering being ca n develop " a finer and more subtle rela
tionship among its bodily parts." It is this possibi l ity that-like everythi ng
that matters-imposes a " cosmos " that is, at the same time, an eva luatory
authority: in this case, God as the " measure of the aesthetic consistency of
the world."
   The kingdom of heaven is not the isolation of good from evil. It is the
overcoming of evil by good. This transmutation of evil into good enters
into the actual world by reason of the inclusion of the nature of God,
which includes the ideal vision of each actual evil so met with a novel
consequent as to issue in the restoration of goodness ( RM, 1 5 5 ) .
   Whi tehead's solution is not yet techn ica lly well constructed . For this
to be achieved, it will be necessary for terms like " i deal vision," " conse
quent," and "so met with as to issue i n " to be understood in such a way as
to avoid attributing to God a form of " knowledge " that would guide cre
ativity. In that case, indeed, what Whitehead a lways fought against would
be restored : the figure of a God who " k nows better," and who can there
fore be j udged responsi ble for the evil he a llows, if only by a bstenti on. The
demand is already in place that this figure must be avoi ded: it is novelty,
associated with relevance ( " to issue i n " . . . ) that indicates the " ki ngdom
of heaven," tha t is, that permits the affirmation of a " mora l order," or a
cosmos.
   Whereas, one year previously, i n Science and the Modern World, God
was a principle of limitation, he has now become an actual but a tempo
ral entity. He is pa rt of the " formati ve elements " of the temporal world,
in the same sense as creativity, which, for its part, is associated with the
temporal passage toward novelty, and the domain of " i dea l enti ties," not
actua l in themselves but exemplified in each actua l occasion. God, like
creati vity and like the ideal entities, is required by the need to affirm not
only the possi ble but also the insistence of the possi ble, that is, evi l as
what may be overcome. This is what is to be thought, and what White
head a ffi rms, "as i f it were done."
   Nothing is done-and we wi l l return to this point-but the " cavalier
perspective" wi l l be mainta i ned, with its own risks. For it is not, i n this
case, addressed to those "adventurers of reason " known as phi losophers,
who are summoned to recognize themselves as such, to a bandon the cult
of any kind of power of reason in favor of the humor of a n adventure of
hope. In fact, the history of philosophy is so densely populated with bi
zarre risks, unusual positions, and unstable constructions, unani mously
despised by rea l professionals, that it clearly exh ibits that its mere endur
ance is the hope, constantly reborn, of overcoming incoherence, of mak
ing concepts hold together even at the cost of an edifice so i mpla usible
2 8 6   C O S M O LO G Y




that it inspires only la ughter on the part of the environment. Although
they have drea med of it, philosophers have never been excellent counsel
ors to princes, and thei r concepts, in the final ana lysis, have caused little
suffering. The sa me does not hold true of the Christian rel igion, and here
Whitehead must hope tha t the " kingdom of heaven" testifies in his prop
ositions. Will the Christians listening to him be able to accept that if God
" knew " wha t the good is, in a sense tha t transcends the multiplicity of
occa sions of experience, i f he constituted i n this sense a sta ble measure
of the good, a measure closed to progress, he wou ld in turn be ana logous
to the man degra ded i nto a hog, or to good people of na rrow sympa
thies ? This is the unknown of which Whitehead risks the question .
    In fact, the suggestion of a moral order of the world implies a con
struction that has nothing religious about it. If the good is God 's l i mita
tion, tha t i s, the way that God ca n be qual ified as an " actua l fact in the
nature of things," i t is excl uded meta physica l ly, tha t is, gramma tica lly as
wel l, tha t God should know wha t the good, which is his limitation, is. To
know one's own limita tion is not to be limited but subject, it is to be able
to envisage evil even when one can will only the good. This may be an
extrapolation, offering God the stra nge metaphysical compliment of be
ing " l i ke us, only better," free as we are, but " free for the good," a happy
state which, according to Augustine, was promised to Ada m if only he
had resisted the trial of tempta tion . Above all, however, it is the fa tal
combination of the rationa l and the empirical tha t enables God to be
fa shioned in the image of man, by mea ns of a passage to the limit tha t
eliminates imperfection by ma king pretensions pa ss to the infinite. White
head, for his pa rt, tries to think of the cosmos, not of man who, in one
way or another, God wo uld have made in his own image, a typical ex
ample of the excess of subjectivity tha t is to be co rrected . And the cos
mos, d i fferent from every state of a ffa i rs, does not correspond to any
" image." In short, what is assigned to God is a role or a function .
   The fact of " not knowing" is not a lack, but the cha racterization of a
mode of working. Gramma tica lly, God cannot have availa ble an abstract
definition, independent of the "actual world," opposing the good to the
bad, beca use it is the very na ture of his functioning to contribute ro the
immanent possibility, for each crea tive act, of crea ting tha t difference.
God is that thanks to which each act of creation can integra te within its
own process the importa nt possi bility of "overcoming " evil. Not evil in
general, but always " this " evil here and now, or " this" destructive posi
tion, insofar as it cannot a ffi rm itself without denying. Correlatively, the
good has no identity in itself. It is never good that overcomes: it is evil
that, beca use it is overcome, designates a good that has no other identity
                    T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E T AT I O N   2 8 7




than this overcoming, that possibility of articulating what was destruc
tively opposed .
   Whitehead wi l l articulate this metaphysica l proposition in a more sat
isfactory way in Process and Reality, when he makes creativity his " ulti
mate." In Religion in the Making, however, the first point is to think of
rel igion, and hence the adventure that we empirically in herit. And here,
Whitehead, undeniably, belongs to his time. What he undertakes to de
scribe is nothing other than "the Ascent of Man " ( RM, 3 8 ), the emergence
of what can be described as co-creation of the religious sentiment, and of
the truth of consciousness for itsel f.
   This doctrine is the direct negation of the theory that religion is pri
marily a social fact. Social facts are of great importance to religion, be
cause there is no such thing as absolutely independent existence. You
cannot abstract society from man; most psychology is herd-psychology.
But all collective emotions leave untouched the awful ultimate fact,
which is the human being, consciously alone with itself, for its own sake.
   Religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness [ . . . I
Thus religion is solitariness; and if you are never solitary, you are never
religious. Collective enthusiasms, revivals, institutions, churches, rituals,
bibles, codes of behaviour, are the trappings of religion, its passing forms.
They may be useful, or harmful; they may be authoritatively ordained, or
merely temporary expedients. But the end of religion is beyond all this
( RM, 1 6-1 7 ) .
   B y religion, it seems w e must understand what Whitehead called " reli
gious vision " in Science and Modern World, to distinguish it from religion
as an institution . This time, however, we should pause over this question
of the rel igious vision, for here we are at the starting point of a specula
tive adventure, and no longer of the description of the modern world.
Hasn't this adventure, which recogn izes neutrality as its primary obliga
tion and its first being-put-to-the-test, j ust emitted a somewhat " cavalier"
judgment against what it calls " social fact," to identify it now with herd
psychology ?
   There are two ways to understand such a text. If we understand it in a
register that ratifies the j udgment emitted agai nst those who were un
awa re of the truth of their solitude, we wi l l have to think that Whitehead,
after Hegel and at the same time as the almost unanimous chorus of his
contempora ries, is a llowing himsel f to celebrate the appea rance of mono
theistic religions as participating in the emergence of a truth that tran
scends history. Yet it is equally possible to understand it on an empirical
level, without which I wo uld have to concl ude that the speculative inter
pretation, in this case, has been blind to its own risks.
2 8 8   COSMOLOGY




   The risk associated with the link between rel igion and the feeling of
solitude is to a uthorize a rea ding of human history as a site of the revela
tion of a truth endowed with the power of j udging. And i n this case, in
the first place, to assign a " herd psychology " to all those peoples who
have thought of themselves i n terms of belonging. I n such a case, there
would indeed be " technica l wea kness," for what has been celebrated as
the " d isenchantment of the world," Man's discovery of his own solitude,
has been and sti l l is the basic reference for a l l the modes of presentation
that link monotheism to the denunciation of attachments said to be idola
trous. Solitude, if it were an " ulti mate fact" in this sense, would place
speculation in the service of the most routine j udgment possible aga i nst
those who are protected by their " beliefs " from the terrible news : they
wi ll, a fter all, have to recogn ize, like us, that their a ncestors are dead,
that their fetishes have no other power than the one they lend it, that the
world is deaf to their rites and indifferent to their superstitions. In short,
Man's sol itude ca nnot be expressed without destructive opposition,
dooming those who cannot bea r to live alone to the pa in of awakening,
for their greater good .
   It is possible, however, to affirm that Whitehead here presents himself
as the heir to a n " empirical fact," precisely the one that is to be described
in another way, to be produced accord i ng to a cava lier perspective that
revea ls the importance of novelty aga inst the pretenses which, histori
cally, have turned that novelty into the discovery of a preexisting truth .
The novelty that constitutes the awareness of man's solitude, an ultimate
fact as soon as it i s felt, wou ld then be sepa rated from all coincidence,
finally rea lized , between fact and right.
   Usual ly, what one becomes aware of, in this case, sol itude, is defined
as preceding the acquisition of awareness . Sol itude is then what " Man"
primordially fled, taking refuge in the certa inties of the group, unti l he
found the courage to accept the hard truth . For Whitehead, however,
" becoming aware " means to produce, to bring something new into exi<;
tence i n the guise of the interpretation of the old. No interpretation can
claim to be a simple eluci dation of something a lready there. And, in this
case, even herd psychology belongs to the contrast produced by novelty:
by tautological definition, what the sol itary consciousness despises, against
which its cry rises up when it seeks its respondent in God . Job da res to
dema nd an account from God of the evils overwhelming him, dares to
affirm that his cry finds an advocate before God, the witness and de
fender of a cause that no fa lse friend could convi nce him to deny. But
those he silences beca use they bear witness, from this new viewpoint, to
a " herd psychology " are his own contempora ries. Their "conformism"
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U LATIVE   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 8 9




belongs to the same epocha l fact as his protest, and thus legitimizes i t
i n a very norma l way. All refer together t o the same genera l dogma that
God is j ust, to derive d ivergent consequences from it: Job to demand
j ustice, his friends to ask him to return to the ranks, to accept his case as
deducible, i n one way or another, from the dogma .
   In the book of Job we find the picture of a man suffering from an al
most fantastic array of the evils characteristic of his times. He is tearing
to pieces the sophism that all is for the best in the best of possible worlds,
and that the ;ustice of God is beautifully evident in everything that hap
pens. The essence of the book ofJob is the contrast of a general principle,
or dogma, and the particular circumstances to which it should apply
( RM, 48 ) .
   Here, o f course, stil l and once aga in, the figure o f a typica lly White
headian circle presents itself. The contrast between principle and circum
stance that ra ises the question of divine j ustice is new, associated with the
monotheistic figure of an omnipotent God . Yet this contrast a lso belongs,
typica lly, to the risks proper to the rationa list adventure, a lways liable to
eliminate what does not correspond to the postulated reasons. In this
sense, this contrast is part of what commits Whitehead to the construction
of his cosmology. Job's cry rises up to the heavens and returns to earth i n
the form of the risks associated with Whitehead's speculative interpreta
tion: how can we hear this type of cry while correcting the excess subjec
tivity it conveys, and avoiding the exacerbation of factual suffering by the
feeling of injustice that tortures the solitary consciousness? How can we
say that the words that make the d i fference between j ust and unj ust
matter but belong to an idiom and do not express an ultimate genera lity,
without, however, joining the number of Job's false friends ? Without hav
ing recourse to the Leibnizian trick na med " the best of worlds " ? The risk
proper to Whitehead's cosmology, the wager of his adequacy, is not that
Job is satisfied, but that he is transformed, and that the transformation of
his experience bears witness to what is to be trusted: not the good qua
more powerful than evil, but evil qua lia ble to be overcome.
   No reason, internal to history, can be assigned why that flux of forms,
rather than another flux, should have been illustrated. It is true that any
flux must exhibit the character of internal determination. So much fol
lows from the ontological principle. But every instance of internal deter
mination assumes that flux up to that point. There is no reason why there
could be no alternative flux exhibiting that principle of internal determi
nation. The actual flux presents itself with the character of being merely
 "given." It does not disclose any peculiar character of "perfection." On
the contrary, the imperfection of the w orld is the theme of every religion
2 9 0   COSMOLOGY




which offers a way of escape, and of every sceptic who deplores the pre
vailing superstition. The Leibnizian theory of the "best of possible
worlds " is an audacious fudge produced in order to save the face of a
Creator constructed by contemporary, and antecedent, theologians. Fur
ther, in the case of those actualities whose immediate experience is most
completely open to us, namely, human beings, the final decision of the
immediate subject-superject r . . . 1 is the foundation of our experience of
responsibility, of approbation or of disapprobation, of self-approval or
of self-reproach, of freedom, of emphasis. This element in experience is
too large to be put aside merely as misconstruction. It governs the whole
tone of human life. It can be illustrated by striking instances from fact or
from fiction. But these instances are only conspicuous illustrations of hu
man experience during each hour and each minute. The ultimate freedom
of things, lying beyond all determinations, was whispered by Galileo
E pur si muove-freedom for the inquisitors to think wrongly, for Gali
leo to think rightly, and for the world to move on despite of Galileo and
inquisitors ( RM, 46- 47) .
   The freedom, in other words, for Whitehea d, to perhaps " have made a
mista ke," to have transformed his reader, or the Christians listening to
him, i nto enemies, ready for any kind of violence if they cannot a ffirm
that, i n one way or another, their truth has the power to emerge victori
ous agai nst error. Job may wel l have been right to refuse the hypocritical
consolations of his friends, but we must a lso imagine a Job suddenly furi
ous in the face of the " consolations " of a Whitehead telling him, " Yes, of
course, the feeling of inj ustice to which you bear witness has a respon
dent," only to add, "and the same is true of what you denounce as resig
nation, indifference, or hypocrisy on the part of your friends, and a lso of
the course of the world, which is free to reduce you to a wreck on a pile
of manure, whether you l i k e it or not, and whether your friends like it
or not."
   " But I demand that the inj ustice I have undergone be genuinely real,
that no one in the world may say that what I am feeling is of the nature
of a fact! And if you tell me that this demand is a lso of the order of fact,
all I have left will be violence to make you understand that your tender
ness and your humor a re unbearable to me-that I prefer, like Samson, to
destroy the universe rather than admit the nonexistence of a beyond
which, here and now, j ustifies me, me and me al one."
   The suffering of this cry corresponds to what Whitehead calls evil, for
what is a ffirmed proclaims its need for the destruction of what is greater
than the cry. Was it provoked by metaphysica l neutra l ity ? Certa inly, if
the latter insisted on proposing itself " at the wrong season," which is a
                      TH E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U L AT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 9 1




typica l trick of evil . This is why Whitehead's text never exhibits, as I have
j ust done, the test his categories constituted for our sense of the true and
the j ust. His cavalier and artificial perspective then seems to descri be,
whereas it is betting on a transformation that it does not describe. My
commentary, just as caval ier, implies a change of epoch and a change of
risk . The empirica l fact is that what I experience as " what is to be avoided "
is the possi bility of constituting human sol itude as an ultimate, and that
what I feel as " what is to be anticipated " is the possi bility that my reader
may consider " the death of God " to be an irreversible fact, with regard to
which any hesitation is regression .
   The vast causal independence of contemporary occasions is the preser
vative of the elbow-room within the Universe. It provides each actuality
with a welcome environment for irresponsibility. "Am I my brother's
keeper? " expresses one of the earliest gestures of self-consciousness. Our
claim for freedom is rooted in our relationship to our contemporary en
vironment (AI, 1 95 ) .
    "Am I m y brother's keeper ? " This cry o f Cain comes, rather curiously,
to i nterrupt a technical development in which Whitehead was d iscussing
the past, present, and future in reference to the physical theory of relativ
ity, as is indicated by the term "contemporary." For Wh itehead, two occa
sions are contemporary if neither belongs to the past of the other. In
usual relativistic terms, what does not belong either to the past or the
present of an event ( for those who might be reminded of something by
this, what is situated outside Minkowski 's double cone ) belongs to its
"elsewhere." And this is i ndeed what Whitehead is attempti ng: to raise
to the power of metaphysics the independence of the here with regard to
the contemporary elsewhere. Our contemporary environment does not
doom us to say " we can't bel ieve it any more." I am not the guardian ei
ther of what my epoch defi nes as an " ultimate fact " or of what it defines
as an " i rreversible acquisition."
   Whitehead no more ta kes the side of Ca in, claiming i rresponsibility,
than he does that of Job, who dema nds an account of the evils over
whelming him; no more of Galileo-the ancestor, albeit despite hi msel f,
of all those who wil l answer to the hypothesis of God by this ca l l from
the heart: " but He does not really exist! "-than of the inquisitors who
proposed that Galileo accept that his thesis was only a hypothesis and
that it does not pertain to man to constitute the world as the respondent
for his ideas. The freedom for the world to move, whatever Job and Cain,
and Galileo and Bel larmi n, and Whitehead and Nietzsche or Artaud may
th ink, since its very movement has produced them all, the dissonant heirs
of unforeseen possi bi lities of feel i ng and of suffering, of affirming and
2 9 2   COSMOLOGY




destroyi ng, of demanding accounts, reasons, and j ustifications, those pos
sibilities that are our fate, that comment on us and render us thinking.
And if speculative philosophy has a meaning, it is in sl ipping among
these possibilities, of new modes of la ughter, of cavalier creation, and of
humor: we ought not to exaggerate.
   Freedom for what inherits! A refusal to ra ise the vibrant continuities,
the mandates accepted, the risks prolonged, to the power of metaphysical
or existential affirmation. A refusa l to confer an excess of legitimacy on
what may have been ta ken up aga in, confirmed, echoed in multiple testi
monies and adventures . A refusal to j ustify a lineage by ratifying the emi
nent quality it assumes, whose consequences it should loya lly unfold. A
refusal to come to the aid of victory, blessing what has ta ken place, that
is, also kicking what might have been when it is down. For what we can
testi fy to has certa inly found in us its proxies. But the i mportance of the
testimony does not consist in its fidelity, and a bove all, no testimony is
possible with rega rd to the crowd of what has cried in vain, of what has
found no other echo than a touch of worry, a certa in something that si
lently testifies that something that might have been is not. Every perspec
tive is cava l ier.
   Whitehead 's caval ier perspective, whether he is addressing phi loso
phers, the a uthors of concepts that have so often made reason rhyme
with power, or Christians, who, in the name of the power of Truth, have
destroyed what their words disqua l ified, is neither that of a righter of
wrongs nor of a denouncer. The present does not have to take cha rge of
what has been excluded, to become the guard ian and spokesman of its
own culpability. Irrespons ible, it cannot help but decide for the epoch to
which it belongs . The terrible question-to defect, or to assume a pa in to
whose truth one no longer adheres-yields to the speculative problem:
"What might this epoch be capable of? " A humorous problem, beca use it
leaves undeci ded, and undecidable, the question of whether what this
epoch might be capable of belongs to it, or topples it into the past. Yet it
is also a technical problem, and it is up to Whiteheadian concepts to cre
ate its terms, to create the actual possibility of belonging to an epoch
without letting oneself be defined by it.
   Here, speculative empiricism reencounters somethi ng of what Nietz
sche called a " ha mmer-thought," supposed to crush and abolish what
cannot bear it. Whereas the ha mmer crushes things, Whiteheadian em
pi ricism " makes things hold together," but it does so in a rather perverse
way, apt to demora l ize the j udgment that, as an excess of subjectivity,
never ceases to come in second with regard to all experience, and every
possible that is sensed, never ceasing its claim to submit what has hap-
                     T H E   R I S K S   O F   S P E C U LAT I V E   I N T E R P R E TAT I O N   2 9 3




pened to a measure authorizing its pronouncement. In both cases, the test
is in the present. The Nietzschean eternal return: you who judge, you will
ret urn again and again, carried, prod uced, and nourished by what you
think you can judge. Tender Whiteheadian perversity: the rights conferred
upon you by the critical consciousness by which you authorize yourself
are a wonderful i l lustration of creativity; they will be added to the many,
and perhaps be articulated with what they claimed to disengage them
selves from. What you claimed to j udge once and for a l l wi l l return in
new contrasts.
   The eternal return is indeed the Similar, repetition in the eternal return
is indeed the Identical-but precisely resemblance and identity do not
exist prior to the return of what returns. They do not initially qualify
what returns, they are absolutely merged with its return. It is not the same
that returns, it is not the similar that returns, but the Same is the returning
of what returns, that is, of the Different, the similar is the returning of
what returns, that is, of the Dissimilar (DR, 3 8 4 ) .
                                                          C H A P TER E I G H TEEN




Fee l i ng One's World




           E A R E NOW up aga i nst the wa l l . Enough of putting things in
             perspective: what demands to be thought will have to be popu
             lated with concepts . First of all, that which, in Science and the
Modern World, had not succeeded in being thought: actua lity, which is
" the only va lue." As we reca ll, the Whiteheadian approach, following the
lead of the " possibilities of val ue," had fa iled in the pragmatic sense. It
was inca pable of awakening the appetite for what a bstraction left out of
consideration. The " fl ight of experience " brought a bout by " eterna l ac
tivity " did not ca use a new sun to rise, germi nating new q uestions. We
must therefore forget this eterna l activity and start all over aga in i n an
other way; starting out this time from the only thing that, according to
the ontologica l principle, is a cause for the ontologica l principle: the ac
tual entity.
   That the actua l entity is a " feel ing" of " its " world is what Whitehead
tried to think from beginning to end of Process and Reality. And if there
is one thing that must first be associated with " feel ing," it is the notion of
a vector. To feel is " to be affected by," that is, at the same time, to confer
upon what is felt " there " the power to have an effect " here." The point is
thus to ta ke literally the common-sense statement " this thing is present in
my experience insofar as it is elsewhere," and to construct its concept,
even in its most phantasmagorica l consequences . The tempta tion to
escape this " i mmediate fact " of experience is insepa ra ble from the mis
placed concreteness associated with the notion of simple loca lization . It
is this tempta tion which, for Whitehead, inspired the set of sleights of
hand through which metaphysics becomes judgment, disqua l i fying what
                                                 F E E L I N G   ONE'S   W O R L D   2 9 5




we sense in favor of what we j udge reasonable, sleights of hand that a re
destined to wind up at what is, for once, a genuine phantasmagoria, that
of the bi furcation of nature. In other words, the choice is between a con
ceptual deployment that exhibits the actually fantastic character of expe
rience, of any experience, and a retreat of this experience to reassuri ng
categories which are, above all, not to be followed too far in thei r conse
quences, for they lead straight to the absurd . That is to say that for
Whitehead, there is no choice. This, moreover, is what is affirmed by the
fourth category of explanation, i ntrod ucing the "principle of relativity."
   The principle of universal relativity directly traverses Aristotle's dictum,
"A substance is not present in a subject." On the contrary, according to
this principle an actual entity is present in other actual entities ( PR, 5 0 ) .
   We had to begin b y recalling this because this may b e what is most dif
ficult to accept in Whitehead ian metaphysics. We have, for better or worse,
become accustomed to think that two bodies can interact "at a distance,"
that is, qua distant, but we are reassured by the fact that d istance makes
itself felt (at least in the definition of the gravitational interaction ), and that
the interaction responds to a regul ar mathematical function. Here, the con
ceptual scandal is fully deployed, irreducible to a redefinition of space-time
as Einstein proposed it. If I feel something, this thing certainly enters into
the definition of my experience: it belongs to my experience, and it is not
forged by my experience . I sense it i nsofar as it testifies to something else.
I produce myself qua feeling that which is not me.
   "To feel," of course, insofar as it holds true both of an electron and of
a mathematician contemplating a sunset, cannot answer the ironic ques
tions that will arrive in throngs. Feeling is appropriate to every actual
occa sion, whereas the perceptions we m ight i nvoke as examples-a nd
especially those that are apparently most simple, the most apt to found
serious thought, the whiteness of that house I see out there, through the
window-refer to the occasion qua belonging to a highly sophisticated
social environment. The felt contrast between " here " and "over there,"
by which Wh itehead characterized the " perci pient event" in The Concept
of Nature, is by no mea ns generic. What is generic-and what this con
trast requires if nature is not to bi furcate-is that the " sophisticated
route " of occasions that gives meaning to the percipient event should no
where be reducible to a construction that bri ngs forth an ill usory " there "
for an experi ence that is in fact loca lizable, belonging only to the " here "
of perception. The vectorial character of feeling translates the " delocal
ization " of every " here."
   If the concepts constructed in The Concept of Nature are henceforth
defined as relative to a highl y sophisticated experience, beca use they
2 9 6    COSMOLOGY




designate the perceiving mind as ultimate, what will be taken as generic,
belonging to the ultimate general ities, is the statement that there is the
feeling of an "object " by a " subject." At the risk, of course, that "subject"
and "object " may find themselves sl ightly redefined .
   The philosophy of organism is the inversion of Kant's philosophy. The
Critique of Pure Reason describes the process by which subjective data
pass into the appearance of the objective world. The philosophy of or
ganism seeks to describe how objective data pass into subjective satisfac
tion, and how order in the objective data provides intensity in the subjec
tive satisfaction. For Kant, the world emerges from the subject; for the
philosophy of organism, the subject emerges from the world-a "super
ject " rather than a "subject." The word "object " thus means an entity
which is a potentiality for being a component in feeling; and the word
"subject" means the entity constituted by the process of feeling, and in
cluding this process [ . . . 1 the process is the elimination of indetermi
nateness of feeling from the unity of one subjective experience ( PR, 8 8 ) .
   We have indeed left behind the "flight o f experience " induced by eter
nal activity, for the contrast between potentia l i ty and actua lity no longer
presupposes an " underlying " acti vity. Every obj ect is defined as potentia l
ity, calling for determination: feeling, wel l and good, but how ? The atomic
character of becoming is, however, preserved . Once a n actual occasion
has produced its own determi nation, once it has satisfied a l l of its obliga
tions, it has simultaneously achieved and produced " its " specific satisfac
tion . All i ndeterminacy is con summated . The many have become one.
Whitehead calls this ful ly actua lized subjective unity " superject." The sub
ject becomes so that a superject may be.
   The many have become one . . . and is a ugmented by one. The being
world, a verita ble Lei bnizian monad, a producer-product enjoying the
adoption-of-a-position that has actua lized " its world," ca n no longer be
the syntactic subj ect of a process, since every process corresponds to a
becoming-determined. Definition, the soul of actua lity ( PR, 223 ) , has
been produced. Henceforth, being what it is, the occasion perishes qua
subject-superject, qua subj ective immediacy, to become a " that which " :
that which others will feel .
   This doctrine of organism is the attempt to describe the world a s a
process of generation of individual actual entities, each with its own ab
solute self-attainment. The concrete finality of the individual is nothing
else than a decision referent beyond itself. The "perpetual perishing " (cf.
Locke, II, X l V, 1 ) of individual absoluteness is thus foredoomed. But the
"perishing " of absoluteness is the attainment of "objective immortality "
( PR, 6 0 ) .
                                                F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   2 9 7




   Ti me, accord ing to Locke, was " perpetua l perishing," but Whitehead
goes back beyond Locke toward the Timaeus, where Plato concludes that
what is conceived by opinion with the help of sensations, and thus outside
of reason, is in incessa nt becoming but never really " is." And he happily
accepts this verdict.
    Completion is the perishing of immediacy: "It never really is " ( PR, 8 5 ) .
    Of course this borrowing ignores the Platonic intention, in a ca va lier
way. If what becomes " never rea lly is," what traditiona l ly designated the
subject, the sense of self, the immediacy of subjective presence to oneself,
never rea lly are either. It is therefore not a ma tter, as in Plato, of casting
doubt on the category of becoming, but of a ffirming that becoming as
such is indeed ungraspa ble, si nce it is the grasp itself that " ma kes things
become." What I can grasp, what I wi ll say " is," is nothing other than
what has become, what has achieved " satisfaction." It is bereft of mean
ing for itself, but it is henceforth " publ ic," avai lable for obj ectivation,
which will make it a n ingredient for new becomings.
    In other words, Whitehead here ta kes up as a metaphysica l principle
what cha racterized the relation of cogredience explored in The Concept
of Nature. Satisfaction marks the transition of the present to the past,
and this mea ns a radica l cha nge of nature. "That which" we feel belongs
to the past. But this past is not in flight, inaccessi ble. Quite the contra ry,
it is what will have to be felt. Like a book as soon as it is published, how
ever, it is inca pa ble of stipulating how it should be felt; it is a potentia lity
for feeling. One can i ndeed say " my past belongs to me," but this is a
ta utology. What has achieved " objecti ve immorta lity " belongs by defini
tion to whoever feels it. My past belongs to you as much as to me, al
though you do not feel it in the same way.
    In fact, it is wel l known that whoever endea vors to think of a n experi
ence as " truly hers" of course ipso facto makes it topple i nto the past. It
may then no longer have a ny present existence except as a term for an
anxious contrast, bringing i nto play the purely rhetorica l hypothesis,
suspicious or downright worri some, tha t its property is only an i ll usion.
And i f I ha ve to dea l with a genuine project of questioning " my " experi
ence, even this contrast can be eliminated, lea ving to what I claim as
mine only the a bstract position of a pretext, a reference. I will then em
bark upon an adventure of panic, as uneven as shooting the ra pids: the
stereotyped plea sure of confrontation, the antici pation of traps and reta li
ations, impatience i nspired by the feel ing of being the victim of the other's
bad fa ith or manipulative ta lents, the suspicion of an ungraspa ble misun
dersta nd ing, the fear of emerging victorious without having understood
what the other meant, and so on. All of that col l i des and becomes
2 9 8   C O S M O LO G Y




entangled i n a way tha t is so shaken up tha t I could very wel l say later:
"I couldn't see heads nor ta ils in it a ny more." Sometimes, moreover, the
only way to find one's bea rings is a bruta l brea k, an outright refusal, a
transition into action . For Whitehead, however, these ambiguous experi
ences testify to the fact that each experienced continuity is a produced
continuity, a verita ble miracle of resurrection of what was " dead "-that
is, " public "-ava ila ble for something other tha n itself, beyond itself.
  The concrescence, absorbing the derived data into immediate privacy,
consists in mating the data with ways of feeling provocative of the pri
vate synthesis. These sub;ective ways of feeling are not merely receptive
of the data as alien facts, they clothe the dry bones with the flesh of a real
being, emotional, purposive, appreciative. The miracle of creation is de
scribed in the vision of the prophet Ezekiel: "So I prophesied as he com
manded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up
upon their feet, an exceeding great army " ( PR, 8 5 ) .
   The import o f the " inversion o f Kant's doctrine," which has here become
the " miracle of creation," can never be overemphasized . Kant's problem
was that of the " k nowledge " of what presents itself as an " object" for a
subject. As such, this problem was the heir of a long tradition of controver
sies, which, in the Middle Ages, caused the emergence of the notion of
"objective reality," not in the sense of "as it exists," but in the sense of " that
to which " thought refers. This problem, constantly relaunched, was that
of the relation between objective rea lity a nd the thing " in itself," that is,
its " essential " or " forma l " bei ng, a s conceived and crea ted by God . In
other words, the problem of creation was above all a problem of knowl
edge, forcing us to think of the rela tion between the creative Intellect and
man, the image of God, who knows " objectively," whereas God conceives/
creates. Whitehead adopts a convergent line of approach with rega rd to
this tradition: knowing is the name for a ( pa rticular) form of creation,
and what is created is always insepa ra bly creator a nd creature, making
what it emerges from its own.
   The fact that we have to do with a " miracle of creation" obviously does
not imply a contrast between " natura l " and " supernatura l ." Creativity is
the ultimate. To tal k a bout miracles is a way of reca lling this, of recal l ing
that nothing is capable of causing " naturally" or " by itself," that every ef
ficacy presupposes that "the many become one " and renders it explicit,
but without ever being able to explain why the many is capa ble of becom
ing one.
   As we have seen, among the "ca uses " of the process is the subject itself.
Determination cannot be assimilated to a consequence that could be de
duced from initial data : as a mathema tician, Whitehead knows that the
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   2 9 9




problems that were able to find this k i nd of solution a re part of the past
of mathematics, but that a genu ine problem, i n the present, impl ies a
face-to-face confrontation between mathematicians and thei r data.
Mathematicians, however disarticulated may be thei r thought in this con
frontation, are " purposive." Likewise, the subject is not only what deter
mines itself, but what aims at its own determination, its completion as a
superject. This means that the superject is not merely the end point of the
process but is "already present," as a final cause, as that whose prod uction
orients the progressive determination. The separation between subject
and superject is thus a simplification, and Whitehead will, moreover, make
freq uent use of the inseparable binome subject-superject.
   Prehensions are not atomic; they can be divided into other prehensions
and combined into other prehensions. Also prehensions are not indepen
dent of each other. The relation between their sub;ective forms is consti
tuted by the one sub;ective aim which guides their formation. This corre
lation of sub;ective forms is termed "the mutual sensitivity " of prehensions
[ . . I the prehensions in dis;unction are abstractions; each of them is its
 .



sub;ect viewed in that abstract ob;ectification. The actuality is the totality
of prehensions with sub;ective unity in process of concrescence into con
crete unity ( PR, 235 ) .
   Here, Whitehead uses the term " prehension," which, according to his
categories, is more general than that of feeling. A feeling is always positive,
including what is felt in a synthesis, whereas a prehension may be " nega
tive." What is prehended will then be eliminated from the unified complex
feeling in the course of determination . Yet what matters more general ly is
the i mpossibility of defining a prehension independently of the process of
subjective determination. Prehensions do not explain the unity that comes
into being, without being explained by it. No explanation is ever unilateral
in Whitehead, none can abstract from what the ontological principle de
mands: among the actual entities entering into explanation appears the fi
nal ca use that the entity in the course of constitution constitutes for itsel f.
All explanations therefore set in motion a set of reciprocal presuppositions
that designate what they all presuppose: creativity.
   Concrescence thus implies a twofold convergence: the subjective forms
(the " how" of feelings ) converge upon a superject, while the multipl icity
of data of these feelings converge upon one datum, the actual world of
the " satisfied " entity. Here again, Whitehead is thinking l i ke a mathema
tician, beca use for a mathematician, a wel l-defined function expresses
and implies a convergence. If a series di verges, it does not define a math
ematical object. When the mathematician becomes a metaphysician, how
ever, convergence ceases to be the condition for a defi nition and becomes
3 0 0   C O S M O LOGY




a process of determination; and the construction of convergence that
brings to existence a single, wel l-determined world, as " what is felt," is just
as much the one that brings to existence the " subject" for which there is
convergence, the subject who feels this world . Satisfaction and determi
nation coi ncide.
   In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead had made up his mind to
atomize becoming in order to make the possible exist in an irred ucible
mode, that is, i n order to relegate to a specialized abstraction what math
ematical physics regards as its great exploit: to reduce change to a func
tion of well-defined va ria bles. One of the ways of expressing the satisfac
tion that closes the process of the constitution of an actual occasion is
to say that each felt entity, functioning as a datum for a feel ing, belongs
henceforth and ultimately to a quite determinate, functional actual world,
to a community within which it has a wel l-determined function or role.
   Calculemus, Lei bniz had proposed, and here we may understand this
exhortation in its fully deployed sense. It is no longer di rected to rational
human beings, al rea dy constituted and gathered together by an active
" we," endowed with rights and duties, proposing to submit a situation to
a consensual calculation . The " miracle of creation " cal ls for a double
creation, strictly insepa rable, of the " we " and of what is to be calculated.
This is speci fied by categories of explanation XX, XXI, XXII, and XXIII.
   (xx) That to "function " means to contribute determination to the ac
tual entities in the nexus of some actual world. Thus the determinateness
and self-identity cannot be abstracted from the community of the diverse
functionings of all entities [ . . . I
   (xxi) A n entity is actual, when it has significance for itself. By this it is
meant that an actual entity functions in respect to its own determination
[...J
   (xxii) That an actual entity by functioning in respect to itself plays di
verse roles in self-formation without losing its self-identity. It is self
creative; and in its process of creation transforms its diversity of roles
into one coherent role [ . . . J
   (xxiii) That th is self-functioning is the real internal constitution of an
actual entity. It is the " immediacy " of the actual entity. A n actual entity is
called the "sub;ect " of its own immediacy ( PR, 2 5 ) .
   These categories of explanation by n o means j ustify that w e can make
a state of a ffa irs correspond to a function. They do, however, enable us to
understa nd that this is (approximately ) possible, as physics testifies, and
to connect this possibil ity to endura nce, both from the viewpoint of the
person speaking or a ttri buting and of the being to whom a role is attrib
uted, or of the state of a ffa irs to which a function comes to correspond.
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   3 0 1




To be able to attribute a role or to make a state of a ffairs correspond to
a function is essential to what we call explaini ng, interpreting, tel l i ng a
story; but a l l these exploits profit from a conti nuity they ca nnot j ustify.
Prior to us, it is our words and our organs that already capture, exhibit,
and select the invaria nts of a l l k inds, in relation to which their own func
tional role has been established , a role, moreover, that has no need of
"consciousness." As Emi le Meyerson poi nted out, the dog who catches
a stick thrown i n the air shows himself able to "calculate" the trajectory
which, si nce Gal ileo, mathematicians have learned to describe by a math
ematical function. In no case, however, will the identification of the two
meanings of " function "-the one that refers it to a continuous state of af
fairs, and the one that designates the role assumed by a prehension in the
functioning of an actual entity-be j ustified . " To function" in the sense of
categories XX, XXI, and XXII is absolutely not " to be defined by a func
tion," and the same is true of the " actua l worl d " of an entity, never to be
confused with a "common world " that would preexist its appropri ation.
  Just as Descartes said, "this body is mine "; so he should have said,
"this actual world is mine." My process of "being myself" is my origina
tion from my possession of the world ( PR, 8 1 ) .
   The " nexus " of actual entities that Whitehead ca lls the " actua l world "
is in no way a " state of affairs ." It has no enduring identity of its own, no
identity that does not come from its appropriation by a concrescent pro
cess. Does it even constitute " a " world independently of the taking posses
sion of " its" world by each entity ? As we sha l l see, this will be one of the
sites of transformation of Whitehead 's position. Let us recal l a lready,
however, that one of the formulations of the ontological principle specifies
that there is no rea l togetherness that is not a bei ng-together in the forma l
constitution of a n actual entity. And in fact, when, in the fourteenth cate
gory of explanation, Whitehead m ust render expl icit what the definition
he has given of the nexus qua third category of existence can possibly
mean ( " nexus," or " public matters of fact" ), he avoids using the term to
gether or togetherness. Instead, he has recourse to the neutra l and static
term set. We may think of a set as a "col lection" of objects that may well
be united only by the common feature of having pleased the collector.
   That a nexus is a set of actual entities in the unity of the relatedness
constituted by their prehensions of each other, or-what is the same
thing conversely expressed-constituted by their ob;ectifications in each
other (PR, 24 ).
   The " miracle of creation " is then the transformation of a " set" i nto a
" togetherness." Yet, as I will not ti re of repeati ng, the term " miracle"
permits no savings. We must now take up the question tha t rema ins
3 0 2   COS MOLOGY




pend ing, the question of what is requi red by this transformation of a set
into a togetherness so that what is " ulti mately" felt may not in any way
be assimilated to a result in the sense of physics ( summation ) or of logic
(deduction ) . Here aga in, it i s perhaps the example of physicists articulat
i ng their functions that may guide us. The question physicists address to
thei r subject-matter is not " what does the world look li ke," but " what
variables and how should they be articulated," what to ta ke i nto account,
and how. The question is that of " what" and " how."
   It is here, of course, that the eternal objects will be required . They are
defined very briefly ( the fifth category of existence) as " pure potentials of
specific definition." The categories of existence, because they precede those
of explanation, cannot " be explained ." They will genera lly be rendered
explicit by a category of explanation, in this case the seventh category.
   That an eternal object can be described only in terms of its potentiality
for "ingression " into the becoming of actual entities; and that its analysis
only discloses other eternal objects. It is a pure potential. The term "in
gression " refers to the particular mode in which the potentiality of an
eternal object is realized in a particular actual entity, contributing to the
definiteness of that actual entity ( PR, 23 ) .
   We wi l l encounter the question o f eterna l objects again and aga in.
What matters, already at this stage, is not to attribute to them the respon
sibi lity that Plato attri butes to his Ideas. The eternal objects are not deter
minant, but " potential for determination." They are what determi nation
requi res, the definition of the " how" of each feel ing, but no particular
" how" constitutes a privileged path allowing us to rise back up toward an
eternal object. The eterna l objects, as Whitehead repeats, " a re what they
are," and they tell no story about their ingressions ( PR, 256 ) : in other
words, they explain nothing, justify nothing, guarantee nothing, privilege
nothing, especially not intellectual operations in search of abstraction.
   Correlatively, the term " i ngression " is here again a primary term . This
does not mean that Whitehead wi l l not ask the question of which eternal
objects make ingression into which actua lity: quite the contrary. Yet the
question of a " mecha nism of ingression " is not to be asked, for this would
imply that ingression is explained on the basis of eterna l objects. Beca use
i ngression is ingression of an eternal object, it is mute. All reasons will
have to fit with statements that take actua l entities as thei r reason: actual
entities a re the only reasons.
   In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had placed the object's ingression
into an event under the banner of a resolute refusal of all expl anation:
"The event is what it is beca use the object is wha t it is," but " objects are
what they are beca use events are what they are " ( CN, 1 44-1 45 ) . Here, we
                                                   F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   WO R L D   3 0 3




may say that the i ngression of an eterna l object has the consequences it
has because the actual occasion is what it is, but it must immediately be
a dded that this occasion is only itself because it is determi ned as it is de
termined . This is what is affirmed by the ninth category of explanation:
  That how an actual entity becomes constitutes what that actual entity is
[ . . j Its "being " is constituted by its "becoming." This is the "principle
 .



of process " ( PR, 2 3 ) .
   The process is rea lity, b u t rea lity i s not pure flux, it i s " realization," and
the process must be j ust as m uch said to be a " process of determ ination."
This is why eternal objects are required . One might be tempted to cal l
them " a bstract " beca use they a re sepa rate from a l l questions concerning
actua lity. And one can indeed do so, but on the condition that the term
" a bstraction " be d ivorced from the verb " to a bstract," and be connected
only to the adjectives " pure," " separate," " impassible." This is another
way of saying that the question of realization must be rad ica lly separated
from that of knowledge, and from a l l the d istinctions we produce be
tween a bstract and concrete knowledge. Whitehead confirms this when
he amuses himself by j uggl ing with the concepts we have inherited from
med ieva l philosophy, together with the link created by this philosophy
between categories of existence and ca tegories of knowledge.
  The notion of a universal is of that which can enter into the description
of many particulars; whereas the notion of a particular is that it is de
scribed by universals, and does not itself enter into the description of any
other particular [ . . . j both these notions involve a misconception. A n
actual entity cannot b e described, even inadequately, b y universals; be
cause other actual entities do enter into the description of any one actual
entity [ . . . j Thus every so-called "universal " is particular in the sense of
being ;ust what it is, diverse from everything else; and every so-called
"particular " is universal in the sense of entering into the constitutions of
other actual entities ( PR, 4 8 ) .
   The eterna l object i s exactly what it is, a n d a s such, it is unknowable,
unnamable. Th is is so, not in the manner of the God of negative theology,
by his eminence, but beca use the verbs " to know" or " to name " refer to
(sophisticated ) modes of feeling, a l l of which presuppose the determina
tion of the " how." I f eterna l objects have nothing to do with what we cal l
an abstraction, i n the sense o f an " a bstract characterization of a situa
tion," it is because they cha racterize nothing, but are requi red by the
" how" of each characterization. When physicists try to understand, won
dering how to articulate their function, that is, what varia bles to choose,
one will not ad dress eternal objects in order to understand what they are
trying to achieve, to j ustify the order they are trying to abstract from
3 0 4   COSMOLOGY




their data . Although every compa rison is da ngerous, however, the refer
ence to eterna l objects, whose ingression " contri butes to the defini teness
of an actual entity," ca n be more ana logica lly adequate when what is at
sta ke concerns physici sts trying to understa nd, to " rea l ize," the way i n
which thei r problem c a n ( perhaps) b e solved . F o r t h e adequate analogy is
the one tha t enables the celebration of a process of co-creation of physi
cists and of their function. Indeed , what is in play is the twofold trans
formation of a perplexed , hesitant being, and of a mass of dispara te,
partia lly redundant information, indeterminate with rega rd to its mean
ing, into a being who knows how to take each item of information into
account in a determinate way, the meaning of some of them being deter
mined by their articulation, by the " how " of thei r ta king-into-account,
and others being defined as ultimately insignificant.
   An eternal object, in abstraction from any one particular actual entity,
is a potentiality for ingression into actual entities. In its ingression into
any one actual entity, either as relevant or irrelevant, it retains its poten
tiality of indefinite diversity of modes of ingression, a potential indeter
mination rendered determinate in this instance. This definite ingression
into a particular actual entity is not to be conceived as the sheer evoca
tion of that eternal object from "not-being " into "being "; it is the evocation
of determination out of indetermination. Potentiality becomes reality;
and yet it retains its message of alternatives that the actual entity has
avoided. In the constitution of an actual entity:-whatever component is
red, might have been green; and whatever component is loved, might
have been coldly esteemed ( PR, 1 4 9 ) .
   A s is specified b y the principle o f relativity stated b y the fourth cate
gory of explana tion, " i t belongs to the nature of 'beings' to be a potential
for each 'becoming' " ( PR, 22 ) . What has happened has happened, and
will have to be felt as such. One may perhaps-Whitehea d does so
spea k of negative prehension with rega rd to beings, but this will not
mean exclusion, only indistinction, or reduction to insignificant noise.
When it comes to eterna l objects, however, the notion of negative prehen
sion will take on a decisive importance: by negative prehension, an eter
nal object may be eliminated. Even if its ingression had been determinant
in the constitution of what the concrescence inherits as " having to be
felt," it can itself be excluded from the synthesis that determines the way
in which this concrescence will satisfy the obliga tion. A component that
was loved can be inherited i n the mode of indi fference, and it will soon
be submerged by the grea t noise of the world .
   The actualities have t o be felt; while the pure potentialities can be dis
missed. So far as concerns their functionings as objects, this is the great
                                                F E E L I N G   O N E'S   W O R L D   3 0 5




distinction between an actual entity and an eternal ob;ect. The one is
stubbo rn matter of fact; and the other never loses its "accent " of potenti
ality ( PR, 239).
   Beca use the eternal objects may be " excluded from feeling," actual
worlds may diverge. The Leibnizian idea of a convergence among all
viewpoints towa rd " the same world," with each monad including, i n its
way, the tota lity of the world, had already been abandoned in Science
and the Modern World. For a decision to be concrete, it must not only
reflect a finite viewpoint, which would be the case if the decision bore
only upon what will be taken into account in a distinct way and what
wi l l be felt in a way that is merely obscure. It must be partia l, in the sense
of capable of eliminating the " how" that defined someth ing that is being
felt. The mirror must be broken and the metaphor of reflection aban
doned . It must be possible to decide that one doesn't want to know about
it, that one is not one's brother's keeper. In Science and the Modern
World, this possibil ity was ensured both by the discrimi nation concern
ing being a nd not-being ( the ideal situation) and by a l l the non sequiturs,
" this fa r but no farther," that affirmed the l i mited character of the prob
lematic horizon with rega rd to which a decision is taken ( God as the
principle of li mitation ) . And all of this referred to the triple envisagement
of eterna l activity. It henceforth perta ins to each entity to " explain itsel f"
with regard to what it takes into account, and with regard to the way it
wi l l eval uate what it takes into account. Convergence is the work of the
subject a s it becomes a superject while it appropriates " its world," which
did not preexist this appropriation qua " world " but qua nexus or set.
   The actual world is thus what is expressed, whose expression is the
subjective satisfaction, and it is categorica lly i mpossible to separate ex
pression and expressed, to conceive the expression in contrast to what is
expressed . This impossibil ity must even be stated twice. It derives, first,
from the fifth category of explanation of the Whitehead ian scheme, which
may recal l the Leibnizian principle of indiscernibles, accord ing to which
no two identica l viewpoi nts on the world exist, nor, therefore, do two
similar blades of grass.
   That no two actual entities originate from an identical universe [ . . . 1
the nexus of actual entities in the universe correlate to a concrescence is
termed "the actual world " correlate to that concrescence ( PR, 22-23 ) .
   To this impossibility, which is " poor " beca use it i s compatible with the
fact that there are " nearly simi lar " viewpoi nts, or nexus, another must be
added. In fact, it is the very possibil ity of "comparing" that is in question
when one disti nguishes the initial nexus, as a set, from the actual world as
a subjective " togetherness." The compa rison abstracts from the " private"
3 0 6   COSMOLOGY




cha racter of the subjective synthesis, designati ng what is compared in the
mode of objectivity, and therefore i mplying its " public " character, avail
able to be felt. In order to a ffirm the categorea l error consti tuted by any
eva luation about the way a n actua l entity has eva luated its world, White
head has recourse to a term that comes stra ight from the med ieval
tradition.
  I will adopt the pre-Kantian terminology, and say that the experience
en;oyed by an actual entity is that entity forma liter. By this I mean that
the entity, when considered "formally," is being described in respect to
those forms of its constitution whereby it is that individual entity with its
own measure of absolute self-realization ( PR, 5 1 ) .
    The distinction between " forma l " and "objective" belongs to pre
Cartesian philosophy and reflects the hia tus between the d ivine Intellect,
which makes conception and creation coi nci de, on the one hand, a nd the
human i ntel lect, to which "objective rea lity" corresponds, on the other.
Yet Whitehead, not without humor, takes this distinction from Desca rtes
at the very moment when Descartes, in the responses to the Ob;ections
that fol low his Meditations, tries to close the problem a nd to focus the
philosopher's effort upon "objective rea lity " a lone. Descartes, Whi tehead
a ffirms, expressed the very thesis of objectivation he hi msel f defends,
when he writes,
   Hence the idea of the sun will be the sun itself existing in the mind, not
indeed formally, as it exists in the sky, but ob;ectively, i.e. in the way in
which ob;ects are wont to exist in the mind; and this mode of being is
truly much less perfect than that in which things exist outside the mind,
but it is not on that account mere nothing, as I have already said ( PR, 76 ) .
   What neither Descartes nor the medieva l thi nkers h a d foreseen is
tha t the d istinction between " forma l " and " o bjecti ve" would be d i sen
gaged from the q uestion o f knowledge, to be extended to everything
tha t happens.
   Every actua l entity, once it has determi ned itself, wi l l be " objectified "
by others: its " being" wi l l be that it is to be felt. And i f this " way of be
ing" can be said to be " imperfect," this is because wha t will be objectified
is not the indivisible unity of the actua l entity for itsel f, its " forma l "
unity, causa sui. What w i l l b e objectified, cal led upon t o participate i n a
new process, is a n entity henceforth defi ned as a na lyzable, endowed with
a " morphology " tha t articulates as its " parts " all the feel i ngs that con
verged i nto a unique, nondecomposable satisfaction.
   The peculiarity of an actual entity is that it can be considered both
"ob;ectively " and "formally." The "ob;ective " aspect is morphological so
far as that actual entity is concerned: by this it is meant that the process
                                                F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   WO R L D   ) 0 7




involved is transcendent relatively to it, so that the esse of its satisfaction
is sentir i . The "formal" aspect is functional so far as that actual entity is
concerned: by this it is meant that the process involved is immanent in it.
But the objective consideration is pragmatic. It is the consideration of the
actual entity in respect to its consequences ( PR, 220 ) .
   A n entity will b e objective qua prehended by another entity, It itself has,
in one way or another, " satisfied its obligations" : nothing more ca n hap
pen to it; the consequences of what it has " made happen " concern entities
other than it, that is, the entities that will prehend it, The entity prehended
by others as a defined, obsti nate, esta bl ished fact imposing the q uestion
of its consequences, is not, a s Descartes sa i d, a " pure nothing." But its
consequences will have to be produced, and it is up to what prehends it to
prod uce them, to confer upon them thei r determinate identity, their prag
matic va lue.
   In other words, objective consideration does not initia lly center a round
the q uestion of k nowledge, even i f all knowledge is a l so pragma tica lly
ta k ing-into-account, It is generic: every actua l entity i n its process of con
stitution is obliged to ta ke i nto account what has ta ken place, what is
publicly i mposed a s having taken place but wh ich is, a s such, a signifi
cant, wa iting for the pragmatic significa nce others will confer upon it,
   In contrast, when Whi tehead " tel ls the story " of the way an entity de
cides for itsel f by itsel f, forma lly, proceeding to what he ca lls a genetic
analysis or division, he is cha racterizing a " private" process, This means
that such an analysis is obviously an a bstraction, and more precisely, it
abstracts from the fact that it cannot be carried out by a nyone. It consti
tutes an ontologica l impossibility beca use there exists no possible " hold "
on the process of concrescence. In fact, between Science and the Modern
World and Process and Reality, we ca n say tha t Whitehead has " simply"
switched a bstractions. Eterna l activity could only be characterized in
a bstraction from actua lity, which is a l so impossible. The problem, how
ever, was not that it is impossible but that the a bstraction did not inspire
any a ppetite for that from which it had abstracted : a fa iled fra ming of
the problem, Genetic ana lysis-j ust a s i mpossi ble-wi ll, for its part, be a
success i f it obliges the reader, and Whitehead himself, to thin k .
   In fact, the categories that dea l with concrescence a s such a r e ca lled
"ca tegories of obl igation." The point is neither to descri be nor to explain,
but to prod uce a set of constra ints that impose on thought a regime of
reciproca l presupposition. A " leap of the imagina tion " may answer these
categories, but it is a vertica l leap, conferring on word s the capacity to
evoke, not to designate, It is not tha t process " transcends " language, but
what is appropriate to it is the component of stammering in la nguage,
3 0 8   C O S M O LO G Y




the "well, what I mean is . . . " or the "how should I say . . " in which
                                                                   .



what hesitates is not a set of potential statements but the very word ing of
the words, their a rticulation, together with the " I " who " should say."
   The analogy is, of course, false from a twofold perspective. On the one
hand, stammering refers to a " route " of occasions, each one of which has
produced its own satisfaction for itself. Moreover, once "what one mea nt"
has finally been said, the rel ief, the conscious impression of success, trans
lates a message about the alternatives avoided, about the possi bi lity of a
stammering that aborts in a renunciation. Likewise, when physicists or
mathematicians construct a function that converges, it is a genuine achieve
ment aga inst the background of possi ble fai l ure, the conscious experi
ence that one has succeeded in constructing what is requi red for a func
tion to have a meaning. But the convergence as prod uci ng a unique,
well-determined functional world, as rea lized by the subject "who feels its
world," is not, for its pa rt, a " success," in the sense that it never " misses."
   No actual entity can be conscious of its own satisfaction; for such
knowledge would be a component in the process, and would thereby al
ter the satisfaction ( PR, 8 5 ) .
   I n n o case will an actua l entity, a s such, be able to become "conscious "
of the role it assigns to what it feels, of the way it " functions." " Becoming
conscious " is never "coincidence with oneself" but is always relative to a
de facto continuity. Achieving convergence, for the actual entity, mea ns to
perish from immediacy, and it cannot be sanctioned by any " becoming
conscious" which, as such, might be bequeathed to what fol lows it. Cor
relatively, consciousness, for instance, the feeling that one has more or less
succeeded in saying what one " meant," does not refer to any dynamic of
advent of the truth, but should rather evoke a mutation that affects its
social environment, characterized by a new d istribution between what is
" mine " and " not mine," a mutation that we do not yet have the means to
explore.
   Let us return to concrescence, the site of the process of convergence. It
cannot, for its pa rt, give any meaning to an experience of success. What
is more, it translates and renders expl icit the fact that creativity, White
head 's ultimate, is neutra l with rega rd to the d isti nction between cosmos
and " disordered " multiplicity. Whatever the individual satisfaction, it is
a lways an exempl i fication of creativity. However, one cannot stop here.
If incoherence is to be avoided, concrescence, as such, must provide the
mea ns for approaching the cosmic q uestion. In itself, the ambition of
metaphysica l neutra l ity to which it responds presupposes in effect, by
construction, a reference to the cosmos: it presupposes the possi bility of
correcti ng the awa reness of its excess subjectivi ty.
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E 'S   WO R L D   3 0 9




   As we saw when it came to characterizing evil, the destroyer of "greater "
things: all satisfactions cease to be equal from a cosmological viewpoint,
a viewpoint that makes a di fference between the creation of new contrasts
and the static chaos produced by the sempiternal clash between ways of
inheriting characterized by the reiteration of the nega tive prehensions of
what each ha s to deny in order to affirm itself. This cosmologica l view
point, like every genuinely cosmological viewpoint, whether it refers to
Stoic thought or to that of Leibniz, puts us to the test. It designates a kind
of truth access to which is at the sa me time a transformation of those who
accede. Adj usted to metaphysica l neutrality, the cosmologica l test may be
so described : people who hate the world that clashes with their aims or
hopes, hate their world, the one they have provided for themselves by
producing themselves as hateful, denying or relegating to irreleva nce all
that might have been felt as worthy of love. Yet in order to function, this
test must correspond to a possibility of feeling on the part of the person
who hates.
   In this process [of concrescence] , the negative prehensions which effect
the elimination are not merely negligible. The process through which a
feeling passes in constituting itself also records itself in the subjective
form of the integral feeling. The negative prehensions have their own
subjective forms which they contribute to the process. A feeling bears on
itself the scars of its birth; it recollects as a subjective emotion its struggle
for existence; it retains the impress of what it might have been, but is not.
It is for this reason that what an actual entity has avoided as a datum
for feeling may yet be an important part of its equipment. The actual
cannot be reduced to mere matter of fact in divorce from the potential
(PR, 226-22 7 ) .
   Without nega ti ve prehensions a n d the scars they leave, Whitehead's
system would be incoherent, since there would be an a rbitra ry discon
nection between neutra l metaphysics and the cosmological viewpoint. As
we have already seen, the ingression of eternal objects gave mea ning to
what, in a sophisticated experience, might be called " experience of the
possible " : " Potentia lity becomes reality; and yet it reta ins its message of
alterna tives which the actual entity has avoided ." Of course, one will not
say that a route of electronic occa sions, for instance, can take such a mes
sage into consideration. Here, we must distinguish between what is ge
neric and wha t matters. The message is generic, but it ca n matter only to
routes of occa sions that a re highly sophi stica ted , those for which modes
of experience dominated by the " subjective emotions" that we ca ll resent
ment, hope, despa ir, ha te, or trust have a meaning; those, therefore, for
whom the d i fference between chaos a nd cosmos counts. And it is also for
3 1 0   C O S M O LO G Y




these routes of occasions that the " scars " left by a feeling's struggle for
existence may matter. Their generic character makes it possible for na
ture not to bifurcate, and for consciousness not to be responsible for the
feel ing that something else was possible. They are required by the cos
mos, if the difference between convergence by elimination and conver
gence by new contrasts is not to i mpose itself like a " divine judgment"
fa ll ing upon indi fferent beings . A contradiction must be able to be felt as
a dead end , or as a defeat.
    In the Whiteheadian universe, then, one is never even with regard to
anything, although to consider oneself even is part of a perfectly legiti
mate way of inheriting. Of cou rse, all of Whitehead's work bears witness
to the possibility of tra nsforming sca rs i nto data , into contrasts that are
felt in the mode of an obligation. One must succeed in affirming together
what has been felt, and what this feeling has excluded in order to occur.
Underl ining the traces testifying to the insistence of wha t phi losophers
have nevertheless eliminated as negligible, in the na me of the coherence of
their system-typica lly the unexpected a ffirmative emergence, at the haz
ard of one of his discussions, of what a philosopher intends to exclude
constitutes for Whitehead a principle of reading in the field of the history
of philosophy. Th is is not to criticize the a uthor but to constitute the pro
tocol of his own underta king: to include and a ffirm together what seemed
doomed to contrad iction. However, for the very principle of this work to
be coherent with what it a ffirms, it had to be a uthorized categorea lly. For
speculative philosophy, which explodes the categories of empiricism and
rationalism by adding enough reasons to save all the facts together, to be
possible, negative prehensions had, by categorea l definition, to leave sca rs.
   If, however, the eternal objects and the scars left by what has been
avoided are required by the possi bility of a cosmos, they by no mea ns suf
fice to guarantee it. More precisely, they a re neutra l with regard to the
possibil ity that evil may be overcome. In fact, the message concerning
alternatives may add venom to the wounds; the decision to avoid may be
intensified by resentment and find itself stabilized by that resentment. As
for the possibility of inheriting in a way that integrates a feeling that has
as its datum what was an emotiona l tone, that is, a feeling of the contrast
between what has been and what might have been, it certa inly testifies to
a soph isticated experience, but it is not "good in itsel f." J ustice-dea lers ca n
be public da ngers: they ca n empower the "trick of evil," imposing the im
porta nce of a feeling at the wrong season, ma king the future of a society
hesitate between regression and the creation of new contrasts.
   More generally, the nine categories of obl igation ( the fifth of which
will be, as we wi ll sec, eli minated in the course of writing) only detail
                                               F E E L I N G   O N E ' S   W O R L D   3 1 1




what "obl iges " i nheritance, or the way a n entity produces itself by i nher
iti ng from the past. They a re neutra l with rega rd to a ny idea of " mora l "
obligation. The " atomic" character o f the entity i s respected : it is " its "
satisfaction that the entity pursues as its final ca use, not cosmic harmoni
zation. As we will see, even with rega rd to God, the atomic character of
this pursuit will be mai nta i ned . Albeit barely: Whitehead will have to avoid
that the "divine ordering " that "conditions creativity" be that thanks to
which an enti ty, while pursu i ng its own end, contributes to the best of
worlds, like a donkey urged along by a carrot. If he had fai led on this
point, God would have been, if not the creator, then at least responsible
for the cosmic order, like the person holding the ca rrot is responsible for
the donkey's progress.
    In other words, the difference between cosmos a nd chaos has no d irect
translation i nto the categoreal scheme . It will, however, take on a more
concrete mea ning when it comes to the crea tive advance itself, that is, by
and in the production of what ma kes a d ifference that matters, which
Whitehead henceforth calls " society."
                                                        C H A P TER N I NETEEN




J ustifying Life?




         NA MUSEUM
     I
                      the crystals are kept under glass cases; in zoological
        gardens the animals are fed. Having regard to the universality of
      W reactions with environment, the distinction is not quite absolute.
It cannot, however, be ignored. The crystals are not agencies requiring
the destruction of elaborate societies derived from the environment; a liv
ing society is such an agency. The societies which it destroys are its food.
This food is destroyed by dissolving it into somewhat simpler social ele
ments. It has been robbed of something. Thus, all societies require inter
play with their environment; and in the case of living societies, this inter
play takes the form of robbery. The living society may, or may not, be a
higher type of organism than the food which it disintegrates. But whether
or no it be for a general good, life is robbery. It is at this point that with
life morals become acute. The robber requires justification ( PR, 1 0 5 ) .
   Only the " anti-specists," that new va riety o f sa int, c a n assign them
selves the goa l of teaching their cats to appreciate vegeta rian food . And
unless they have recourse to genetic manipulations, they will not be able
to transform the situation " i n general," but will have to address each cat,
one by one. The cat's mode of existence implies the death of mice and
birds, and that of the least cell impl ies the destruction of sophisticated
chemica l edifices. Life is robbery, and the robber requires a justification.
Not any specific robber, this cat eating this mouse, but the general prin
ciple that singularizes life, the link between order and destruction. Life
therefore impl ies the cosmologica l question.
  The d i stinction Whitehead proposes between crysta ls and " l iving
societies " corresponds to the contemporary distinction, associated with
                                                       J U STIFY I N G   L I F E ?   3 1 3




the work of Prigogine, between "equilibrium structures " capa ble of
mainta i n i ng themselves i ndefinitely, requiring only that the envi ron
ment maintain itself more or less as it is, and " d issipative structures,"
the price of whose existence is " dissipa tion " : " something" in the envi
ronment must be consumed to nourish the perma nent processes whose
structure expresses its articulation . Yet Whitehead does not i ntend to
ra ise the genera l question implied by this d i stinction : fo r him, a cy
clone, as a typica l d i ssipative structure, would not have requ i red a cos
mologica l j ustification . The cosmological question arises with rega rd to
" l i fe," for in this case destruction is not merely a fact. The history of l i fe
is, a mong other thi ngs, that of an active invention of means for locat
ing, grasping, seduci ng, capturing, trapping, and pursuing. A cyclone
does not seek out the most heavily populated zone to feed on the rav
ages it ca uses . It goes where it goes. To tel l the story of the evolution of
living bei ngs, by contrast, is to tel l the story of a n increase i n the cre
ation of ever more effective modes of destruction, inventing new preys
for new predators.
     That what is under discussion is the mora l order, and with it the "cos
mos," will be a shock for biologists . The celebration of the moral har
mony of nature is pa rt of their prehistory. Evolutiona ry biologists a re
proud of describing the history of living beings as essentially opportu
nistic, and therefore rebell ious to everything that might resemble the
unity of a proj ect, an intentiona lity, or even a measure capable of defin
ing progress. On this last point, Whitehead might perhaps speak of an
excess subjecti vity: a testimony, certainly, to a success of human con
sciousness-to have succeeded in not consti tuting itself a s the norm and
truth of the evolution of living bei ngs-but a testimony that is mute
about a l l that is impl ied by the very possibi l i ty of this success. A specula
tive position cannot, for its part, be content with the twofold, rather
abstract satisfaction of having esca ped both anthropocentrism and the
mora lity of nature. As always, when we have to do with speculative phi
losophy, the point is to be concrete, that is, complete. And therefore, to
render contrasts expl icit, whereas scientists, i n the name of evolutiona ry
history and the unity of one nature, accentua te resemblances.
     As an example of such contrasts, let us take the term "opportunity."
When used by biologists, it allows the successful denial of the need to de
scribe such-and-such a living being qua responding to a goal, or qua means
for the rea lization of a project. Yet to cha racterize evolution as opportu
nistic, if it is not one abstraction denying another abstraction, in this case
denyi ng the cha racterization of evolution as finalistic, ca lls for a whole
series of requisites. An opportunity does not exist without something
3 1 4   COSMOLOGY




capable of seizing it, that is, of inventing it qua opportuni ty, qua possi bil
ity " for" somethi ng new.
   "Opportunity," possibility " for" : these terms are not metaphysica lly
neutra l . They refer d i rectly to the question of the cosmos, and hence to
the question of God qua conditioning creativi ty. It is in fact the question
of the " divine ordering " that may wel l " require a j ustification ." However,
Whitehead makes it clear that this orderi ng by no means implies a " proj 
ect," a global vision, a final ized "order of nature." Hence the terminologi
cal choice on which I have a l ready commented:
   If we say that God's primordial nature is "vision," we suggest a maimed
view of the subjective form, divesting it of yearning after concrete fact-no
particular facts, but after some actuality. There is deficiency in God's pri
mordial nature which the term "vision " obscures [ . . . J "envisagement " is
perhaps a safer term than "vision " (PR, 33-34 ) .
    Here again, Whitehead may have been thin king aga inst Lei bniz, against
the image of a God able to " read " in the sl ightest state of a monad the
total series of states it unfolds in the course of time, thus bringing to exis
tence those monads whose harmonious totality will give meaning to a
particular world, the best of all possible worlds. In that case, life would be
j ustified without a ny particular question, together with the world, with
everything referring to a single unknown, that of the definition God has
given to the " best." Job's friends would be right.
    God yearns after concrete facts, whatever they may be: the future,
whatever its mode of existence in the divine " subjective form," will not
appeal to the realization of a particular possibility but to the concrete fact
as such: " some actuality " as causa sui, self-determining its own value.
Otherwise, God would have a position ana logous to that of Socrates,
who, in the Meno, waits for the slave to say to him, " Yes, Socrates, you
are right." That would be a caricature of the " yearning" Whitehead por
trays. Socrates is not yearning after an answer, whatever it may be; he is
waiting for the "yes " that will al low him to move on to the next stage in
his argument.
    Wi th the question of life as requiring j ustification, we a re thus begin
ning the maneuvers to approach a terrai n that did not exist prior to the
fl ight of speculative experience. What rema ined somewhat incoherent i n
Science and the Modern World w i l l also b e explored : on the one hand,
eternal activity had no need of obsti nate and destructive living beings; on
the other, organisms were defined as " l imited to being none other than
themsel ves," that is, as bei ng their own j usti fication. Coherence, this ti me,
must be satisfied in a positive way, without easy ways out or half
solutions. Thus, with regard to the way the di vine envisagement is defi-
                                                      J U STIFY I N G   L I F E ?   3 1 5




cient, the rather poor idea should be proscribed that God concei ves the
future " i n broad outli ne," and is therefore yearning a fter an actual i ty that
should specify what he conceptual ized only in a " vague " way. Such an
idea would i mply that Whitehead not only read Leibniz with the rad ical
lack of indulgence that a mathema tician may reserve for another mathe
matici an because they both share the same ideal of the wel l-framed prob
lem, but that he read him badly. For between a " vague " possible and a
determinate reality, what interposes itself is the multiplicity of uni verses
that diverge as radically as one may wish. For Leibniz, there is no opposi
tion between "Adam the sinner" and "Ada m who resists temptation,"
hence participating in the history of an eternal paradise, but a difference
so minimal that precisely only God's vision could discern them. A God
who coincides, in one way or another, with a mode of existence of the
future qua " partially indeterminate" would, by contrast, be the God of
a regular, stable uni verse, where Adam's role is robustly attributed , thus
turni ng "our experience of responsibility, of approbation or of disappro
bation, of self-approval or of sel f-reproach, of freedom, of emphasis"
into an i l lusory construction . The reason Whitehead can be so hard on
Lei bniz is that they both a ffirm the same kind of world, a world that
" bifurca tes everywhere," although they affirm it by di fferent mea ns.
  In Leibniz [ . . . I the bifurcations, divergences of series, are veritable
frontiers between worlds that are mutually incompossible; so that the
monads that exist include the totality of the compossible world that
comes into existence. For Whitehead (and for many modern philoso
phers), in contrast, bifurcations, divergences, incompossibilities, and dis
agreements belong to the same multicolored world, which can no longer
be included among expressive units, but merely does or undoes following
prehensive units and according to variable configurations, or changing
captures ( LP, 1 1 0-1 1 1 ) .
   The j ustification of life does not require a " h igher freedom" that would
see farther and wider than we. It requires "yearning" as such, a yearning
di rected both to wha t is done and to what is undone, in the " here and
now " of decision: thus and not otherwise. Here, moreover, Whitehead
meets Lei bniz once again, for whether Lei bnizian or Whiteheadian, the
solution proposed to the question of the world's mora l order will consti
tute a kind of " hammer-thought," accord ing to the expression N ietzsche
reserved for his hypothesis of the eternal return. Li ke this hypothesis,
the Whiteheadian sol ution will pay no attention to the preserva tion of
the particularities that are dear to us, which we associate with proj ects,
disappointments, and even with our maintenance in existence through
good and bad encounters. Yes, God " makes a difference," but for Leibniz as
3 1 6   C O S M O LOGY




for Whitehead, this di fference does not ratify the alternative between " be
ing authorized to hope " or " having the right to despa ir"; it d isplaces it.
  It is as if one told men: do your duty, and be happy with what will hap
pen, not only because you could not resist divine providence or the
nature of things (which may be enough to feel at peace, but not to be
happy) but also because you have to do with a good master. And this is
what might be called fatum christianum (Th, 3 1 ) .
    Yet how ca n one tel l Job he has a "good master" without unleashing
his fury ? How can one tell a woman whose child has been ea ten by a tiger
that the " robbery " to which she has fallen victim has a j ustification ? For
Whitehead, the d i fference made by the hypothesis of God cannot evoke a
secret harmony between a general j ustificatory principle and particu lar
circumsta nces. It ca nnot ask Job to trust in God 's j ustice, nor the woman
to understand the loss of her child. Rather, it passes between despa i r as
an eventual concrete fact- " I can no longer find any reason to hope " or
"life has made a hog out of me "-and the ratification that wou ld come
to justify it- " may the world that has betrayed my hopes be cursed! " or
"well, then, a hog I shall be ! "-what Nietzsche called resentment. It im
pl ies the rather strange possibil ity of not despairing of the world, even
when it crushes you or kills you.
   The primordial appetitions which jointly constitute God's purpose are
seek ing intensity, and not preservation. Because they are primordial,
there is nothing to preserve. He, in his primordial nature, in unmoved by
love for this particular, or that particular; for in this foundational process
of creativity, there are no preconstituted particulars. In the foundations
of his being, God is indifferent alike to preservation and to novelty. He
cares not whether an immediate occasion be old or new, so far as concerns
derivation from its ancestry. His aim for it is depth of satisfaction as an
intermediate step towards the fulfillment of his own being. His tenderness
is directed towards each actual occasion, as it arises.
   Thus God's purpose in the creative advance is the evocation of intensi
ties ( PR, 1 05 ) .
   " Evocation," the term chosen by Whitehead, i s interesting: spiritua lists
do not command the spirits they "evoke " : they only know how to call
them, how to invite their coming. Likewise, one does not command mem
ory, as Bergson showed when speaking of pure memory. Evoked memory
emerges when consciousness becomes a " med ium," passi ve and yet del ib
erate, the search not for a memory but for the way that memory a l lows
itself to be approached , as it vacillates between expansion and fl ight. In
both cases, the accent is placed not on a project but on a " here and now"
on which everything depends, both suspension and opening up to a pos-
                                                      J U S T I F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 1 7




sibi l i ty of becoming. Yet although the term " evoke " is i nteresti ng, it does
not authorize any analogy. There is no analogy between divine experience
and those we ca n evoke; otherwise, it would lead us to what is obscene.
While the groans of human suffering rise up, an indifferent God feeds on
what, for him, corresponds to so many a nonymous intensities.
   And yet, God is indeed indifferent to what counts most for us: preser
vation. Divine eva luation is impa rtial and makes no d istinction between
a " new" occasion and an "old" one, deriving from a long ancestral line,
while it is this difference that is implied by our complaints and our
cla ims, our feel i ng of injustice and demands for justification. It i s our life
that is at sta ke and not some fundamenta lly anonymous " present," since
as soon as I think of it as " mine," it will have sli pped into the past, will
have become objectively immortal, availa ble for any objectifica tion. If
God is a " good master," it is not, as with Leibniz, because he has chosen
the best of all worlds; but the test is a nalogous, for what his tenderness is
directed to is deeply indifferent to us.
   Correlatively, the justification of life does not imply, or at least not d i
rectly, what was the centra l notion of Science and the Modern World: the
orga nism, whose success had to be defined as preservation or endurance.
Yet this will not stop Whitehead from continuing to spea k of his philoso
phy as a "philosophy of orga nism."
  In the philosophy of organism it is held that the notion of "organism "
has two meanings, interconnected but intellectually separable, namely, the
microscopic meaning and the macroscopic meaning. The microscopic
meaning is concerned with the formal constitution of an actual occasion,
considered as a process of realizing an individual unity of experience. The
macroscopic meaning is concerned with the givenness of the actual world,
considered as the stubborn fact which at once limits and provides oppor
tunity for the actual occasion ( PR, 1 2 8-1 2 9 ) .
     According t o this d istinction between microscopic a n d macroscopic,
the organism has lost wha t constituted its signification in Science and the
Modern World. For there, it played the part of a key that allowed the
question of the order of nature to be penetrated, in such a way that the d i
versity of cases was articulated to a unique definition. The orga nism a nd
a l l the definitions it authorizes depend on a success: the orga nism exists
insofa r as it succeeds in enduring, that is, also, in infecting its environment
with " patience." Yet the "microscopic " organism constituted by the actua l
entity no longer conj ugates "endura nce " and "success " at a l l . From now
on, the orga nism articulates an " indivisible process of rea lization," on the
one hand, which never fa ils because it always ends in what Whitehead
ca lls "satisfaction," and, on the other hand, "objective immortal i ty," what
3 1 8   COSMOLOGY




is given to be felt by others, an immorta lity bei ng i mpartially accorded
to everything that has satisfied its obligations, in whatever way, whether
trivial or innovative. As far as this " macroscopic " signification of the or
ganism is concerned, it seems to designate the role assumed by the environ
ment. Yet it is only the actual world of an occasion as objectified by the
ones that have to feel it. The dynamics of infection, in which the eontrast
between patience and impatience was played out in Science and the Mod
ern World, has thus disappeared. The environment is "given," simultane
ously limit and opportunity. It is no longer a " stake."
   The organism is thus no longer a nything more than a witness to the
past, and yet, by its stubborn survival, it translates a continuity that is
i mportant to Wh itehead. The " actua l entities" are " final real i ties" or "res
verae " ( the fi rst ca tegory of exi stence ) , as the orga nism was in Science
and the Modern World, beca use they, l i ke this organism, are a " unifying
hold i ng-together," and beca use, aga i n like the organism, this holding
together cannot be described in the abstract mode of Aristotelian logic, in
terms of a subject endowed with attri butes. What the subject "attri butes
to itself" belongs to it only in the very act by which, as it consti tutes it
self, it attributes it to itself.
   That which, in Process and Reality, "endures," a " mundane " success to
which God is indifferent, has as its new name " society " or " nexus enjoy
i ng a social order." This is no longer a nexus qua " set," that which is cor
related with every actual entity, where it is up to that entity to turn it i nto
" its" world. It is a much more limited set, which i ncludes actua l entities
having somethi ng in common.
  A nexus enjoys "social order " where (i) there is a common element of
form illustrated in the definiteness of each of its included actual entities,
and (ii) this common element of form arises in each member of the nexus
by reason of the conditions imposed upon it by its prehensions of some
other members of the nexus, and (iii) these prehensions impose that con
dition of reproduction by reason of their inclusion of positive feelings of
that common form. Such a nexus is called a "society," and the common
form that is the "defining characteristic " of the society ( PR, 3 4 ) .
   A n a bstract definition, t o s a y the least, b u t w e c a n understand its ab
straction i f we reca ll that the concept of society must succeed in what the
organism sought to accomplish: to unite under the same definition all that
" endures " in one way or another, whether electron or human person .
   Two things are remarkable in this definition, which, of course, enables a
rather clear relation with the eeo-ethology associated by Science and the
Modern World with entangled organisms. First of all, the "common form,"
felt positively by each member of the nexus. Then, the term " impose."
                                                     J U STIFY I N G   L I FE ?   3 1 9




    Form is the name Whitehead someti mes gives to the eternal objects, and
it is important, here, to remember that the eternal objects do not dictate a
particular mode for their ingression into an actual entity. Consequently, in
the case of a society, the " positive feelings of that common form" does not
mean that a form will be felt in the " same way " by each member. We thus
are not dealing with a "social form." The defining characteristic does not
in itself have the power to define: each occasion, as it includes positive
feel i ngs of the common form, has ensured the relevance of the defining
characteristic, but each can confer a distinct role on what is in common.
The only restriction is that this role must be positive. A society will not be
defined by the fact that a form exists upon which none of its members
confers a role. If one wished to define a " society " by a common positive
reference to the truth, for instance, it could therefore include liars, if they
know that they a re lying, but not those to whom the di fference between
the true and the untrue is completely indifferent. And a common indiffer
ence cannot be the " defining characteristic " of a society.
    The second remarkable feature is the link between ingression of the
common form and the notion of imposition . The eternal objects, pure
potentials, have no power to impose their ingression. If the fact that each
member of a society includes a common element of form is imposed upon
it, it is not imposed by a power associated with the form itself but by the
other members of society: we have to do with a successful dynamics of
infection.
    It is thus society that inherits the link between endurance and success.
Its endurance is not a right; there is no "common form " that i mposes
itself by itself on its members, but only the " fact" that the feeling of this
form succeeds in imposi ng itself, infecting each new entity. Each, there
fore, produces itself qua member of a society, because of its prehensions
of the other members of this society; without any justification to tran
scend this fact. People to whom the difference between truth and lie is
completely indifferent do not transgress anything, do not deny anything,
do not brea k with anything. This is so even if they have to dea l with
others for whom this indifference must d i ssimulate a transgression, a
negation, or a will to carry out a brea k, or even if it inspires on their part,
as the case may be, the worst i mpatience: to insist on being born at the
wrong season is the trick of evi l .
    Some commentators o n Whitehead have regretted that " societies " d i d
not receive the categoreal dignity o f the "res verae," or the actual entities
which, accord ing to the ontologica l principle, a re " the only reasons ."
Life would then find a quite si mple, even simplistic j ustification. It would
be the process thanks to which ever more important beings, and therefore
3 2 0   COSMO LOGY




reasons, would come i nto existence . . . i nclud i ng the State and the rea
son of the State ? The anti-Dreyfusards would be right: the State is justi
fied when it destroys the l i fe of a simple priva te person.
   Th is argument is a bit below the belt, I admit. But this is delibera te: the
point is not to denounce, but to cal l to the flight of experience. If societies
were to be res verae, all the terrai ns i n which one could land would be
come swampy: experience would be bogged down i n moral problems,
someti mes ca lling for operations of normative stabil ization and discrimi
nation. Such operations are the daily bread of sociology and pol itical
philosophy (what is a sect ? ) , but it does not perta i n to speculative phi
losophy to simpli fy a difficulty that constitutes the daily bread of special
ists. It is not up to it to propose to specialized undertak ings, tryi ng to
describe the variety of situa tions where wha t we have to dea l with " holds
together," concepts on which these undertakings could rely, or rest, in
order to define " the proper way of approach i ng the situation " ; all de
pend on what matters for them. The speculative aim is generic.
   For instance, let us take as an example the classic question in sociol
ogy: should a human society be defined as a collective aggregate of pre
constituted i ndividuals, or as a collective whole, the subject of its own
adventures ? For Whitehead, it is clea r that it is no simple aggregate, for
an aggregate is made up of pa rts whose properties a ppea r as susceptible
of being described a nd attri buted, at least at a first approxi mation, i nde
pendently of the situation of aggregation. Society as an aggregate would
presuppose that human bei ngs are defined by "consciousness" indepen
dently of the collecti vities in which they are born; that is, they would be
conscious in the same inevitable way as they breathe. Yet a human soci
ety is not a " whole" either, for i f it were, human beings, defined as " pa rts,"
would be intel ligible in terms of the kind of patience required for the
enduring success of that whole. This will seem to be an acceptable hypoth
esis only to sociologists who identify their knowledge with a disencha nt
ment or demythification of the illusions of freedom-at the risk that these
sociologists may have to define how their science protects them from the
common lot. Special ized branches of knowledge have no need for rei n
forcement of what is thei r perma nent tempta tion: to confer the power of
self-Iegi timatization upon some types of descri ption.
   The d i fficulty in defining a human society is obviously connected to
the fact that the project of definition matters to human bei ngs, as is the
case for a l l the questions they can ask themselves with regard to what
they are, to what they belong to, to wha t they know, to what they owe,
or to wha t they thin k . And therefore, to what j usti fies them . "Whitehead
ian sociology," beca use it ra ises the question of j ustification to its specu-
                                                      J U STIFY I N G   L I FE ?   3 2 1




lative, cosmological power, cannot ratify any particular j usti fication. I f it
were to construct a "good " definition of what matters, generic with re
gard to the specialized categories, a defi nition capable of specifyi ng what
j ustifies a society as such, this defi nition, whatever it might be, would
become a weapon and raise the question of its own j ustification, of what
j ustifies the destructions i t will ratify i n the name of what i s then " cosmic
progr ess." This is why Whiteheadian sociology will not involve defini
tions but " modes of thought," to take up the title of Whitehead's last
book . What Whitehead proposes is the contrary of ready-to-think: in
stead, thought pluralizes itsel f in va rious modes according to the way it
envisages the importance of the situation it is trying to characterize. To
penetra te is to create.
   To penetrate and to create, however, thought must be " equipped,"
and it is such an equipment that meta physics offers it qua " neutral,"
that is, qua refusing to privilege a " specia l ization " of importance, i n
order t o affirm creativity a s an ultimate. In Science and the Modern
World, Whitehead had thought that the notion of organism could
" eq u i p " thinkers, i nspiring thei r aesthetic a ppetite for the order of na
ture qua variety of successes, to be descri bed a s such . But the organism
gi ves no primord i a l mean i ng either to hesitation or to originality, or to
doubt, or to the possi ble, without which thinkers themselves are in
conceivable. The speculative equipment must enable resistance to a l l the
" soci a l reasons " that would relegate hesitation, doubt, and originality
to mere psychology. This i s why I choose to think, with Whitehead, that
a society is not a reason, i n the sense of the ontological principle, and
does not enjoy any tra nscendence with rega rd to the entities who are its
members. The " reason " of a n entity's social belonging refers not to " so
ciety " but to other actual entities as prehended by that entity. The social
nexus consti tutes a more or less dominant envi ronment for each entity
that uni fies itsel f qua one of its members. It is sometimes so dominant
that the entity might seem to be explained on the basis of its belonging,
which is the case each time we can defi ne a nexus as a unique l i ne of
inheritance.
  Such a nexus is called an "enduring object." It might have been termed
a "person," in the legal sense of that term. But unfortunately "person "
suggests the notion of consciousness, so that its use would lead to mis
understanding. The nexus "sustains a character," and this is one of the
meanings of the Latin word persona. But an "enduring object," qua "per
son," does more than sustain a character. For this sustenance arises out of
the special genetic relations among the members of the nexus [ . . . 1 These
enduring objects and "societies," analysable into strands of enduring
3 2 2   C O S M O LO G Y




objects, are the permanent entities which enjoy adventures of change
throughout time and space ( PR, 34-3 5 ) .
    What w e have t o dea l with, i n the sense that w e can, if not explain it,
then at least have the words to describe or cha racterize it, always refers
to nexus that " sustai n a cha racter," and that a re, moreover, able to main
ta in it throughout the adventure our i nterest ma kes them undergo . Yet a
character can always be transformed. The art of the Sophists, who had
recourse to all the syntactic and sema ntic subtleties that la nguage a llows
but also to that of the mathematicians, may be cha racteri zed as an explo
ration of transformations of character. The same holds true of contempo
ra ry models in biology and in ecology, which ta ke us further and further
away from the notion of " natural equilibrium" or the body's "wisdom "
towa rd the exploration of the unimaginable and precarious sophistica
tion of the roles, of the risky tinkering of functions, of the metasta ble
assemblage of coexistences. In contrast, when a society is described as a
"whole" made up of "parts," the description ratifies a sta ble assignation
of roles, with the parts being measured and eva luated according to their
service to the whole qua characterized by the function that a rticulates
them. Biologica l macromolecules are then defined by thei r role in the
metabolic concert, which enables the cel l to be a functional part of an
organ which . . .
    The Sophists were denounced as i mmora l, veritable public poisoners
who destroyed the ad herence the citizens owe to the va l ues of their soci
ety. Mathematicians are " a mora l " in the sense that they adhere to their
definitions only in a hypothetica l way, and owe loyalty only to the adven
ture of mathematics. Conseq uently, it is particularly stupid to praise the
" heroism" of mathematicia ns, if this term is to evoke the heroic sacrifice
to which the part must, i f the case may be, consent for the sa lvation of
the whole, i n the mode of the highest mora lity. Individual heroism re
sponds to a successful social infection.
   For example, consider the patriotism of the Roman farmers, in the full
vigour of the Republic. Certainly Regulus did not return to Carthage, with
the certainty of torture and death, cherishing any mystic notions of
another life-either a Christian Heaven or a Buddhist Nirvana. He was a
practical man, and his ideal aim was the Roman Republic flourishing in
this world. But this aim transcended his individual personality [ . . . ] In
this estimate, Regulus has not in any way proved himself to be exceptional.
His conduct showed heroism that is unusual. But his estimate of the worth
of such conduct has evoked widest assent. The Roman farmers agreed; and
generation after generation, amid all the changes of history, have agreed by
the instinctive pulse of emotion as the tale is handed down ( AI, 290 ) .
                                                      J U STI F Y I N G   L I FE?   3 2 3




     Regu lus was a hero, but through the exemplary value of his choice,
he i nspires a mode of thought that celebrates the enduring va l ue of an
ideal capable of i nspiring the sacri fice of those who henceforth ad here
to the role that is assigned to them. The immediate assent inspired by
his sacrifice may, of course, satisfy morality, but not a mode of thought
tha t ra ises to the cosmic power the need to j ustify, not to pra ise, the
" sacrifices " associated with ma inta ining l iving societies. And this is so,
even when it is an ideal that dema nds this sacrifice in order to survive.
The approva l i nspired by Regulus's choice belongs to the thought of the
orga nism, not to the one that asks the question of the " j ustification of
l i fe ."
     Quite different is the perplexed si lence inspired by the Original, and it
is i ndeed this type of silence Whitehead produces for those who have ap
proached his texts then moved away from them somewhat stunned, find
i ng neither the possibil ity of adherence nor the incitement to become
indignant and denounce. I have already risked, for Whitehead, the ca pita l
" 0 " that Deleuze reserved for those fictional characters, such as Bartleby,
through whom one discovers "the power of an impersona l that is by no
means a genera lity, but a singularity to the highest degree " ( CC, 1 3 ) . Here
the circle closes. The need to think " with Whitehead " rather than " a bout
Whitehead " is an example of the discrete efficacy that Whitehead himself
associates with originality, such that it can infiltrate and, in this case, turn
readers away from a reading that tries to " form an opinion " to which it
can adhere.
  Life lurks in the interstices of each living cell, and in the interstices of
the brain ( PR, 1 05-1 (6 ) .
   For Whitehead, origina lity is the j ustification o f the " robbery " that
cond itions the endurance of living societies. But no living society is origi
na l i n itself. Every social success must be said to be "tradition," or suc
cessful reiteration. Life, for its part, " is the name for origi nality, a nd not
for trad ition " ( PR, 1 04 ) .
   Th is contrast, however, does not imply an opposition, whether heroic
or patient. One will not oppose li ving societies and novelty, habit and
freedom, conformism and a utonomy. Rather, one will ask the question of
what social belongi ng ma kes possible. Is it not, in fact, this question that
Whitehead explores when he constructs concepts that put to the test the
rational ist tradition to which he himsel f belongs ? Living societies are not
opposed to life; they a re what " shelters " the interstices in which life l urks;
they constitute the environment needed by the " non-socia l " or " entirely
alive " nexus, which designate the ultimate social question : what may a
given society become capable of?
3 2 4   COS MOLOGY




    The characteristic of a living society is that a complex structure of in
organic societies is woven together for the production of a non-social
nexus characterized by the intense physical experiences of its members
[ . . . I there is intense experience without the shackle of reiteration from
the past ( PR, 1 0 5 ) .
    There is a typically academic snigger that consists o f pointing out the
l imits to a thought's origina lity, all that it has borrowed, or accepted, with
out questions. But the events of thought associated with the names of the
most "anti-social," or the most impatient thinkers, Nietzsche, Artaud, or
Foucault, are neither placed in doubt nor diminished by al l that they re
peat, at the same time as they i nnovate. For if originality needs uinterstices,
it req uires that with regard to which there is an i nterstice. Interstices do not
even have to be defined aga inst societies; they are just "to one side," as
" non-social nexus," correlated with experiences that are not adherence to
the past, that are not intelligible either on the basis of the defining charac
teristic of a society, or, of course, on the basis of the rejection of that char
acteristic. But Whitehead is not celebrating what is nonsocial as such as if
it were the j ustification of life. Originality is the justi fication of life.
   Life is a bid for freedom: an enduring entity binds any one of its occa
sions to the line of its ancestry. The doctrine of the enduring soul with its
permanent characteristics is exactly the irrelevant answer to the problem
which life presents. The problem is, How can there be originality? A nd
the answer explains how the soul need be no more original than a stone
( PR, 1 04 ) .
   For Whitehead, a soul that would have both freedom a n d endurance i s
a n unacceptable ontologica l setup, one of those setups that a re proposed
whenever too much confidence is accorded to an abstraction, accepted as
such in spite of the dramatic bifurcation it leads to, between what would
be free and what could be expla ined . One turns the soul into a " perma
nent characteristic," which means social conformity, and one attributes to
it at the same time what contradicts that conformity : freedom. The logical
contradiction, perfectly predictable, is transformed into a deep mystery.
   Yet the same problem arises for any living society, insofar as it is envis
aged from the viewpoint of the question that henceforth matters, that of
the origi na lity of its responses to its environment. The marvelous organi
zation of living beings, with their strata and their functional hiera rchies,
does not a nswer this question.
  We ask for something original at the moment, and we are provided
with a reason for limiting originality ( PR, 1 04 ) .
  One of the ma i n effects o f speculative thought is, in fact, t o infect all the
questions raised by living societies with the hesitations and uncerta inties
                                                      J U S T I F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 2 5




that are the lot of what we cal l " sociology." For Whitehead, it is always
societies that we study. Everything is sociology, and human sociology,
with all its difficulties, merely exhi bits the questions, taken to their ful l
exacerbation, that other sciences c a n neglect, insofar as they can neglect
the question of originality, i nsofar as the way they study li ving societies
does not i mpose upon them what constitutes the " j ustification of life."
This is why Whitehead can no more tel l us what a society is than Spinoza
could say what a body is capa ble of. In both cases, "we don't know." We
only know that the two opposite extremes, " my body belongs to me " and
"I belong to my society," are both somewhat misleading simplifications.
  No one ever says, Here I am, and I have brought my body with me
(MT, 1 1 4 ) .
   I can, o f course, say " my keyboa rd," " my fingers," " my body," " my
tongue," " my text," and even " my reader," but the meaning of " my," mark
ing possession, is obviously different each time. They are all mine, how
ever, in the sense that they belong to " my " actual world, the one that re
quires the triggering of that chai n of events of an indescribable complexity:
to decide that there will be a " colon" here, i ntrod ucing as an example the
very situation in which, as 1 wrote, 1 make a whole world for myself of the
question of how to use my experience as an example. An instant later,
however, the reader on whom 1 have decided to "play this trick" has
evaporated . Reader, you may wel l have smi led or become annoyed, and, i f
the straw broke the camel's back, you will perhaps have closed this book
for good. That is no longer my problem, for it is the syntactic setup that
has concerned me, as 1 hesitate between " my sentence " and " the sen
tence." It is this setup that had to be tamed, but it has also become the
subject that now demands that " its author " show herself to be worthy of
what, by her decision, that author has placed herself in a position of ow
ing to it. Belongi ngs are not only multiple but fluid and constantly enter
ing into new assemblage. Between " that belongs to me " and " I belong to,"
the distribution never ceases being prod uced anew, while a subject,
amazed to have been able to experience this, that, and that, never stops
occurring and concluding. Li kewise, belonging to societies of d ifferent
types, endowed with different modes of endurance, is req uired to a l low
the production of that Ca rtesian a ffi rmation-so original- " I think,
therefore I am."
   Far from constituting a " defining characteristic," my feeling of being
" me," continuously, in a heterogeneo us world in which my attention
never ceases to vary, which the mutations of my i nterests, the permanent
transformations of the " here " of my perception, never cease to recom
pose, is thus in itself an "exploi t" req uiring that the " chains of reitera tion
3 2 6   COSMOLOGY




of the past" be constantly forged, tinkered with, and i mprovised . What
is woven in this way is the thread of what Whitehea d ca lls a " living
person."
   An "entirely living " nexus is, in respect to its life, not social. Each
member of the nexus derives the necessities of its being from its prehen
sions of its complex social environment; by itself the nexus lacks the
genetic power which belongs to "societies." But a living nexus, though
non-social in virtue of its "life," may support a thread of personal order
along some historical route of its members. Such an enduring entity is a
"living person. " It is not of the essence of life to be a living person. In
deed a living person requires that its immediate environment be a living,
non-social nexus ( PR, 1 07 ) .
    There is n o reason t o suppose that the kind of experience Whitehead
associates with the notion of " l iving person " is reserved to human beings.
In any case, it can designate a l l those li ving beings that have a sense of
duration, that is, for whom the notion of "specious present," which
Whitehea d borrowed from Wi lliam James, is relevant. Indeed, James's
emphasis on the pseudo-continuous character of an experience made up
of interva ls and connections designates precisely what Whitehead defines
as a thread of continuity, having a nonsocia l living nexus as its immedi
ate envi ronment. A thinker does not think twice, a cat does not l isten
twice to an interesti ng rustle in a bush, but when one block of the present
slips as such i nto the past, a thread of continui ty, which is that of a pro
cess of appropriation, is woven. For the new present, the past becomes
" its past," unless the strange experience of a hiatus should ma ke itself felt.
Thus, for instance, when I find myself at the wheel of my car on a habitual
road that was not at all the one [ had planned to ta ke. Has the threa d of a
" living person " that had been " me" been broken, without anything hav
ing come to commemorate it, that is, to canalize it into a repetition that
constitutes me as the owner of a memory ? "Where" was I d uring that
past, of which I cannot find the slightest memory ? Was [ payi ng atten
tion, or was I distracted, and did I avoid a near disaster ?
    Wha t I hope, in this case, is that the routines of my cond uct were such
that, in the case of somethi ng unforeseen, they would bring me back to
myself in time, that is, that the enti re social envi ronment that explains
what is meant by " driving a car" does not oppose "attention " to " rou
tine." [ hope, then, that the social routines of driving integrate that with
out which my distraction would risk bei ng fatal . This particular hope may
be misplaced, but it communicates with a more genera l question: how,
from the viewpoint of the " j usti fication of life," can we characterize social
order in the sense that it is required by origi nality but does not explain it?
                                                      J U STI F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 2 7




    If we refer to that which, whether a work or the adoption of a position,
is qualified, in our j udgment, as " original," the relation between a society
and the " interstices in which life lurks " first brings the " patience " of soci
ety into the spotl ight. The "true professiona l " constitutes an environment
that is i mpatient with regard to its i nterstices. When a society mobilizes
for war, the interstices become imperceptible, and all originality is sus
pected of treason. Only a society that does not define the environment on
which it depends as a threat can tolerate originals. And the fact that a
state of emergency can, moreover, signify bracketing a large number of
"traditiona l " usages, may perhaps confer an important meaning upon the
term " tradition " : one might say that only a tradition is liable to cultivate
the interstices that make origi nality possible. And in that case, originality
itself cannot be defined as antisocial, nor as asocial either: originals, even
if they are sol itary, have fashioned for themselves a world of habits,
rhythms, objects, places, and distances that are carefully dosed with their
contemporaries. If one can nevertheless say that they do not " belong," it is
insofar as originals constitute thei r fellows, their contemporaries, as a n
"outside," which certai nly obl igates their own mode of existence, b u t ac
cording to a " how " that disconcerts any effort to make them a participant
in a " we" by which they could be explained, i ncluding in terms of impa
tience with our routines (the trick of evi l ) . A " how " that makes us feel the
misplaced character of any characterization of originals as " exemplary."
Whatever they fina lly may become, heroes, creators of epochs, openers-up
of the world, great reformers, simple visionaries, traitors, prophets, public
poisoners, martyrs, and so on, originality is not a virtue.
   The fact that original humans require a society that does not denounce
the person who escapes the " we" is an example of a general truth : for a
nonsocial nexus to have original consequences, it must survive, and this
requi res protection. This is thus what j ustifies life, j ustifies the robbery
that is the price of every living society. Such survival obviously has noth
ing to do with the question of the " survival of the sou\ ." Far from desig
nating the endurance of a l ineage that is faithfully reproduced, it may
evoke those experiences i n which we must become " passive" in order to
allow, within us and outside us, the prolongation of the process by which
a thought searches for itself, i n which what is often called an " i ntuition,"
fleeting and indecisive, takes shape, liable to evaporate at any moment, as
if a gap were inexorably closing. In such experiences, it may seem that the
universe itself holds its breath, which is perfectly correct from a White
headian viewpoint, for these experiences exhibit the j ustification of life.
They do not deny the social character of experience, but reflect a cha nge in
the mode of belonging. Everything we know, and can do, seeks to become
3 2 8   C O S M O LOGY




an environment for something possible, which is not ours, because it is
nonsocial, but whose eventual " social ization " depends entirely on " us,"
on the environment we constitute for it: a culture of interstices.
   The culture of i nterstices is not the privilege of personal experience . It
may also be a wa y of understanding ritual trances, divinatory uttera nces,
and the objects manipulated by therapists, which open a human col lec
tivity to an outside whose intrusion suspends ha bitua l social functioning.
However, interstices do not need to be deliberately cultivated . The fact
that I can evoke such experiences, the fact that I know, and can thi nk that
my reader knows, what it means, for instance, to cultivate the type of at
tention to which a memory appea ls, the fact that we can understa nd the
mode of evocation Bergson analyzed in Matter and Memory, all these
facts designate us as " conscious." But the i nterstices make themselves felt
j ust as wel l without any " becoming aware " : when a young child attempts
her first steps, risks her first words, and bursts out la ughing, when I learn
a new type of gesture, when I stammer while trying to get to the end of a
sentence, when I feel myself to be al ive in a new world.
   If life l urks i n the interstices of each living cell , one may say just as well
that the singularity of living societies, what j ustifies them as such, should
be cal led a "culture of interstices." What belongs properly to human soci
eties is the question ra ised by its interstices, at the risk that some social
answers to this question may turn aga inst their culture, for insta nce,
when professiona ls are honored because they know how to refuse hesita
tion and ad here heroica lly to their role, or when freedom is set agai nst
determination, good against evi l , order against d i sorder, subversive p u
rity aga inst recuperation. Words matter here, and the ones Whitehead
uses first put to the test the oppositions that poison us.
   Apart from canalization, depth of originality would spell disaster for the
animal body. With it, personal mentality can be evolved, so as to combine
its individual originality with the safety of the material organism on which
it depends. Thus life turns back into society: it binds originality within
bounds, and gains the massiveness due to reiterated character (PR, 1 07).
   " Slowdown " is a term that may be j ust as fitting for Whitehead as for
Bergson, to designate the socialization of the new-yet in di fferent ways.
Bergsonian elan vital is associated with a power that " falls back " or " be
comes bogged down," with intuition disguising itself as reasoning. The
slowdown associated with Whiteheadian life should rather be cal led
" percolation " : propaga ting from interstice to interstice until the flow it
self becomes recogniza ble, descri bable, social ized , no longer interstitial
but the thread of a living person . The sentence one begins while knowi ng
(more or less) how it wi l l fini sh, the self-assu rance of the person who
                                                         J U STI F Y I N G   L I FE?   3 2 9




" knows" how to wa lk or to read , the experienced behavior that was, 1
hope, mine, when 1 took a wrong turn while distracted .
   Correlatively, Whitehead will never oppose, as Bergson does some
times, the " pure " to the i nterested, the busy, or the preoccupied . Jesus
would have been one more visiona ry, destined, l i ke a fleeting d ream, to
sink into oblivion, if his words had not subsisted inside a story, an insti
tution that, to be sure, never ceased betra ying them, but a lso never cea sed
being j udged in the na me of this betraya l . Every social inheritance is a
betra ya l, in the sense of " recupera tion," but that which, as it makes soci
ety, inherits wha t was origina l, is transformed by what was betrayed, and
creates the possibility of new interstices.
   As fa r as " pure" originality is concerned, and the becoming that is i rre
ducible to all expla nation, they are, as such, neutra l . Especia lly if the con
cern for having to rema in pure comes to socialize them surreptitiously, if
the pleasure of being the only ones to be right and contempt for the herd
come to canalize them, they can be identified with what Whitehead calls
evil . But " pure" origina lity, or life as nonsocial, is first and foremost er
ratic, as is moreover amply attested, since Whitehead, by experi ments of
so-ca l led " sensory deprivation." When the " world " no longer provides a
la ndma rk, it is not that " I am another," as if th is other assumed the fea
tures of a " foreign " persona l ity, it is that without the possi bil ity of " there,"
able to prod uce the invaria nts of recognition, the sta ble differentiation
between " body " and " world " eva pora tes into the " non-socia l " sa ra band
of a frenzied experience, impossi ble to na rrate, a nd even impossible to
reconstitute by means of memory.
   The contrast between Whitehea d a nd Bergson is thus ra ther obvious,
and corresponds to the project announced as early as the preface of Pro
cess and Reality, to rescue the type of thought of Bergson, Ja mes, and
Dewey " from the cha rge of a nti-intel lectua l ism, which rightly or wrongly
has been associated with it" ( PR, xi i ) . Living societies, as the shelters for
interstices, undo every bina ry opposition that might be transformed into
a phi losophica l wea pon of war. The distinction between living societies
and life is not the one between intellectua l reasoning a nd intuition. The
effects of such a distinction are ra ther of a pragma tic type, and belong to
the revision of our modes of abstraction, with which Whitehead associ
ated philosophy.
   " Living societies " are conceptual a bstractions: we never have to dea l
wi th a living society as such, but rather with what requires that the social
order not be the l ast word . The slightest cel l , insofa r as its reactions to
externa l stimuli may be interpreted as adaptive-that is, as Whitehead
emphasizes, origina l-requires wha t the social order as such cannot give
3 3 0   C O S M O LOGY




meaning to. Even the worst professiona ls, the most insensitive with re
gard to what their j udgments elimi nate, may manifest a certa in original
ity with regard to the way they reject objections. One may, of course,
doubt this when one regularly hears physicists suggest that those who
do not mani fest the appropriate respect for the laws of physics, and thus
bel ieve that gravitation is a human invention, should throw themselves
out the window. Yet we know that if those whom they add ress burst out
laughing, and ask them if people confused doors and windows before
Galileo and Newton, they would adapt their arguments without, for all
that, cha nging thei r position. As Lewis Carroll's Red Q ueen said, it takes
all the running one can do to keep i n the same place. The fact that a liv
ing being can succeed i n maintaining itself i n a changing, uneven envi
ronment implies both a social order and interstices in which life lurks.
   The conceptual distinction Whitehead proposes between living society
and life thus does not confirm the opposition between repetitive, reproduc
ible order and invention. In the case of living societies, reproduction itself
requires invention, original approaches to an environment that is never the
same twice; in short, it constitutes a social adventure. But this distinction
matters when it comes to our modes of abstraction, and in particular the
contrast between the way we address living and nonliving societies.
   Today, it is no doubt the extremely sober version of this contrast pro
posed by Stuart Kauffman that fits best with the Whiteheadian difference.
The success of physics and chemistry, as he emphasizes, is to define what
they study as functions, involving a wel l-determined number of variables,
that is, also, to describe the set of behaviors studied as belonging to the
space of possibilities defined by these variables. The conservation of the
number of relevant varia bles is an operative constra int, which is at work
in the very definition of the object under study and the q uestions that will
be asked of it. Reciproca lly, it will be confirmed by the ded uctive cha rac
ter of the derived descri ptions and explanations, whether deterministic or
proba bilistic. When it comes to the biosphere and the evolution of l iving
beings, however, this constraint loses its releva nce. Indeed, what matters
henceforth is the expa nsion of the number of varia bles, that is, of the
number of aspects of a situation that may come to matter, and that a rel
eva nt description must ta ke into account.
   Kauffman takes up the term "exaption," created by Stephen J. Gould,
to designate the emergence of new meani ngs that come to associate them
selves with a preexisting feature. The classic example is that of "proto
wi ngs," whose adaptive role may have been associated with thermal reg
ulation. The emergence of wings ca n then be descri bed as a tra nsformation
of the mea ning of the air, which ceases to be a mere factor of friction, to
become a crucial ingredient of what we ca ll " l i ft." A new possible has
                                                       J U ST I F Y I N G   L I FE ?   3 3 1




been created, mod ifying the definition of the biosphere, for this biosphere
henceforth incl udes the multiple adventures of those beings who ha ve a
sta ke in flying.
  If I am right, if the biosphere is getting on with it, muddling along,
exapting, creating and destroying ways of mak ing a living, then there is a
central need to tell stories. If we may not have all the categories that may
be of relevance finitely prestated ahead of time, how else should we talk
about the emergence in the biosphere or in our history-a piece of the
biosphere-of new relevant categories, new functionalities, new ways of
making a living? ( I, 1 34-1 3 5 ) .
   The i nterest of the Ka uffmania n contra st is that it arises from a prac
tice that pushes as fa r as possible the possibility of reprod ucing i n biol
ogy the symbiosis with a forma l la nguage that cha racterizes physics.
Kauffma n is a special ist i n the beha vior of complex systems and i n pa rtic
ular of connectionist networks, whose ambition is to construct a bridge
between nonl iving and li ving things. This is why what is put on stage is
not a living order endowed with a n i ntrinsic, inventive dynamic, but a
pragmatic di fference between the mode of abstraction a ppropria te for
physics and chemistry and the one that is appropriate to livi ng beings
and the biosphere.
   More genera lly, every scientist, but a lso every novelist, is, in Whitehead's
terms, a " sociologist," for only societies can be cha racterized, only social
adventures can be recounted . This also mea ns that scientists, if they accept
the Whitehead ian proposition, should know that thei r description, and,
as the case may be, thei r expla nations, require the social endurance of
what they describe; in genera l, novelists are well aware of this. The d istinc
tion between nonliving and living societies reflects the di fference between
the pragmatic consequences of this knowledge. A living society may, of
course, lend itself to descriptions in terms of stable categories, which claim
to expla in its workings in a mode ana logous to the one that al lows the
modes of abstraction of physicists and chemists. Yet the sociologists whose
description depends on the endurance of " living societies" cannot have the
ambition of achieving the success of the physicist or the chemist, for what
they have to deal with ra ises, in the fi rst insta nce, the q uestion of the rela
tion that the social order ma inta ins with its own interstices.
   The primary feature of living societies is not a li mitation on the power
of our explanations, as it is the case, for i nsta nce, with a cyclone and its
somewhat unpred icta ble behavior. Quite the contra ry, they q uestion our
thirst for explanation, that is, our fa ith i n explanation as what would
suffice to define the attention they a re due. Indeed, the " sociologists"
who address such societies must learn to resist the temptation to expla in
their s tability in the terms tha t this stability ma kes releva nt. They ha ve to
3 3 2   COSMOLOGY




lea rn to pay attention to the interstices, even i f what l urks in the inter
stices has no significant consequences as long as the social order main
ta ins itself. And when it comes to those who ca l l themselves sociologists,
that is, who address human societies, they must know that expla ining
their sta bility will merely ratify the categories and justifica tions produced
by th is society itself when dea ling wi th what threa tens its sta bility.
   Th us, where we might be tempted to descri be a static distri bution
between wha t ma tters and what does not matter, for instance, when we
descri be a society called " tra ditiona l," which perpetuates itself in a way
that is a pparently unchanged through a cha nging envi ronment, perha ps
we have to dea l with a positive culture of interstices, with the adventure
of a regime of origi nal and permanent renewa l , that ceaselessly re-creates
what will be descri bed as a relation of " tra ditiona l " belonging. As for a
disciplined a rmy, which is mea nt to obey like a single man in a terrifying
environment, it ca nnot be explained by the sold iers' obedience to orders,
or by tra ining that would make them the pa rts of a single body. Here,
novelists and fil mma kers a re better guides, as they echo the testimonies
of soldiers at the front, and experiences that never cea se creating inter
stices: doubts, nostalgias, a feeling of a bsurd ity, questions dea l ing with
life and death, l ucid ity with rega rd to the stupidity of the orders they
must obey, even if those o rders signify their proba ble dea th. " Enrolled "
humans may wel l think more than those who busy themselves with their
daily affa i rs. If the army " holds," it is to the extent that, in one way or
another, these interstices lack the power to propagate themselves and to
enta il " origina l " behaviors, especia lly disobed ience or desertion . It is pos
sible tha t what " ma kes" a soldier, what prevents him from such " betray
als," but also often from objecting and denouncing when he sees his broth
ers in arms commit what he knows to be a crime, ca nnot be expla ined by
the values inculcated by the a rmy, nor by tra ining. The sta bility of the
society known as an army might depend on that which, brought into be
ing by the unimaginable situation in wh ich a l l sold iers find themselves,
prevents the interstitial thoughts of each one from having consequences:
"you don 't abandon your buddies."
   Correlatively, i n the case of a " social catastrophe," when the sold iers
flee in panic, every man for hi msel f, or when the modes of reprod uction
of a tradition cea se to function, the question will not be one of external
causality, of which the catastrophe would be the effect, but of a society 's
relation to its own interstices. Obviously, this is not to deny the outside
world, but to demand that we do not spea k of externa l " causes ." One
should not spea k of " socia l " causes either, for to spea k of a " socia l " ca use
is to confer on a society the power to explain its own end urance. The poi nt
                                                       J U S T I F Y I N G   L I F E ?   3 3 3




is then to try to tel l stories, for only stories a re ca pa ble of giving mea ning
to the way in which what seemed separated ceases to be so, in which
what seemed to have the power to explain loses this power, in which
what was required, what seemed to go without saying, reveals its role, in
which what seemed i nsignificant becomes important.
   Among " l iving societies," those that interest Whitehead most d i rectly
are certa inly those one might call our " mental habits." This is why, for
him, the pa radigmatic " social science " was education, with its crucial ele
ment: the transmission of the abstractions without which we cannot
think. These abstractions may be transmitted either as " living val ues,"
va l ues that incite curiosity, the appetite for contrasts, in short, original
responses to the situations of this world , or as " dead va l ues," usually in
citing complia nt submission and the inhibition of what questions that
compliance. Perhaps one of the most intense experiences that turned
Whitehead i nto a philosopher was the power of these abstractions that
demand submission. Spea king of the ind ustrial revol ution, he writes,
  Ultimate values were excluded. They were politely bowed to, and then
handed over to the clergy to be kept for Sundays [ . . . J The workmen
were conceived as mere hands, drawn from the pool of labour. To God's
question, men gave the answer of Cain- "Am I my brother's keeper? ";
and they incurred Cain 's guilt (SMW, 203 ) .
   Whitehead does not denounce; he i s terrified, for those who have given
this answer, who have looked at the conseq uences of the ind ustrial revo
l ution with a " stone-blind eye," are not only the capta ins of ind ustry
there was something in it for them-but a lso, as he emphasizes, the " best
men " of the time. And, for insta nce, those honorable, d isinterested, gen
tle, and educa ted men with whom he dined in the evening at the high
ta ble of his college. They are the men we know wel l today, and who we
feel rea lly do incur the guilt of Ca in: that guilt that is first tra nslated by
an inabil ity to accept the interstices of imagination and doubt. Or, more
precisely, it i � what they make us feel, when they infect us wi th the feeling
that if they were to face up to that guilt, they would collapse.
   Mental habits, insofar as what l urks in the interstices that they harbor
ca n be said to be " danger" for them, thus intensify the question of good
and evil dea lt with in Religion in the Making, and taken up aga in in Pro
cess and Reality with the trick of evi l . These honora ble men, who " never
doubted," reflect the insta bility of evil, for they held fast only by inhibit
ing, in them and around them, that which would make them doubt. As fa r
as the good in a cosmologica l sense is concerned, it is what prevents us
from defining a society on the basis of its mode of order. It is impossible to
exclude what, for Whitehead, is the parad igmatic cosmic event: that evil
3 3 4   C O S M O LO G Y




be overcome, that is, that what was felt as into lera ble be accepted,
ca nal ized, admitted to infect its social environment, mak ing it capable
of original responses.
   Wh itehead's cosmologica l perspective corresponds to the fa ith in prog
ress that Wi lliam James, in The Moral Philosopher and Moral Life, pro
poses to moral philosophers. For James, these phi losophers must defend
themselves aga inst the temptation of trying to define a system of mora l
obligations that should be accepta ble to a l l . Like Whitehead ian sociolo
gists explaining the stability of a living society, mora lists could not help
but confer the force of law upon some of the categories of their own so
cial environment. It can even be said that, j ustifying the elevation of an
ideal to the highest status, whence the rest can be deduced, they might
contribute to the trick of evil, that is, ratify the sacri fice of other ideals,
demand ing other obligations.
  If we follow the ideal which is conventionally highest, the others which
we butcher either die or do not return to haunt us; or if they come back
and accuse us of murder, everyone applauds us for turning to them a deaf
ear ( MPM L, 203 ) .
  James thus seems t o condemn mora l phi losophers t o relativism, t o the
admission that all moral ideals are of equal val ue. Yet th is is not so, and
the position James proposes, like that of the evol utionary biologists in the
sense of Stuart Kauffman, and like those of the sociologist in the White
head ian sense, demands an attention to the interstices. For James, this first
means to accept that the question is tragic. Philosophers should be able to
resist the temptation to j ustify the sacrifice, the excl usion of other idea ls.
They should accept that the victims haunt the interstices of their adher
ence to an idea l . They should accept to let their experience throb with the
complaint of those who were sacrificed in the name of what they define as
mora l .
  This is not, however, the same th ing as taking sides with the excl uded,
for we are not in the doma in of the j ust and the unj ust, but of the tragic:
every definition of what is j ust and good prod uces victims. And it is
against a tragic background that James defines his trust in a mora l prog
ress that cannot be reduced to relativism. Mora l philosophers who trust
this progress will si tuate themselves in the midst of an adventure, in
which it may ha ppen that new ways of satisfying an idea l , original ways
that demand fewer victims, become soci ally accepta ble or even obvious.
Philosophers cannot foresee such events, for they are not the prod uct of
a tolerant relativism, of a general affirmation that no aspiration should
impose anything upon anybod y. They are " cosmic" events in Whitehead's
sense, in which an evil is overcome, in which an apparently insupera ble
contradiction becomes a contrast.
                                                    J U S T I F Y I N G   L I FE ?   3 3 5




   The knowledge that such an event is possible, transforming the judg
ment of moral philosophers themselves about what is envisagea ble and
what is not, implies an empiricism that is on alert. Philosophers should
be attentive to the action of " thinkers " at work in their time, who create
new moral " facts," and to original ideals that appea r in the interstices but
gradually modi fy social j udgment, making it normal for it to accept what
it was proud of rejecting.
  Everywhere the ethical philosopher must wait on facts. The thinkers
who create the ideals come he knows not whence, their sensibilities are
evolved he knows not how; and the question as to which of two conflict
ing ideals will give the best universe then and there, can be answered by
him only through the experience of other men (MPML, 20 8-209 ) .
   Yet philosophers who know how t o wait for those other people, who
wi l l teach them what thei r own ca tegories doomed them to excl ude,
a re not mere specta tors. I f they a re hea rd, if their words-themselves
interstitial-a re a udible to the soc iety to whose va l ues they adhere, they
may contribute to the event, to the social ization of the novel sensibility.
Trust in the possible, the humor of a relation that does not try to j ustify
what seems obvious to us, and does not disqualify it, for that matter, as
arbitra ry, but situates it in the midst of an adventure that no justification
will constra in, can transform the relation between our modes of a bstrac
tion and their interstices. Ever si nce he became a philosopher, Whitehead
did nothing but work for such a transformation .
   This is what we will see now, with a new flight of experience toward the
territory Whitehead first explored when, in The Concept of Nature, he
questioned the specious cla rity of perceptive experience, in which leaves
are green, the sky is bl ue, and my body is " here."
                                                          C H A P T E R TW E NTY




The Adventu re of the Senses




         HE RISE OF ANIMAL,        and then of human, consciousness is the
           triumph of specialization. It is closely connected with the evolu
           tion of clear and distinct sensory experience. There is abstrac-
tion from the vague mass of primary feelings, and concentration upon
the comparative clarity of a few qualitative details. These are the sensa.
   Unless the physical and physiological sciences are fables, the qualitative
experiences which are the sensations, such as sight, hearing, etc., are in
volved in an intricate flux of reactions within and without the animal body.
These are all hidden below consciousness in the vague sense of personal
experience of an external world. This feeling is massive and vague-so
vague that the pretentious phrase, namely, personal experience of an exter
nal world, sounds nonsense. A particular instance can be explained more
simply. For example, "I see a blue stain out there " implies the privacy of
the ego and the externality of "out there." There is the presupposition
of "me " and the world beyond. But consciousness is concentrated on the
quality blue in that position. Nothing can be more simple or more abstract.
And yet unless the physicist and physiologist are talking nonsense, there is
a terrific tale of complex activity omitted in the abstraction (MT, 1 2 1 ) .
   Whitehead never tires o f returning t o the grey stone o r the blue sta in,
and to the error of the philosophers who have accepted them as starting
points that are both simple and assured . He never ti res of describing and
undoing the trap always set for philosophers by the search for a starti ng
point, a ble to dictate the way it must be taken into account. The question
is not wha t these phi losophers affirm when they proclaim "I (here) see a
blue stain (there)" ; it is everything they deny when they act "as if" this
                                    T H E   A D V E N T U R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 3 7




were the fai thful account of thei r i ncontrovertible experience. As i f there
were not, in addition to a " state of affa irs " over there, for an " I " over
here, at the very least an ingredient tha t requires precisely wha t they in
tend to deny. This ingred ient is "ca usa lity," to which the blue stain gi ves
no meaning, whereas it matters for both physicists and physiologists .
  [ . . . J The "make-believe " character of modern empiricism is well
shown by putting into juxtaposition two widely separated passages from
Hume's Treatise: "Impressions may be divided into two kinds, those of
sensation, and those of reflection. The first kind arises in the soul origi
nally, from unknown causes." And " If it be perceived by the eyes, it must
be a colour . . ."



   The earlier passage is Hume's make-believe, when he is think ing of
his philosophical principles. He then refers the visual sensations "in the
soul" to "unknown causes." But in the second passage, the heat of argu
ment elicits his real conviction-everyone's real conviction-that visual
sensations arise "by the eyes." The causes are not a bit "unknown," and
among them there is usually to be found the efficacy of the eyes. If Hume
has stopped to investigate the alternative causes for the occurrence of vi
sual sensations-for example, eye-sight, or excessive consumption of
alcohol-he might have hesitated in his profession of ignorance. If the
causes be indeed unknown, it is absurd to bother about eye-sight and
intoxication. The reason for the existence of oculists and prohibitionists
is that various causes are known ( PR, 1 71 ) .
   The freedom for Hume, and for so ma ny other philosophers, to act as
though the difference between " seeing something" and " hallucinating"
depended on their verd ict. The freedom for prohibitionists and oculists to
quietly testify to this difference, whatever the phi losopher may say. And the
freedom, as well, for those who wonder how to tell someone they need
glasses or how to ask someone to stop d rinking. For Whiteheadian causal
ity-we see " by the eyes "--does not, like the causes defined by experimen
tation, constitute the answer to a well-defined question. It refers to that
" bod ily life" that Whitehead, in The Concept of Nature, had associated
with the " here " of the percipient event, a life associated not with the knowl
edge of scientists but with a feeling that is most often vague.
  The first principle of epistemology should be that the changeable, shift
ing aspects of our relations to nature are the primary topics for conscious
observation. This is only common sense, for something can be done
about them. The organic permanences survive by their own momentum:
our hearts beat, our lungs absorb air, our blood circulates, our stomachs
digest. It requires advanced thought to fix attention on such fundamental
operations ( MT, 2 9 ) .
3 3 8   COSMOLOGY




  It is thus not a matter of choosing between two accounts of experience
that are j ust as a bstract: that of purificatory empiricism, which acts as
though causality could be eliminated from our experience like a parasiti
cal belief, and that of science, which acts as if experience could be defined
on the basis of a chai n of causes. The point is to aft rm them both as
abstract and therefore highly interpretative, that is, a lso, to construct a
more complete interpreta tion.
  If we desire a record of uninterpreted experience, we must ask a stone
to record its autobiography ( PR, 1 5 ) .
    The description bereft o f interpretation aimed a t by the empi ricists is
chimerical : a pure testimony to the excess subjectivity that can affect con
scious experience, denying its selective character while pushing selection
to the extreme. What Whitehead chooses to underline, and to interpret
speculatively, is the interpretative choice from which our experience has
issued . We do not know how a bat, armed with its sonar, or a dog, capable
of track ing by smell , perceive " their" world . We can identify the features
they d iscrimi nate, but we can only drea m of the contrast between " that
which " they perceive a nd what they are aware of. All we " know" is that
their experience is, like ours, highly interpretati ve, and that, like ours, it
has solved an extraordinarily delicate problem: to give access, in a more
or less reliable way, to what it is important to pay a ttention to. For White
head, what we know in this way suffices to engage speculative interpreta
tion. The point is to think of an experience in which what is at stake is
" real istic," that is, must propose an interpretation that is not adequate,
but reliable with regard to what matters . This crucial element will com
municate in a privi leged way with the class of eternal obj ects Whitehead
names " sensa ."
    Here, Whitehead prolongs the " logica l " hierarchization of objects to
which he ha d proceeded on the basis of perceptive experience a lone in
The Concept of Nature. He had shown that sense objects do not presup
pose any other type of object, whereas a l l other types of objects presup
pose sense objects. Li kewise, the eterna l objects Whitehead calls " sensa "
(i ndependently of whether or not they communicate with an experience
that is " sensi ble" for humans, or even for any inha bitant of the earth)
form the " lowest category," because their realization does not require any
particular other eternal object. In this sense, the sensa are "simple."
    Beca use the ingression of a sensum does not require that other eternal
objects make ingression a t the same time, the sensum is also that which
does not require a particularly sophisticated process of concrescence in
order to make ingression. Colors can enter i nto complex contrasts, make
a child happy and d rive a painter mad, but sensa can also make i ngres-
                                    T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 3 9




sion i nto "simple physical feelings," i nto societies characterized by the
thread of a " reproduction " in conformity, as privileged by physics . In
other words, among all the ways of " feeling," those i n which the sensa
make ingression have the peculiarity of always being able to be taken
into account, whatever the concrescence may be.
   The singularity of a sensum is therefore the fact that it can play a role
that is rather analogous to that of a trading currency among the mem
bers of a human society. A four-year-old child will, of course, not make
the same use as you or I of a ten-dollar bill, and the possession of such a
bill will take on a completely different significance for him and for me, or
for a j obless person a nd a multimil lionaire. Yet each person to whom the
bill is transmitted can make use of it, and neither age nor socia l status
presents an obstacle to its circulation from seller to buyer. From an ab
stract viewpoint, one may say it is " same" bill, whoever its possessor, and
in a way that is much more relevant than if one speaks of this book in the
hands of a reader or of a four-year-old chi l d .
   The reactivation o f a sensum from occasion t o occasion does not mean
conformity of experiences between "electromagnetic" societies and a per
son contemplating a sunset. But the sensum's simplicity, the a bsence of
presupposition that characterizes its mode of ingression, allows the satis
faction of the demands associated with the experiences whose " realism" is
at stake. Realism demands that the blue of this coat designate, in one way
or another, this coat as an " active condition." I am not hallucinating. You
can tel l it how you will, but I demand that what I cal l "coat" shall be actu
ally implied in my perception. This does not mean, however, that I de
mand that the color I perceive be what is common to the coat and to my
perception, that the coat be " i ntrinsically blue." Nor do I demand that
what I perceive as a coat explain the sensation " blue." I do demand, how
ever, that this color I perceive have a respondent different from me. It is
precisely this demand that is satisfied by the ingression of a sensum. This
ingression does not explain either this coat that exists on i ts own account,
or the complex a nd entangled set of societies presupposed by "I who am
looking a t it." In fact, it is because this ingression cannot be invoked as a
"cause " in any particular explanation that the ingression of this sensum
can be what my perception owes to this coat: the sensum is a " same," in
definitely available for all significations, and of which each disparate soci
ety, both the "coat " and " myself," must, on i ts own account, prod uce the
signification. It is the paradigmatic transmissi ble, since its reprod uction,
from occasion to occasion, does not require a ny other eternal object.
  The realization of a sensum in its ideal shallowness of intensity, with zero
width, does not require a ny other eternal object; other than its intrinsic
3 4 0   COSMOLOGY




apparatus of individual and relational essence; it can remain just itself,
with its unrealized potentialities for patterned contrasts. A n actual entity
with this absolute narrowness has an ideal faintness of satisfaction, dif
fering from the ideal zero of chaos, but equally impossible. For realiza
tion means ingression in an actual entity, and this involves the synthesis
of all ingredients with data derived from a complex universe. Realization
is ideally distinguishable from the ingression of contrasts, but not in fact
( PR, 1 1 5 ) .
   Every contrast is, according to the eighth category o f existence, " a
mode o f synthesis of entities in a si ngle prehension." If the chaos White
head evokes here corresponds to the ca tegorically impossible hypothesis
of a " vacuous " satisfaction, the hypothesis of a satisfaction l imiting itself
to the real ization of a sensum corresponds, for its part, to an a bstract
idea, a pure mental exercise. In other words, what is at stake in the sen
sum is not to privilege " pure " transmission : its real ization can play the
most different roles in the most diverse contrasts. Qua available without
constraint to participate in various contrasts, and free in itself with re
gard to every contrast, the sensum does not communicate with the em
piricist censorship that would ask us to restrict ourselves to the "common."
It satisfies the demands of the freest empiricism, the one that intends to
accept at the same time, and to place on the same plane, a l l the experi
ences that can oblige us to think.
   As we reca l l , colors, sounds, and smel ls not only inhabit experience
as perception, " that gray stain there," but they also communicate with a
completely different version of "empiricism." For the painter or poet of
Science and the Modern World, color haunts time, but is not in time; it
surges forth somewhere, but does not stay anywhere. It does not emerge,
does not occur, it is there or is not there, and, when it is there, it does not
orient toward the past nor toward the future, and it is perceived in a way
that affirms itself as independent of the person perceiving: it stands up on
its own.
   The goal of art, with the means of its materials, is to tear the percept
away from the perceptions of objects and the states of a perceiving sub
ject, to tear the affect away from affections like the passage from one
state to another. To extract a block of sensations, a pure being of sensa
tion [ . . . 1 Memory plays a minor role in art (even, and especially, in
Proust). It is true that every work of art is a monument, but here the
monument is not what commemorates the past, it is a block of present
sensations that owe their own conservation only to themselves, and give
the event the compound that celebrates it. The act of a monument is not
memory, but fabulation ( Q Ph, 1 5 8 ) .
                                     T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 4 1




   The fact that we can, according to the expression of Deleuze and
Guatta ri, tea r the percept away from perception, that is, as Whitehead
wou l d say, produce a n experience dominated by sensi ble contrasts qua
sensi ble-the shimmering of colors celebrated by Shelley in Science and
Modern World-is what obl iges the artist's fa bulation, and must oblige
the philosopher's, but in very different ways.
   For Whitehead, the " act of a monument " certainly matters, in a way
that specifies a rt, but in a more generic way what matters is to liberate the
green from abstraction, to refer it to the multipl icity of contrasts a nd ex
periences that make it intervene: whether this contrast is itself sensi ble, for
the painter creating a complex, sensi ble composite, or for Shelley celebrat
ing the forest; whether it belongs to a perception-this green leaf--or
translates a doubt-I was sure that your eyes were green; whether it be
comes an object of comparison-what green should we choose for the
door, this one or that one?--or intervenes in a philosophical thought that
defines it as a " secondary quality."
   Of course, we are much more civilized than our ancestors who could
merely think of green in reference to some particular spring morning.
There can be no doubt about our increased powers of thought, of analy
sis, of recollection, and of conjecture. We cannot congratulate ourselves
too warmly on the fact that we are born among people who can talk
about green in abstraction from springtime. But at this point we must
remember the warning-Nothing too much (MT, 3 8 ) .
   Congratulations become excessive when they make the poet responsi
ble for the patterned , sonorous harmony of the nightingale's song, that
song a bout which we know that the nightingale that prod uces it is also
the first to enjoy it. What we should rather congratulate ourselves warmly
for is the way i n which animal experience, then human conscio usness,
have privileged and given a n eminent role to the ingression of the
" simple" eternal objects that enable sensible a nd perceptive experience to
bear witness to the actual solidarity between disparate actual entities .
What we shoul d celebrate is the way each new appa ratus for detection,
each new prosthesis, comes to increase this sol ida rity.
   It pertains to what Whitehead calls the " categories of obligation " to
specify how a process of concrescence is "obl iged " by its " causes," by
what it inherits a nd by its fi nal accomplishment. Yet it is interesting to
emphasize that once an apparatus for detection is prepared, this relation
between obligation and cause finds a direct exemplification. Such an ap
paratus is not, like a thermometer for instance, a physical process set up
and ca li brated in order to exhibit a functiona l relation that takes on the
role of a measure. Its ela bora tion is intended to ensure it a sensibil ity that
3 4 2   COSMOLOGY




is extremely selective to " what must be detected," that is, to what can be
designated, in a reliable way, as the " cause " of the signal it will emit. The
final accomplishment, for its part, obviously refers to the person who
carries out the elaboration . An apparatus that has finally been perfected
may be defined as " synthesizing" what was previously d isjointed : such
beings as electrons or rad ioactive pa rticles, which its perfecti ng presup
posed but to which, once it is perfected , it testifies in a reliable manner,
and human specialists who have become a ble to detect the presence of
these beings . It is then inseparable, in the same sense as a n organ, from an
experience that it does not explain but that designates i t as i ts respon
dent: no longer a coat, or a tiger ready to leap, but what was previously
" unobservable." In other words, the perfecting of a n apparatus for detec
tion has as its goa l to transform the " what it detects " i nto ingred ients of
human reasoning and action.
   Although such an apparatus impl ies only physical processes, the as
semblage of these processes cannot be completely described by physics, a
science that is a l l the more relevant when what it describes exhibits its
conformity. The assemblage, for its part, exhibits i ts final ity; it is made to
produce a " sa me " that did not exist prior to its selective a bstraction . As
such, it prolongs the i nvention of sense organs, conferring an eminent
role upon the sensa . And a s such an organ, it is si lent with regard to the
diversity of the adventures that require it, i ndependently of which it
would not have come into existence, but to which it pertains to produce
the signi fication of what it testifies to.
   In a sense, one could say that the research of artists and of technicians
prolongs the animal invention of organs a long divergent paths. Artists
seek to bring to existence new sensations for the eyes or the ears, sensa
tions that a re, of course, much more complex than red or sweet, but ca
pable, like red or sweet, of testifying in a fleeti ng way to eternity. Those
who prepa re an apparatus of detection, in contrast, create new organs
for sensible experiences that have nothing particular in themselves
there we go, it's sizzling but that may intervene, as culmina tion or de
                          -



nouement, in unprecedented a nd intense i nterpretative adventures . Only
experimenters can waltz a round singing in their laboratory because a
detector has emitted the expected signa l . And from that point of view,
detection here involves, but cannot be reduced to, what Whitehead, fol
lowing Bergson, calls " sense-reception."
  The more primitive types of experience are concerned with sense
reception, and not with sense-perception. This statement will require
some prolonged explanation. But the course of thought can be indi
cated by adopting Bergson 's admirable phraseology, sense-reception is
                                     T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 4 3




"unspatialized " and sense-perception is "spatialized." In sense-reception
the sensa are the definiteness of emotion: they are emotional forms trans
mitted from occasion to occasion. Finally in some occasion of adequate
complexity, the Category of Transmutation endows them with the new
function of characterizing nexus ( PR, 1 1 3-1 1 4 ) .
   The " unspatialized sense-reception " discussed by Bergson i s by no
means a typica l case of primitive experience, in the sense that such an
experience might be associated with an electron, or any other being de
scri bed relevantly in terms of conservation or conformity. It is at the heart
of the practical sphere of " psychophysics," on which Bergson comments
at length in his Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness. Bergson 's
(critical ) interest responded to the ambition of this field, that is, the a rticu
lation between the " objective," quantitative measure of a sensible signal,
and the " subjective" evaluation of the intensity of that signal . Such a n
articulation obviously requires an experimental setup in which maximum
homogeneity is realized, in which no difference can i nsinuate i tself that
refers to an interpretation, an interest, a doubt. This is why the experi
mental setup is dominated by passivity: it confers, as it were, upon the
" subject " the role of detection appa ratus for the scientist. The experimen
tal subject " bears witness " to the intensity of the sound, the pain, the l ight,
in an experimental context that is actively opposed to perceptive experi
ence. The testimony concerns a sensation, for instance in terms of the
threshold at which it manifests itself to consciousness, the threshold of
saturation after which quantitative d ifferences will no longer be sensible,
and the estimation of the variations of intensity between these two thresh
olds. Like the invention of detection apparatuses, the " psychophysical
measure" is thus a triumph of abstraction, providing itself with the means
to name, i f not to descri be, components of experience that are usually
" what goes without saying." Yet to describe this apparatus in a concrete,
and therefore complete way, we must add that it presupposes the docility
of a " witness " who accepts to submit to this kind of experiment. J ust as
the technica l detection apparatus presupposes an assemblage whose final
ity is foreign to the assembled physical processes, the psychophysical ap
paratus cannot relate the objective measure of a signal and the subjective
testimony to its intensity without exhibiting what is foreign to such a rela
tion : the fact that the subject agrees to submit to a situation that is new
for a human. Like technical detection, the psychophysical experience is
creation, i mplying that scientists equip themselves with a new prosthesis.
   What, then, of the experiences that can indeed be under the banner of
an " unspatia lized reception," those, for instance, that I have already attrib
uted to insects, when, specu latively denying them percepti ve experience,
3 4 4   COSM OLOGY




I spoke of " detection" with rega rd to them ? The analogy with technical
detection has the i nterest of emphasizing that the category of " sensible
reception " defined by Whitehead covers an immense social variety. From
this viewpoint, there is no opposition between the processes studied by
physics or chemistry, as long, of course, as they are technically articulated
and stabilized enough to play a role in detection, and those physiologists
discover when they study the functions of selective capture accomplished
by a n organ. I n none of these cases, however, should " primitive experi
ence " evoke the idea of an " automatism." For Whitehead, we certainly do
not have any access to the type of enjoyment of occasions belonging to
nonliving societies, to which we delegate detection and the production of
a selective signal, but every experience is productive, enjoying the i nten
sity it produces. The ma in di fference between appa ratus and organs is
that la boratory apparatuses a nd prostheses exhi bit their dependency on
issues of knowledge and rel i a bility that can be formulated i ndependently
of their functioning. If the experience i n question is to be " primitive " as
such, it must not exhibit such a dependence.
   This is why if one can, as I have already risked doing, conceive the
experience of a butterfly or a fly as " detection" rather than as " percep
tion," it is by taking the term in its ful l sense. The sense in which, when
experimenters exclaim "there we go, it 's sizzling "; their experience is not
dominated by a contrast between a " here " and a " there" of a perceptive
type. The experi menter is affected in a way that is first a nd foremost
"emotional ." " Detection" ought therefore to evoke rather the accentua
tion of what we l ive as " presence," giving rise to an i rreversible, uncon
trollable mutation of experience. We need only think of a feeling of fright
or disgust, or else an attack of the giggles, and perhaps we can approach
what a butterfly " feels " when it detects the odor of its fema le: to speak of
" detection " implies that what is detected " makes a sensation " i n a way
that may be closer to a " trance " tha n to the identification " here" of some
thing that is " there."
   We now come to sense-perception, tha t is, to spatialized experience,
implying a contrast between " here" and " there." Whitehead associates the
emergence of this contrast with the sixth category of obligation, which
defines " transmutation."
   When [ . . . l one and the same conceptual feeling is derived impartially
by a prehending sub;ect from its analogous simple physical feelings of
various actual entities in its actual world, then, in a subsequent phase
of integration of these simple physical feelings together with the derivate
conceptual feeling, the prehending sub;ect may transmute the datum of
this conceptual feeling into a characteristic of some nexus containing
                                     T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   TH E   S E N S ES   3 4 S




those prehending actual entities among its members, or of some part of
that nexus. In this way the nexus (or its part), thus characterized, is the
objective datum of a feeling entertained by this prehending subject [ . . . I
This category is the way in which the philosophy of organism, which is
an atomic theory of actuality, meets a perplexity which is inherent in all
monadic cosmologies. Leibniz, in his Monadology, meets the same diffi
culty by a theory of "confused " perception. But he fails to make clear
how "confusion " originates ( PR, 27).
   The category of transmutation, sixth of the nine categories of obliga
tion, implies, because it requires the notion of " conceptual feeling," the
fourth category, the "ca tegory of conceptual eval uation." Unl ike transmu
tation, which corresponds to a possibility ( the prehending subject " may"
derive), this fourth category is generic. It concerns every actual occasion,
from the most si mple to the most sophisticated . At the initial phase of
every process of concrescence, there is " conceptual eval uation ."
  From each physical feeling there is the derivation of a purely concep
tual feeling whose datum is the eternal object determinant of the definite
ness of the actual entity, or of the nexus, physically felt ( PR, 2 6 ) .
  . Let us recal l that both physical feelings ( that is, feelings i nitiating the
concrescence, which have actua l entities as their data ) and conceptual
feelings ( feel ings of a n eternal object) belong to genetic analysis, and as
such do not communicate with a ny experience. In particular, a concep
tual feeling. (or conceptual prehension ) has nothi ng to do with an intel
lectual experience. Like the eternal object of which it is the feeling, it
" tells no story." It is " evaluation " in the sense that it is the feel ing of the
eternal object, i n its capacity to be rea l ized qua determi ni ng the how of
a physica l feeling. Elsewhere, Whitehead asks ( PR, 3 3 ) that it be under
stood in an a bsol utely neutral way, without admitting the slightest con
notation suggesting a thought or an i ntel lection. This must be the case,
since conceptual feeling belongs to the initial phase of any concrescence
and will a lso designa te the d i vine feeling of eterna l objects .
    Transmutation, as defined by the sixth category of obligation, is not an
intellectual operation either. What is transmuted is the datum of a concep
tual feeli ng, which leads to a new mode of i ngression for the eternal ob
ject, whose feeli ng has been i mpartially derived from a multitude of physi
cal feelings. There is no need to think that the eternal object whose mode
of i ngression is transmuted is always a sensum. What can be affirmed, in
contrast, is the particular importance, from our animal viewpoint, of the
application of the category of transmutation to the sensa to which our
sense organs testify. Correlatively, the simplicity of these eternal objects
known as the sensa is particularly appropriate for transmutation, for their
3 4 6   C O S M O LO G Y




conceptua l feelings, which do not require the feeling of any other particu
lar eternal object, lend themselves to the impartial derivation presupposed
by tra nsmutation. Whether the blush that infuses your cheeks is of shame
or of anger, it is always such a colored nuance, offering a contrast with the
rest of your face.
   If transmutation is not specifically l inked to perception, it is certainly a
condition for perception. Only i f it has issued from a transmutation can
what is felt be felt " there," that blue stain enteri ng into contrast with
other colors in the midst of a colored world, or the great roar of that wave
crashing, there, against that rock. Or it may not be, like the confused mul
titude of little noises produced by the droplets presumed to compose that
roar, which I do not perceive " there," but which no doubt confer a defi
nite character on the emotion inspired by the roar of the wave or that
slightly diffuse pa in i n my head. Transmutation ma kes spatialization pos
sible, but does not operate it.
   The transmutation that conditions a perception certainly has detection
as its own condition: it requi res selective organs to give mea ning to the
simple physical feeli ngs from which it is possible to derive, in an i mpar
tial way, one and the same eternal object, one and the same sensum. For
Whitehead, however, it first constitutes the paradigmatic example of a link
between social success and simplification . We are amazed that the fl ight
of a butterfly can testify to the presence of a single "odoriferous " mole
cule, but Whitehead, for his part, celebrates a s a much more sophisti
cated exploit the fact that we smell "an odor " or that we hear "a noise."
   The examination of the Category of Transmutation shows that the ap
proach to intellectuality consists in the gain of a power of abstraction. The
irrelevant multiplicity of detail is eliminated, and emphasis is laid on the
elements of systematic order in the actual world ( PR, 254 ) .
   The simplification produced b y transmutation is not in itself synony
mous with intelligibility, as is attested by the difficulty in naming a pain,
but it conditions the " that which " of perception, marking the threshold
where, for us, experi ence will be exhi bited not only as selective but a lso as
" original," exhibiting the " miracle of creation." It fact, it opens onto all
the experiences in which the questions raised in The Concept of Nature
assume meaning, those questions that all designated " mind " as ultimate.
   We must, however, insist on the fact that transm utation does not by
any mea ns open specifically upon consciousness, even though the con
scious experience of a world of things existing at the same time as we do
i mpl ies transmuted feeli ngs on a massi ve scale. Nor does it characterize
exclusively all the experiences that end up as loca lized perception. A " so
norous environment " does not designate its source, and a rabbit, i f it
                                    T H E   ADVENTURE   O F   T H E   S E NS E S   3 4 7




bolts a t the sl ightest " worrisome " noise, switching to a desperate mode
of exi stence in which it will be said to be " wholly in its fl ight," may be
dominated by a " there " experience rather than by a felt contrast between
here and there-it hasn't taken the time for that. Its mode of endurance
had as its component an acute sensitivity to the highly specialized con
trast " everything's OK/danger! " and the how of the transmuted sensation
is then ca lled " flee." Habit, instinct, intuition, reflex: many names-some
pejorative, some laudatory-have been given to the variety of behaviors
that attest no hesitation with regard to what is felt, and this is so whether
these beha viors come before any learning (closing one's eyes if a moving
obj ect approaches them quickly ) , or are the fruit and crowning moment
of a process of learning ( to k now how to drive or read ) . Whitehead
would ca ll them all " i mportant," social successes proper to the bodily l i fe
and to the immense variety of experiences of which it is and becomes
capable, successes that, as the case may be, will be the soci al environment
proper for receiving other feelings that are even more complex.
  Our intuitions of righteousness disclose an absoluteness in the nature
of things, and so does the taste of a lump of sugar (MT, 1 2 1 ) .
    For a dog, smells may testify a s much a s colors to the loca l ization that
makes verification possible. As far as many human beings are concerned,
there is something a bsolute a bout smell and taste, which lea ves no room
for the slightest hesitation . Yet the cry "That's not right! " also testifies
to an absolute intuition that makes experience tip over. It has nothing to
do with being made explicit: I judge that this experience, such as I per
ceive it, does not correspond to the definition of a j ust situation. The
contrast between detection and perception is thus not the only one. Mul
tiple contrasts inhabit a l l human experiences. Even a mathematician,
a fter years of furious work, may be moved to tears when evok ing a suc
cessful demonstration.
    Between " bolting without ask i ng for verification " and " asking for it,"
taking the time to pay due attention to what is worrisome, for i nstance,
by turning one's head toward the source of the worrisome noi se, the dif
ference is important, and sometimes lethal . For humans, however, the
d ifference can also become very important between "asking for a verifi
cation " and " wondering how one should ask for it," and i t is here that
consciousness comes i nto play.
    How do you know that somethi ng is or is not j ust? A sel f-administered
doubt, a situation of open controversy, a fleeting change in the i nterlocu
tor's physiognomy, it matters l ittle: what may disappear is the " trust" that
constitutes the common feature between the experience of the bolting
rabbit and that of the rabbit turning its head . A predator is a predator,
3 4 8   COSMOLOGY




and " i ntuition " is absol ute, even i f it has proceeded to a verification. As
for the d isappearance or effective questioning of the a bsolute character
of an " i ntuition," they are neutral in themselves: they may be deplored
when our doctri nes sap our trust in " what we know," but they are re
qui red to tell the d i fference between the professional, l i ke a predator,
who " never doubts," and Leibniz wondering how his perception of the
great roa r of the surf can be generated by a nondenumerable multipl icity
of sma l l noises .
   The possibil ity included in the question "how do you know that's
;ust ? "-that the intuition o f what is j ust may be challenged-has the
eventual efficacy of brutally transforming the assertion " it is j ust" i nto an
example of a theory that could be false, and the subj ect who inherits this
transformation can say good bye to any resemblance to a rabbit.
   The general case of conscious perception is the negative perception,
namely, "perceiving this stone as not grey." The "grey " then has ingression
in its full character of a conceptual novelty, illustrating an alternative. In
the positive case, "perceiving the stone as grey," the grey has 'ingression in
its character of a possible novelty, but in fact by its conformity emphasizing
the dative grey, blindly felt. Consciousness is the feeling of negation: in the
perception of "the stone as grey," such feeling is in barest germ; in the per
ception of "the stone is not grey," such feeling is in full development. Thus
the negative perception is the triumph of consciousness. It finally rises to the
peak of free imagination, in which the conceptual novelties search through
a universe in which they are not datively exemplified (PR, 1 6 1 ) .
    I f the rabbit turning its head testifies t o the possibility that a noise may
not signify a predator, this does not mean that it is conscious, in the sense
that Descartes is conscious when he meditates " I see a piece of wax there "
( o r a nything else ) . The confrontation between the w a x and an "extended
substance " that no perceptual data exemplifies belongs to the summits of
free imagination, like the multitude of tiny noises made by drops, envis
aged by Leibniz. The difference, for Whitehead, does not consist i n the
superiority of consciousness over the feeli ng that we can attribute to the
rabbit or over ourselves in most of our experiences. It testifies to a trans
formation of what is at stake. One of the ways to express the difference is
to recal l that the piece of wax does not really interest Descartes: for him,
it is an "example." His experience is dominated by the question of having
to construct a description of it that resists any possible challenge. One
must refuse to the piece of wax everything whose " objective reality " could
be denied . On the contrary, Lei bniz's experiment is dominated by the pos
sibil ity that we may refuse to the world the obscure multiplicity hidden by
our clear perception of the roar of the surf.
                                    T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 4 9




   From pedagogic goodwill ( ,'I 'll explain it to you ") to worried specula
tion ("he's going to judge me on the basis of my explanation "), it is,
moreover, not certa i n that i t is always j udicious to leave behind the
doma i n of taste and colors, of trust i n the nature of things, for that of the
adventure of arguments, as is attested by the doctrines that have made
nature bi furcate. The brutal ity of the passage from i mpersona l obvious
ness, "that is just, " to the personal position, "that is what I felt, and now
I have to explain myself," opens the door to what was and remains one
of Whitehea d's grea t concerns, the construction of reasons that, in order
to resist cha llenges, ma ke a c lea n slate of what we nevertheless k now.
This is why consciousness is placed under the banner of novelty, not of
any possibility of tra nscendence. And i f it has something to do with the
question of truth, it is i n terms of " a ttention to truth " (PR, 275 ) : new
risks, new origi na l possibili ties of experience, new contrasts .
   Attention to truth is pri mary with regard to " truth val ues." It refers
rather to the conscious mobil ization of the question of " due attention."
We shall return to this poi nt when we undertake to explore the positive
power of la nguage, which can be a n i ngredient of every social envi ron
ment in which such a question may be ra ised . What needs to be empha
sized here is that attention to truth does not found, for consciousness, any
claim to a privi leged access that would enable us to disqua li fy the experi
ence of the rabbit turning its head. A habitual gesture does not " lack " any
thing, but it is different from a conscious gesture, runs other risks, translates
other urgencies than those, presupposing language, of having to account
for what one " means." The fact that the rabbit, when it turns its head or
bolts, is not equipped for the abstract " how can one recognize a preda
tor ? " does not, ultimately, deprive it of much, as Wittgenstein, moreover,
showed i n a pretty way: most of our discursive definitions try to " follow"
what we " know," and i f a definition contradicts this knowledge, it is the
definition that wi l l be modified .
   Language was developed in response to the excitements of practical ac
tions. It is concerned with the prominent facts. Such facts are those that
are seized upon by consciousness for detailed examination, with a view of
emotional response leading to immediate purposeful action. These promi
nent facts are the variable facts-the appearance of a tiger, of a clap of
thunder, or of a spasm of pain [ . . . 1 But the prominent facts are the super
ficial facts. They vary because they are superficial; and they enter into
conscious discrimination because they vary. There are other elements in
our experience, on the fringe of consciousness, and yet massively qualify
ing our experience. In regard to these other facts, it is our consciousness
that flickers, and not the facts themselves. They are always securely there,
3 50   C O S M O LO G Y




barely discriminated, and yet inescapable. For example, consider our deri
vation from our immediate past of a quarter of a second ago. We are
continuous with it, we are the same as it, prolonging its affective tone,
enjoying its data. A nd yet we are modifying it, deflecting it, changing its
purposes, altering its tone, re-conditioning its data with new elements.
   We reduce this past to a perspective, and yet retain it as the basis for
our present moment of realization. We are different from it, and yet we
retain our individual identity with it. This is the mystery of personal iden
tity, the mystery of the immanence of the past in the present, the mystery
of transience. All our science, all our explanations require concepts origi
nating in this experience of derivation. In respect to such intuitions, lan
guage is peculiarly inadequate ( AI, 2 1 0 ) .
   Ca n you identify the grey o f that stone that you have j ust mentioned i n
this color chart ? Even color ca n be taken u p aga i n in an experience that
testifies to the " mystery of persona l identity." What I have just mentioned,
I suddenly discover to be rather different from a simple perception. This
color, suddenly belonging to the past, does not have much to do with the
shades presented i n the pa int-seller's color chart. When I mentioned it, it
was as if present, preserved, the imma nence of the past i n the present of
my experience. But when summoned to define itself i n a public way, it
becomes mine, a nd j ust as much slips into the past, for it is in contrast
with the evoca tion of an experience qua past that I feel that none of the
shades presented i n a way that a llows them to be compa red quite does
justice to that one, unique and incomparable, that I had loved . But this
conscious hesitation will proba bly be hard to remember when I face the
wa ll once pai nted : it is its color.
   Inadequacy does not mea n denunciation. The point is not to achieve a
" neutra l " consciousness or to oppose the purity of sense evidence, or the
" mystery " of what is a lways there, to hesitant, fea rful, perplexed, or pas
sionate negotiation. Quite the contra ry, it is the i nterest of this negotia
tion, the mutations of experience it brings a bout, that matter, that resitu
ate consciousness, not at all as an avenue to the truth but as the product
and vector of an ad venture.
   In fact, Whitehead is fa r more interested in the adventure of free imagi
nation than in the veraci ty of j udgment. Freedom of imagi nation is not
indifferent to the question of truth but presupposes it i n a n origina l way.
To say " once upon a time," or " let's pretend," or even " let there be " (an
idea l tria ngle) presupposes critical judgment, since these utterances indi
cate the need for its inhibition . " I maginative rationa l ization" a lso implies
the provisional bracketing of the question of the " true." Let us suppose
we can construct a coherent language, equally adequate whatever the
                                      THE   A D V E N TU R E   O F   THE   S E N S E S   3 5 1




experience may be, and let us reserve for the appl ica ble cases the atten
tion to truth req uired by its verification. If speculative philosophy con
cerns the contrast between " true " and " false," it is only via the detour of
that genuine triumph of free imagination that Whitehea d associated with
meta physics, defined as a " d ispassionate consideration of the nature of
things." There is nothi ng indifferent about such an absence of passion,
for it deli berately suspends " what we k now well," that is, what our vari
ous ways of spea k i ng-the one that is a ppropriate for describing me, the
one that is appropriate for describing this keyboard-define as i mpor
tant. Artificially, experimentally, through the imperative of coherence, it
demands that la nguage take cha rge of the experiences compa red with
which it is most i nadequate. This is why "attention to truth " i n the sense
of speculative philosophy does not presuppose critica l consciousness, but
the critica l experience of consciousness. It does not presuppose becoming
awa re of the finitude of experience, but becoming aware of its social and
therefore partial functioning. William Ja mes had suggested mak ing con
sciousness a " function." Whitehea d associates it with a socia l novelty,
which, fa r from defining human experience, " fl ickers " i ntermittently.
   Plura l ism. The sensible, the i ntell igi ble, the problematic, a l l designate
moda lities of sense-experience which, a lthough they a re put on the same
pla ne, m ust be carefully distinguished . The experiences that exhibit in a
domina nt way the releva nce of the category of transmutation- "Sweet! "
" Run a way !"-must not be idea lized, beca use they esca pe a l l hesitation,
nor "overcome," beca use they escape all reason . We must reca l l that they
testify not to the "concrete " but to what is carried out by tra nsmuta tion:
a bstraction.
   Apart from transmutation our feeble intellectual operations would
fail to penetrate into the dominant characteristics of things. We can only
understand by discarding ( PR, 25 1 ) .
   However, the truth of the adventure of the senses is not the abstraction
of transmutation. Already in The Concept of Nature, Whitehead empha
sized the i mporta nce of what we ca l l synesthesia, and which he ca lled
" conveyance of one sense-object by a nother." That fla nnel coat that is
not a blue patch, which I sense i n the mode of " wear" or " touch." The
fact that I ca n be led to admit that ali i see there is a blue form designates
me as vulnera ble to the imperative of havi ng to give an account of my
experience: that is, not as a human being in genera l, but as belonging to
a social adventure, in which the questions that were created by philoso
phy have been taken up by the school i nstitution that accustoms people
to deny, or to pretend to deny, what they are aware of, although they
cannot j ustify it.
3 5 2   C O S M O L O GY




   The blue flannel coat was appropri a te fo r Whitehea d 's project i n
The Concept of Nature, centered a s it was around nature a s what w e are
awa re of in perception. The coat allowed the affirmation that what we are
aware of is not a blue form. But the tri umph of the adventure of the senses
is not that I know that I could touch this coat that is here. What The Con
cept of Nature could only allude to is the experience of presence, the pres
ence that affects us, makes us feel, much more than we perceive it.
   In The Spell of the Sensuous, David Abram suggests associating this
presence-presence of the word, presence of thi ngs-with a convergence
of the senses that places what Whitehead ca lls conveya nce under the ban
ner of the event.
    When the local tomcat comes to visit, I do not have distinctive ex
periences of a visible cat, an audible cat, and an olfactory cat; rather the
tomcat is precisely the place where these separate sensory modalities join
and dissolve into one another, blending as well with a certain furry tactil
ity. Thus, my divergent senses meet up with each other in the surrounding
world, converging and commingling in the things I perceive. We may
think of the sensing body as a kind of open circuit that completes itself
only in things, and in the world. The differentiation of my senses, as well
as their spontaneous convergence in the world at large, ensures that I am
a being destined for relationship: it is primarily through the engagement
with what is not me that I effect the integration of my senses, and thereby
experience my own unity and coherence ( 55, 1 25 ) .
   When I associated the functioning o f a detector with the ability to de
tect a being's presence, I dared to make a comparison with the experience
of a butterfly " detecting" the odor of its female, which means that I de
nied the butterfly the experience descri bed by Abram, that of sensing its
female "as present." The fact that experimenters do not feel the presence,
attested by their detectors, of radioactive atoms or neutrinos is the cor
relate of experi mental practice, whose success is the crea tion of relations
with beings that do not belong to "our" worl d . Yet to refuse the experi
ence "of what is not me " to the butterfly is obviously much more risky,
and only has mea ning in order to try to give all its importance to the
plurality of animal experiences against the hiatus between humans and
animals. Some day, perhaps, for instance, i f neurophysiology succeeds in
associating an aspect of the brain with the achievement constituted by
conveyance, we sha ll lea rn more about the contrast between our experi
ence and that of butterflies. Yet whatever scientists and philosophers may
say, we know, even i f we cannot j usti fy it, that the world is present for a
cat, as it is for Thomas Nagel's famous bat.
   The fact that David Abram took a tomcat as a n example is neverthe
less significant. Many of us have little experience with bats but wi ll pro-
                                     T H E   ADVENTU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 5 3




test i f we a re told that we know nothing about what it is like to be a cat.
Scientists will then denounce the temptation to a nthropomorphize, to
imagine, i n particular, a reciprocity of attention, a cat that looks at us
as we loo k at it. I nstea d , The Spell of the Sensuous ra ises the question
of the rarefaction of such a n experience i n the midst of a world hence
forth dominated by signs that claim a purely i ntel lectual efficacy. A world
in which the livi ng and expressive presence of cats is an exception.
   Direct, prereflexive perception is inherently synaesthetic, participatory,
and animistic, disclosing the things and the elements that surround us
not as inert objects but as expressive subjects, entities, powers, poten
cies. A nd yet most of us seem, today, very far from such experience.
Trees rarely, if ever, speak to us; animals no longer approach us as emis
saries from alien zones of intelligence; the sun and the moon no longer
draw prayers but seem to arc blindly across the sky. How is it that these
phenomena no longer address us, no longer compel our involvement or
reciprocate our attention? If participation is the very structure of percep
tion, how could it ever have been brought to a halt? To freeze the ongoing
animation, to block the wild exchange between the senses and the things
that engage them, would be tantamount to freezing the body itself, stop
ping it short in its track. A nd yet our bodies still move, still live, still
breathe. If we no longer experience the enveloping earth as expressive
and alive, this can only mean that the animating interplay of the senses
has been transferred to another medium, another focus of participation
(55, 1 30-1 3 1 ) .
    The transformation of experience described by Abram corresponds to
the experience of what, fol lowing Whitehead, I have called the "solitary
consciousnesses," and to its mute, disenchanted world. It is what the bifur
cation of nature turned into the only rational starting point for inquiry. But
the originality of Abram's proposition, which places it within the White
headian tradition, is to reject this idea of disenchantment, with all its con
notations of a truth to be assumed by a humanity that has left its illusions
behind. The enchantment of presence has not disappeared, but it has been
d isplaced. In a dominant way, "our world," the world of most of this
book's readers, is a world " to be read." Isn't reading a text, inseparably, to
see it and to hear it, to feel it as a " presence " different from us ? Don't phi
losophers, who refuse even to a cat the reciproca l attention that its pres
ence nevertheless suggests, address a text as if that text " wanted " some
thing from them ? Aren't they forced to feel and to think " with " that text?
   The fact that, as Abram suggests, read ing inherited the achievement of
synesthetic col laboration, and therefore belongs to the ad venture of the
senses, impl ies that the solitary consciousness does not mark the i rrevers
i ble tri umph of the i ntellectual over the sensible. It would be insepa rable
3 5 4   COSMOLOGY




from an event, from the stra nge fact that written words, made up of al
pha betic signs abstracted from any allusion to the world, have a power
over us, spea k to us, and make us feel in a way that captures our ability
to feel " with." Those who write, but also those who rea d, would then be
under the sway of a " spel l " that comes before awareness beca use it con
cerns the senses . To consider oneself sol itary would then be of the order
of what Whitehead would have ca lled a cultura lly bred exaggeration, a
consequence of what would be, in the first instance, an etho-ecological
mutation .
   It is moreover, the question of this mutation that Whitehead addressed
when, in Science and the Modern World, he ca l led for an education that
provides a ha bit of art, that is, the habit of enjoying living, expressive va l
ues, values which, he affirmed, a re in the world, rather than mere prod
ucts of our imagination. Abram gives this affirmation a ra dical expres
sion, since he dema nds that what we know when we speak of the magic of
a work of art, of a poem, or of a landscape be taken l iterally, to the letter.
   If trees seldom speak to us, literate people, can we accept that written
texts do without claiming it is "only a metaphor" ? The solitary conscious
ness will snicker. Yet what is meant by the demand for a " litera l " under
standing if not the attribution to the written sign of a power over us ? We
shall certainly not learn how to cope with this power by affirming that it is
"only a metaphor." What demands to be understood litera lly is not sepa
rable from the experience of " sheer disclosure" aroused by a text, since it is
aroused by a presence upon which our senses converge. This is attested by
the adventures of mathematics, of poetry, and also of philosophy, all the
adventures in which one does not feel oneself to be the master of what one
writes, but where writing forces one to think, to feel, and to create. And the
very writing of Process and Reality not only belongs to this adventure but
affirms it. When Whitehead writes that all the concepts that will be defined
in it appea l, silently, to a leap of the imagination ( PR, 4), he testifies to his
experience as a writer but also warns his readers that they will have to
make themselves available to the efficacy of the text, or else close the book.
   In this perspective, the idea, current among contemporary phi loso
phers, that it is la nguage that has sepa ra ted us from thi ngs, is one that
could only be conceived by those who have the benefit of the powers of
thought, ana lysis, memory, and conjecture that have been contributed by
writing. Only the spell of writing ma kes intelligible the idea a discursive
world closed upon itself, in which the meaning of all words could be ex
plained by reference to other word s. And when the thesis that there is
no such thing as a " perfect dictionary" is celebrated as a major event of
thought, the power of the spell is not broken, but rises to new i ntensi ty.
                                    T H E   A D V E N TU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 5 5




  The account of the sixth day should be written, He gave them speech,
and they became souls (MT, 4 1 ) .
    Writing i n this way the account of the day when humans (after most
animals) were created would mean giving to wri tten words the poetic
power to lead us back to wha t, for Whitehead, is specifically human: the
power of spoken words over our experience. H umans are those whom
words can inspi re, or bewitch, enrage, or kill. This is why the tale of the
sixth day should not tel l the story of man's creation in the image of God,
but of the efficacy of spoken language, which is " received " by every hu
man offspring. And the souls humans became are not, primordially, ratio
nal ones. " Men are the children of the Universe, with foolish enterprises
and irrational hopes " (MT, 3 0 ) . The adven ture of reason itself is a some
what mad adventure.
    This is why the adventure of the sensa is not over. Hasn't one of its
prolongations, in the course of the somewhat mad history known as phi
losophy, been the somewhat irrational hope that the data of the senses
might define a " pure " perception ? It is in this capaci ty that " blue" was
engaged by David Hume in a speculative adventure, which was to be
taken up and prolonged in Process and R eality in a mode that would
certainly have surprised Hume himsel f. I refer to the thought experiment
involving the " case of the missing shade of blue."
    Like all phi losophical thought experiments, this case corresponds to a
highly artificial si tuation, conceived to ill ustrate a phi losophical abstrac
tion, and unlike thought experiments in physics, it does not communicate
with any conceivable experi mental invention . Hume imagi nes a person
familiar with all colors except a shade of blue, which she has never en
countered . Suppose she is presented with a color chart featuring a l l the
tones of bl ue, except that shade: she would, Hume supposes, perceive a
"gap," a hiatus, discontinuity, or lack. The question is whether her imagi
nation wi l l enable her to fill that gap, and to positively imagine the shade
of blue she has never seen.
    If Hume's question is valid for Whitehead, it is because Whitehead has
accepted as a constraint, in order to think of any concrescence, the thesis
that i ntegration draws all of its resources from its primary phase, con
ceived in terms of " physical feelings " and the conceptual feelings that de
rive from them . He even baptized th is constraint " Hume's pri nci ple," as
i f he were repeating-in a slightly modified form, of course-Hume's
central thesis that all our simple ideas, when they first emerge, are derived
from simple impressions.
  Conceptual feelings and simple causal feelings constitute the two main
species of "primary " feelings. All other feelings of whatever complexity
3 5 6   COSMO LOGY




arise out of a process of integration which starts with a phase of these
primary feelings. There is, however, a difference between the species. A n
actual entity i n the actual world o f a subject must enter into the concres
cence of that subject by some simple causal feeling, however vague, triv
ial, and submerged. Negative prehensions may eliminate its distinctive
importance. But in some way, by some trace of causal feeling, the remote
actual entity is prehended positively. In the case of an eternal object,
there is no such necessity. In any given concrescence, it may be included
positively by means of a conceptual feeling; but it may be excluded by a
negative prehension ( PR, 2 3 9 ) .
   That which, for Hume, served to question the pretentions of experi
ences to go beyond " empi rical " data has become a n experimental con
stra int for Whitehead . More preci sely, " Hume's principle" is that thanks
to which the extent of the ontologica l principle, what it imposes and
what it forbids, will be able to unfold and measure itself against the de
mand of adequacy. The primary phase col lects all the ca uses that can be
invoked for concrescence, except the ca use that the latter will constitute
for itsel f. Its characterization, marked by the distinction between physi
cal or "causa l " feelings and conceptual feel ings, gives a good translation
of the distinction between the "ca use "-what will, in one way or another,
function as a " reason "-and the open question of how it will cause, or of
what determination it will become the reason .
   Initial physical feel ings, feel ings having actual entities as their data, are
limited to reproducing themselves: what has been felt is to be felt again.
This is the " power" proper to objective immorta lity. The way it will fi
nally be felt, however, is pa rt of the subjective decision . The eternal ob
jects that are the data of the initial conceptual feelings may be eliminated
by negative prehension . Conceptua l feelings, because they enter into the
heritage without obl iging it, thus reflect the problematic dimension that
is generally concea led by the notion of cause: to cause, of course, but
how? No cause has the power to prescribe the way it will cause. What
has been felt in this way might be felt otherwise, or might find itself be
reft of any distinct importance.
   Whoever says constra int also says " putting to the test." Ultimately, it is
adequacy that will j udge. If " Hume's principle" were to lead to explana
tion by elimination, it would have to be a bandoned, but it can be a ban
doned only a fter what it authorized has been ful ly deployed first. And it
is therefore here that the " case of the missing shade of blue" assumes its
speculative importance, for this case raises the question of " what was not
felt," and more precisely of an " unreal ized eternal object " in the primitive
phase. How, without infringing the ontologica l principle that prescribes
                                     T H E   A D V E N T U R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 5 7




that actual entities are "the only reasons," could such an eterna l object
make ingression ?
   This question should not make us think that, independently of the pos
sibility, sti ll in suspense, of such an i ngression, there wo uld only be a
more or less selective transmission without true originality. If Whitehead
had thought this, he would have thought like a poor mathema tician, re
ferring the essential aspect of the difficulty to a unique and obscure ques
tion after having defined as a " regular," unproblematic so l ution a rather
uninteresting case in which creativity is only exemplified under the a spect
of a possi bility to neglect, not to ta ke into account. Good mathemati
cians do not refer everything that ca uses problems to one vast undiffer
entiated category: they learn to discern the difficulty, that is, correlatively,
to enlarge the class of " regular" solutions as broadly as possible. This is
what Whitehead has done, by distinguishing between pure physica l feel
i ngs and " hybrid " physica l feeli ngs in the gamut of physica l feelings.
   In a "pure physical feeling " the actual entity which is the datum is ob
;ecti{ied by one of its own physical feelings [ . . . I in a "hybrid physical
feeling " the actual entity forming the datum is ob;ecti{ied by one of its
own conceptual feelings ( PR, 245-24 6 ) .
   Thanks to hybrid physica l feelings, " Hume's principle" a l ready autho
rizes by itself a grea t va riety of cases connecting " i nheriting" and "creat
ing." As Whitehead remarks ( PR, 246 ), the entities for which hybrid feel
ings are important designate societies for which the notion of energy,
conserved and transmitted, loses not its va lid ity but its relevance. The
function i ng of a living body conserves energy, of course, but a decompos
ing cadaver conserves it j ust as wel l . A bacterium swimming up a gradi
ent of sugar concentration combines a movement with a contrast ( more
or less suga ry ), and it is this contrast as such that, together with its social
repercussions, "explains " the movement for the biologist. I n genera l, the
originality of living beings with rega rd to thei r environment, attested by
living societies, requires that the subjecti ve form acquired by conceptual
feelings i n the course of a n i ntegration (an intensive eva l uation, which
Whitehead calls "a dversion" if it is positive, and " a versio n " if there is
attenuation or elimination) may be felt as such. Si nce the most typica l
manifesta tion of original ity is partiality, that is, adversion or aversion,
the feeling of these subjective forms is part of what may crucially matter.
Furthermore, for sophisticated experiences, what may come to play a
role are " the sca rs " of what an entity's heritage has avoided, the subjec
tive emotion associated with what might have been but is not.
   Nevertheless, hybrid p hysica l feelings do not solve the q uestion of
unrealized eterna l objects any more than this question is sol ved by the
3 S 8   C O S M O LO G Y




category of transmutation, implying an initial phase in which the same
conceptual feeling may be derived impartially from the feeli ngs of multiple
entities. What i s new i n transmuted feeling is the mode of ingression of
the eternal object, but not the eterna l object itself. The fact that the same
eternal object is i mpl icated is essential to rea l ism-the green of this leaf
does indeed belong to the leaf-but this is precisely what cannot be the
case with the missing shade of blue, first percei ved insofar as it is lacki ng,
and then, eventually, experienced for itself.
   Th is shade of blue i s certa inly not a spectacular case of conceptual in
novation. Just as the sensa have as their primary i nterest the possibil ity of
a transmission indifferent to the disparate character of social environ
ments, so the sensum corresponding to that shade has as its only interest
to give a simple i l l ustration, debatable as such, of the question of the en
try into the world of a new eternal object, not real ized in the transmi tted
heritage.
   But this question is crucial for Whitehea d, since it is connected with
that of relevance. I f a nonrealized sensum can make ingression into expe
rience, it is because the order of the color chart makes its a bsence "glar
ing," because its i ngression responds in a relevant way to what is felt as a
" lack ." In Whitehead's thought, relevance is closely linked to the cosmo
logical question. Novelty, in the cosmologica l sense, is always " relevant
novelty." Therefore, wherever blue is " missing," God is not far, for God is
precisely that thanks to which what has been realized is plunged i nto the
possi ble, that thanks to which realization is not the last word .
   The things which are temporal arise by their participation in the things
which are eternal. The two sets are mediated by a thing which combines
the actuality of what is temporal with the timelessness of what is potential.
This final entity is the divine element in the world, by which the barren
inefficient disjunction of abstract potentialities obtains primordially the ef
ficient conjunction of ideal realization. This ideal realization of potentiali
ties in a primordial actual entity constitutes the metaphysical stability
whereby the actual process exemplifies general principles of metaphysics,
and attains the ends proper to specific types of emergent order. By reason
of the actuality of this primordial valuation of pure potentials, each eternal
object has a definite, effective relevance to each concrescent process. Apart
from such orderings, there would be a complete disjunction of eternal ob
jects unrealized in the temporal world. Novelty would be meaningless, and
inconceivable. We are here extending and rigidly applying Hume's princi
ple, that ideas of reflection are derived from actual facts ( PR, 40) .
  The author who wrote these lines could not raise the problem of the
missing shade of blue, since this problem did not exist for him. In fact, this
                                     T H E   ADVENTU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 59




author was quite close to the one who, in Science and the Modem World                     ,


had defined the ideal situation as implying all the eternal objects. For him,
the "prima ry phase " issued from an " ordering"-here, at last, is the "di
vine ordering"-implying a relation of relevance defined for all eternal
objects. The fact that in other passages of Process and Reality Whitehead
accepts the problem of the missing shade of blue thus i ndicates the meta
morphosis undergone by the "cosmotheological " economy of Process and
Reality in the course of its writing. For there to be a problem, the divine
ordering, whatever its role may be, must no longer have an answer for
everythi ng, that is, the i nitial phase of a concrescence must contain feel
ings of all the actual enti ties ( the principle of relativity), but its conceptual
feelings must be li mited exclusively to eternal objects that have been real
ized . Hume's principle, far from being a ble to be "extended and rigidly
applied," then begins to ra ise the problem of what it excludes.
   We do not know what determined Whitehead's transformation on this
point. Perhaps it was a dynamic li nked to the increasing importance he
gave to the constraint of having to resist the slope of "great explanations "
and their power to explain anything and everythi ng. The fact that the
"divine element in the worl d " can be responsible for the relations of rele
vance of all the eternal objects with regard to each process of concres
cence, constitutes such an explanation. At the limit, the ontological prin
ciple did not yet need, on this hypothesis, to be formulated, for it would
not have entailed any constrai nt: divine actuality satisfies it every time.
   Correlatively, the divine ordering ra n the risk of crushing the actuality
of what is temporal . I f eternal objects have recei ved thei r degree of rele
vance prior to a ny subjective decision, the essentia l point has been de
cided. The idea that occasional becoming is "cause of itself" threatens to
be a mere hypocritica l witticism. In fact, it would rather be akin to a
si mple a ppropriation . The subject comes into existence where a perspec
tive is already proposed, and this perspective includes unrealized possibles
" ordered as a function of their relevance " by primordial evaluation. In
other words, what is proposed to the subject a l ready designates the way
in which it will, eventually, be able to prod uce releva nt novelty.
   In fact, i f what one inherits is already unified, the question of how one
inherits is about as open as that of how to function for a functionary: there
are ways to sabotage, to cheat, to let oneself be corrupted, to commit faults
with incalculable consequences, in short, to poison one's envi ronment, but
not to play its meaning over again. Unity demands conformity. The rela
tion between individuals and thei r language, it will be noted, is quite dif
ferent. They inherit it, of course, and learning it fashions, one by one, each
of the human offspring who accomplish that incredi ble tour de force of
3 6 0   COSMOLOGY




learning to speak . But it does not have a unity such that it would assign a
role to human beings, si nce it also enables them, to a certain extent, to ask
the question of this role. Is it not, moreover, this possibility of questioning
that is req uired by speculative philosophy itself, as also by all the adven
tures in which people risk something other than their body?
   The risk Whitehead faced can be stated on the basis of the contrast
between language and grammar, i n the sense that the latter demands con
formity and claims to define the normal usages of a language. If one ad
heres to such a claim, each particular utterance becomes a simple case,
and each locutor can be j udged . Likewise, concrescence could be assimi
lated to a mode of real ization of a preexistent possible and j udged on the
basis of the way this possible will be realized, the way the concrescence
wi ll prod uce, qua realized novel ty, that whose perti nence has al ready
been ideally defined .
   The clarity with which I have j ust defined this risk is the retroactive
product of the iti nerary that led Whitehead to a ffirm the occasional be
coming as " cause of i tself," and the ontological principle as restrictive.
These affirmations probably did not preexist in thei r capacity as con
stra ints, but i ssued from the flight of experience, and probably coincide
wi th the tipping point where Whitehead separates himself from his refer
ence to an "eternal activity " and adopts creativity as an ultimate. And it
is probably along multiple paths that the difficulty " percolated," quietly
insi sting through the silence cast over unformulated objections. Be that
as it may, the case of the missing shade of blue allows us to follow a story
in which the conseq uences of this " becoming aware " are played out.
   Thus, Whitehead will first answer the question of the missing blue by
the fifth category of obligation, the " category of conceptual reversion."
This category authorizes a second source of conceptual feelings, not con
tained within the initial phase. New eternal objects could make ingression
if their di fference with obj ects already realized is relevant. This relevance,
Whitehead specifies, is determi ned by the " subjecti ve aim," by the concres
cent subject qua aiming at its own sel f-determination. The divine order
ing, qua implying the relevance for experience of all eternal objects, has
already absented itself. No doubt, moreover, the categories of obli gation
were born from this mutation, for they answer the challenge of rendering
explicit what "obliges " a concrescent process in a way that excludes all
preliminary determination.
  Thus, the first phase of the mental pole is conceptual reproduction,
and the second phase is a phase of conceptual reversion. In this second
phase the proximate novelties are conceptually felt. This is the process by
which the subsequent enrichment of subjective forms, both in qualitative
                                    T H E   A D V E N T U R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 6 1




pattern, and in intensity through contrast, is made possible by the posi
tive conceptual prehension of relevant alternatives. There is a conceptual
contrast of physical incompatibilities [ . . . I But it does limit the rigid
application of Hume's principle. Indeed Hume himself admitted excep
tions [ . . . I This "aim at contrast " is the expression of the ultimate cre
ative purpose that each unification shall achieve some maximum depth
of intensity of feeling, subject to the conditions of its concrescence. This
ultimate purpose is formulated in Category VllI ( PR, 249 ) .
   The eighth categoreal obl igation, which deals with " su bj ective inten
sity," states that the subjective aim is at the origin of the evaluation (ad
version and aversion ) of conceptual feeli ngs, a nd that what i s ai med at,
what gives its ulti mate meaning to the creation of the subject by itself, is
the intensity of a feeling. It is thus the subject's a im, bringing into exis
tence a contrast, a new possibil ity of i ntensity, that satisfies the ontologi
cal principle. The fact that Whitehead refers expl icitly i n this regard to
Religion in the Making in a note gives a good ind ication of what is at
stake. Conceptual reversion makes possible the transformation of de
structive oppositions i nto positively felt contrasts. And the very experi
ence of the person who, faced by the " lack of a shade," i magi nes the
missing shade, i s an a bstract example of a properly cosmic event, when
the future possibility of a still-inconceivable contrast intervenes a s a de
termining factor in the experience of a destructive confl ict.
   Everything thus seems to be taken care of. Except that the category of
reversion not only signifies a " limit" to Hume's principle but raises an
other problem, much more serious. The eternal objects, which must be
indifferent to their own ingressions, here run the risk of exhibiting them
selves as nonindifferent, partial, correlated, and even endowed with the
abil ity to cause their own i ngression. For what does " relevance" mean i f
not a relation of intrinsic proximity between eternal objects ? B u t i f this
relevance is no longer med iated by God 's divine ordering, i f it intervenes
in one of the categoreal obligations that determine what every concres
cence can and should do, doesn't this proximity become intrinsic ? This
would mean that the real ized eterna l objects themselves explain and give
rise to feelings of unrealized objects. In that case, however, eternal objects
would no longer be a multiplicity, but should be characterized as togeth
erness, that is, endowed with intri nsic relations. They thus risk acquiring
the ideal power that the ontologica l principle expl icitly denies them.
Eterna l objects do not have the power to make a d ifference by them
selves, even if only by relations of proximity : no ideal proximity can be
invoked as a cause or explanation for the creation of a " but then . . . "
implying a relevant association. For eternal obj ects would then say some-
3 6 2   COSMOLOGY




thing, i f not a bout themselves then at least a bout their relations of prox
imi ty. They would no longer be " pure potentia ls." But if eterna l objects
" say " anything at all a bout their ingressions, the enti re problem is turned
upside down . No ha lf-measures a re possi ble, and they will be in com
mand. Whitehead has thus moved from the Charybdis of an overly deter
minant God to the Scylla of insistent eterna l objects.
   And suddenly, at the end of a paragraph, the problem and the solu
tion are made expl icit a t the same time, when Whitehead announces a
rearrangement of the categories of obligation .
  The question, how, and in what sense, one unrealized eternal object can
be more, or less, proximate to an eternal object in realized ingression
that is to say, in comparison with any other unfelt eternal object-is left
unanswered by the Category of Reversion. In conformity with the onto
logical principle, this question can be answered only by reference to some
actual entity. Every eternal object has entered into the conceptual feelings
of God. Thus, a more fundamental account must ascribe the reverted con
ceptual feeling in a temporal subject to its conceptual feeling derived, ac
cording to Category I V, from the hybrid physical feeling of the relevancies
conceptually ordered in God's experience. In this way, by the recognition
of God's characterization of the creative act, a more complete rational
explanation is obtained. The Category of Reversion is then abolished, and
Hume's principle of the derivation of conceptual experience from physical
experience remains without any exception ( PR, 249-250) .
   Th is is n o doubt Whitehead's most fa mous insertion, because i n its
case his procedure leaps to the eyes. The category of conceptual rever
sion , whose abolition he announces, will con tinue to be used imperturb
ably in the pages that follow. Whitehead will l imit hi msel f to adding, a
few pages before, the reasons for which what has j ust happened to him,
the necessity that an actual occasion ( physically) " feel " God, was obvi
ously necessary . . . retroactively.
   The limitation of Hume's principle introduced by the consideration
of the Category of Conceptual Reversion [ . . . 1 is to be construed as
referring merely to the transmission from the temporal world, leaving
God out of account. Apart from the intervention of G od, there could be
nothing new in the world, and no order in the world. The course of
creation would be a dead level of ineffectiveness, with all balance and
intensity progressively excluded by the cross currents of incompatibil
ity. The novel hybrid feelings derived from God, with the derivative
sympathetic conceptual valuations, are the foundations of progress
( PR, 247).
                                    T H E   A DVENTU R E   O F   T H E   S E N S E S   3 6 3




   David Hume would no doubt have been rather surprised that " the case
of the missing shade " finds its solution in a feel ing directly derived from
God. As fa r as we a re concerned, to speak with Leibniz, while we might
have thought that we had a lmost reached port, here we are thrown back
on the high seas, and even into a stormy ocean . For it is one thing to link,
as was the case i n Religion in the Making, the theme of progress, or the
possibil ity that evil may be overcome, with a cosmology i mplicating God.
It is quite another to attribute to an actual entity a " hybrid feeling" de
rived from God, and more precisely--otherwise we would rediscover a
new version of the bifurcation of nature-to attribute such a hybrid feel
ing to every actual entity.
   It is a lways hard, especially with Whitehead, to know to what extent
creators are aware of the problems that they have not yet provided them
selves with the means to solve. Did Whitehead tel l hi mself " this will
do fine l i ke that," or " that ought to be enough " ? Did he know, when he
evoked the divine ordering, that a shadowy zone remained, loading down
his own future with " I shal l have to go back to that " ? The fact that his
later books preserved the conceptual construction of Process and Reality
does not, moreover, prove that he was not feeling other silent, insistent
dissatisfactions, felt scars of negative prehensions. Fatigue can mark the
end of an adventure: it is up to others, if possible, to prolong it. Neverthe
less, the " hybrid feel ing of God," a triumph of the ontological principle, is
calling for new conceptual articulations. In Christian theology, God's prov
idential function never did get along very wel l with his eternity, and White
head criticized lame theologico-metaphysical compromises too strongly
not to finally tackle the problem. Once he has fi nished with what Lewis
Ford has called his " final revisions," God will be endowed with a conse
quent nature, that is, a " physica l " pole derived from the temporal world:
we will come to that at the end of our itinerary. As far a s the process of
concrescence is concerned, it will undergo, and it is to this that we turn
now, a transformation that will definitively drive away the specter of a
unification that could be cal led the realization of an ideal possibility.
                                                  C H A P T E R TW E NT Y - ON E




Actuality between Phys ics and the D i v i ne




     'F  WE SUBSTITUTE THE TERM        "energy " for the concept of a quan
     ! titative emotional intensity, and the term "form of energy " for the
     I concept of "specific form of feeling," and remember that in physics
"vector" means definite transmission from elsewhere, we see that this
metaphysical description of the simplest elements in the constitution of
actual entities agrees absolutely with the general principles according to
which the notions of modern physics are framed ( PR, 1 1 6 ) .
  When i t comes to Process and Reality, we must be careful a t every
step. The absolute agreement with the general principles associated with
modern physics that is clai med here refers us directly to an ancient hope,
ceaselessly rei nvented. In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead proposed
the relation between the electron a nd its field as a simplified but i mpor
tant example of the ingression of an object into an event. The insepara
bility of the electron, characterized by scalar quantities such as energy,
mass, and charge, and its field ( vectorial and delocalized ) constituted a
typical example of the way physics itsel f denounces the misplaced con
creteness of simple localization. Whitehead, at the time he was wri ting
his Gi fford lectures, the text of which, somewhat modified, would finally
become Process and Reality, apparently thought he could mainta i n the
terms of an agreement he had long envisaged.
   It is on the basis of this obstinate continuity that one can understand
the importance of the conceptual transformation I set forth in the con
text of the case of the missing shade of blue. Thi s transformation could
certai nly not be i nspired by the physicists' electron, for no situation
studied by physics seems to req uire the ingression of unrealized eternal
                   ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   PHYSI CS   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 6 5




objects. The fl ight of speculative experience, reassembling the notion of
actuality from top to bottom, had as its starting point the extremely so
phisticated actual entities with regard to which the question of con
sciousness arises-for insta nce, philosophers asking the question of the
hiatus in the color chart of blues. Yet Whitehead intends to produce an
interpretation applicable both to thin kers and to electrons, to novelty
and to conformity. The electron must therefore be d ragged i nto the up
hea val provoked by the thin ker. The question can then be asked of
whether the upheaval in question has finally destroyed what Whitehead
attributed so much value to : the agreement of his metaphysics with the
genera l principles of physics. The text is si lent on this subject: Whitehead
allowed the passages expressing the importance of this agreement to re
ma in, but, here as elsewhere, he seems to have left it up to his readers to
" fil l in the blan ks," at their own risks and peri ls.
    Rather curiously, a path can indeed be constructed that maintains,
throughout all its conceptua l tra nsformations, Whitehead 's ambi tion of
a metaphysics that generalizes physics while bringing to l ight the partial
and selective character of its successes. This path, which I sha l l take, will
proceed by way of what is called " second generation " quantum formal
ism, which many commentators have a ffirmed raises " explicitly meta
physica l " problems, concerning the very existence of a " real i ty in itself."
In fact, Whitehead's si lence with rega rd to the speculations i nspired by
quantum forma lism, which however began at the very time when he was
writing Process and Reality, is rather remarkable. He never commented
on the theses according to which it is henceforth i mpossi ble to speak of
"objective" physical rea lity, definable independently of the measuring op
eration, even independently of the mind of the person for whom measure
ment has significance. We can understand this if we reca ll that he did not
like to criticize, for the great alternatives deployed by these speculations
are so ma ny variations on the theme of the bifurca tion of nature. Either
this bifurcation is solved by an absolute triumph of the " secondary quali
ties" over the " primary qualities "-this is what is celebrated by those who
have opted for the radical negation a l l " physica l reality," the only " object"
of quantum mechanics then designating the results of the measurements
that we c hoose to ca rry out. O r else it is resolved by the a potheosis of
dualism: quantum rea lity would then be theoretica l ly wel l defined, via
Schrod inger's equation, for instance, but defined qua unknowa ble, with
knowledge, for its part, referring to us, to our " becoming aware," assimi
lated to so many fragmentations of what cannot be fragmented, produc
ing answers tha t are purely relative to the mode of questioning that condi
tions them. Or else again , as Whitehead predicted would be the case every
3 6 6   C O S M O L O G Y




time mind and nature intervened together, speculation makes the whole
powder magazine explode, si nce measurement would then signify the
conscious mind's power of direct intervention upon matter.
    Here it is i mportant to recal l that the disti nction Whitehead ma kes as
early a s Science and the Modern World, between the mental and the
physical, does not offer any analogy with what the i nterpreters of quan
tum mechanics distinguish as " mind " and "matter." Whiteheadian " phys
ical feeling" i ncludes the feel i ngs of everythi ng that has obtained i mmor
tal objectivi ty, be it an "electronic" occasion or an occasional thought. In
other words, we must accept that among what constitutes a heritage for
the electronic occasion, there are a lso the physicist's feel i ngs. The differ
ence between the practice of the physicist and that of the psychologist
consists i n the fact that an electronic occasion cannot create a relevant
i ntegration between what the enduring society to which it belongs offers
to its feeling, a nd what is felt a bout it by the physicist. Unlike the relation
of double capture constituted, for i nsta nce, by an operation of taming or
seduction, the relation of k nowledge between physicist a nd electron des
ignates its terms as dominated by mutually i ncompatible modes of feel
i ng. The stubborn end urance of the material societies that maintain the
thread of their conformity has nothing to do with the physicists' doubts.
But the physicists' questions, taking advantage of this conformity, j ust as
much ignore what could testify to " mental pole" of the occasions whose
" routes " they study, relegati ng, if need be, what escapes this conformity
to the unknowable: it is impossi ble to expla i n why a n unstable radioac
tive nucleus breaks apart at one moment rather than at another.
   The privilege of physics, when it comes to understanding the " physical
pole," that is, the first phase of a process of concrescence, thus does not
designate physics as a " science of matter" as opposed to mind . Instead, it
can be claimed that it designates physics as highly selective, since the ar
ticulation it risks between experi mental research and mathematica l cre
ation makes full use of the conformity of i nheritance of the processes it
selects. The i nventive, relevant, and rigorous definition of physico
mathematica l notions is what interested Whitehead in The Concept of
Nature, and it is the adventure of this definition that I will use as a guide
to unfold the radical nature of the transformation that will a ffect the
" physical pole" of the actual enti ty. This transformation will enable cre
ativity to be defined as the ultimate, actua lity as causa sui, a nd the onto
logical principle as restrictive. First, however, we must begin (aga i n ) with
the beginning, that is, what Whitehead was thinking i n 1 927.
  The first phase is the phase of pure reception of the actual world in its
guise of objective datum for aesthetic synthesis. In this phase there is the
                  ACTU A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   THE   D I V I N E   3 6 7




mere reception of the actual world as a multiplicity of private centres of
feeling, implicated in a nexus of mutual presupposition. The feelings are
felt as belonging to the external centres, and are not absorbed into the
private immediacy. The second stage is governed by the private ideal,
gradually shaped in the process itself; whereby the many feelings, deriva
tively felt as alien, are transformed into a unity of aesthetic appreciation
immediately felt as private [ . . . 1 in the language of physical science, the
"scalar " form overwhelms the original "vector" form: the origins become
subordinate to the individual experience. The vector form is not lost, but
is submerged as the foundation of the scalar superstructure ( PR, 2 1 2 ) .
   In physics, forces a n d fields, which are vectorial, designate the inter
dependent character of a rea l ity, in which everything that occurs refers
to something else. As for energy, it is a scalar quantity, and is required by
measurement: every act of measure i mplies an exchange of energy. In the
correspondences Whitehead is suggesting here, physics, confronted by
diverse experi mental situations and the power and constraints of mathe
matics, has therefore created a distinction that can be genera l ized . In this
general ization, what physics cha racterizes as an individua l , defined as
loca l izable by the role it plays in energetic exchanges, will designate " in
dividuals qua feel ing their world," or concrescence qua ta king a determi
nate position with regard to what it has received or, more precisely, com
i ng into existence qua this taking of position, and therefore insepa rable
from what has become " thei r " world.
   The characterization of concrescence that results from this general iza
tion could have been produced by the a uthor of Science and the Modern
World, or more precisely by the author who, having finished writing Sci
ence and Modern World, would have undertaken to render explicit the
aspects left in the dark, and in particular the link between realization as
"a gathering of things in the unity of a prehension "-a cavalier general
ization of Berkeley's thesis-and the theme of the atomic nature of the
world of becoming. Such a link had only been risked from the viewpoint
of the envisagement of eternal objects, that is, from the viewpoint of pos
sibilities of value, whereas the question of "event-related processes," and
hence of va lue, had remained unexplored . All that remained would be to
conceive of that val ue, the way the " scalar" form " overwhel ms" the i nitial
" vectorial " form.
   It is impossible to deal with the " physica l pole " (vectorial ) without
dealing at the same time with the divine. For here, of course, we encounter
the objection I had raised with rega rd to the " triple envisagement" pro
posed in Science and the Modern World, that is, the possibility of reduc
ing Whiteheadian concrescence to what Gilles Deleuze calls " realization ,"
3 6 8   COSMOLOGY




as opposed to " actua lization." To what extent is private a ppropriation not
reducible to a selection in the midst of what is a lready potentially well
defined ? To what extent is the contrast between " possibility of value,"
corresponding to an idea l situation, and " va l ue," an actual taking of a po
sition, not reducible to the passage to existence of a possible that lacked
only existence ? The term " energy " is, from this viewpoint, highly compro
mising. It is precisely the great success of rationa l dynamics to have a rticu
lated "energy " and "di fference in potentia l " in a complete a nd coherent
way. Every measurement is, of course, i ntimately linked, directly or i ndi
rectly, to a n exchange i n energy, but i n dynamics " actual energy," as it can
be measured through scalar effects, bears witness in a way that is com
plete and without remai nder to the vectorial potential of which it is the
real ization. This is what makes dynamics the ideal to which physicists re
fer when they call themselves " realists."
   To i l l uminate the situation a s it presented itself to Whitehead in 1 927,
let us address a nother fragment from the same period of composition.
Here, Whitehead comments on the selective character inherent i n the pro
cess by which multiple feelings are transformed into a unique aesthetic
appreciation.
   Again the selection involved in the phrase "selective concrescence " is
not a selection among the components of the objective content; for, by
hypothesis, the objective content is a datum. The compatibilities and in
compatibilities which impose the perspective, transforming the actual
world into a datum, are inherent in the nature of things. Thus the selection
is a selection of relevant eternal objects whereby what is a datum from
without is transformed into its complete determination as a fact within.
The problem which the concrescence solves is, how the main components
of the objective content are to be unified in one felt content with its com
plex subjective form. This one felt content is the "satisfaction," whereby
the actual entity is its particular individual self; to use Descartes ' phrase,
"requiring nothing but itself in order to exist." In the conception of the
actual entity in its phase of satisfaction, the entity has attained its indi
vidual separation from other things; it has absorbed the datum, and it
has not yet lost itself in the swing back to the "decision " whereby its ap
petition becomes an element in the data of other entities superseding it.
Time has stood still-if only it could ( PR, 1 54 ) .
   In fact, what emerges i n this text is that there a re two " moments " of
selection. The first, which transcends the actual entity, is here relegated to
the " na ture of things " : it is the compatibil ities a nd the i ncompatibilities
inherent in this na ture of things that determine what the " perspective "
of the concrescence wi l l be. In other word s, this perspecti ve will concern
                   ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 6 9




what is a l ready defined as unifia ble, a ppropria ble, which corresponds
to the notion of a n idea l situation envisaged i n Science and the Modern
World. A certa i n "ordering " has ta ken place, i ncompati bilities have al
ready been eliminated . A " datum" is proposed, and, to characterize this
da tum, we rea d elsewhere ( PR, 1 50 ) of " settlement," which designates
both an "esta blishment," an " agreement" between parties, a nd a " deci
sion " solving a problem, founding a new depa rture. The matter is closed .
In short, what the entity " finds " is not a multiplicity but a ma tter that is
already settled, a heri tage offeri ng the " rea l potentiality" that the data
that make it up be felt i n a unified way, as a datum.
   The final stage, the "decision," is how the actual entity, having attained
its individual "satisfaction," thereby adds a determinate condition to the
settlement for the future beyond itself. Thus the "datum " is the "decision
received," and the "decision " is the "decision transmitted." Between these
two decisions, received and transmitted, there lie the two stages, "pro
cess " and "satisfaction." The datum is indeterminate as regards the final
satisfaction [ . . . I The actual entity, in becoming itself, also sallies the
question as to wha t it is to be ( PR, 1 50 ) .
   We ha ve once again t o dea l with the problem left in suspense b y the
underlying eternal activity of Science and the Modern World. The "divine
ordering," i nherent in the " na ture of things," corresponds to the envis
agement of the " idea l situation," with rega rd to which entities wi ll have
to choose " by addition of the future " what they a re to be . The " triple
envisagement " has thus simply become the way in which God, envisaging
the tota lity of eternal objects, settles the dea l that will be a l lotted to the
entity. It is on the ba sis of this dea l that an entity must decide what it will
be, i n somewhat the sa me way that gamblers decide what their play wi ll
be on the basis of the ca rds they have been dea lt, a l l of which are com
patible with the rules of the ga me. Here, therefore, datum is not the sin
gular of data, the datum of a particular feeling, to be unified with the
others. The datum is the hand dea lt, a l ready cha racterized by a form of
togetherness which the actua l entity will have to a ppropriate.
   The contrast between vector and sca lar, as i nvented by physics, would
then be wha t is genera lized by the difference between the possibility of
va lue a nd va l ue. Before moving from this observation to the possi bi lity
of going further, whose necessity it confirms, it is appropriate to think, with
Whitehead, a bout why this genera lization seemed so promising to him.
   It is first i mportant to emphasize that we have to do here with an
" imaginative rationaliza tion," for Whitehead did not ta ke up this contrast
as such from physics. I nstead, by mea ns of the example of the electron
and its field, Whitehead has given centra l importa nce to what ra tiona l
370    COS M O LOGY




dynamics al lowed to be omitted when it identified energy and potential
(energy) difference, the tra nsition from potentia lity to actuality. Yet it is
precisely thanks to this identification that the dynamic designation seems
to designate an " obj ective" world defined as intrinsica lly measura ble, ex
plaining by itself the sca lar quantities in terms of which physicists carry
out their measurements. Correlatively, by accentuating the i rreducible
contra st between sca lar description and vectorial description, Whitehead
adopts a position with regard to what became a critical problem for
physicists, with the quantum model of the atom proposed by Niels Bohr.
Bohr's atom articulates two types of components, whose heterogeneity is
now exhi bited : a dynamic type of descri ption (and therefore vectoria l )
o f the " stationary states," and a sca lar characterization o f the energetic
exchanges to which this atom is liable when it " changes sta tes " in a way
that dynamics cannot descri be ( the famous " q uantum jump " ) . White
head's genera lization thus does not obey physics, but has as its starting
point a physics in crisis: in one way or another, physicists know that,
when interrogating an atom, they can no longer recount its adventures as
if they were the simple description of a well-defined being, endowed with
strictly functiona l behavior.
    In my commentary on the triple envisagement, I emphasized that its
defect was that it did not i nspire any appetite for the question of actual
ity. I was right, but this reason needs to be reformulated: Whitehead
thought he knew how to solve this question, and the a ppetite that his
text did not inspire may perhaps reflect his tranquility in this rega rd . He
had, in fact, made the opposite choice to the one that was to be made by
the physicists who, inheriti ng this first quantum physics, would come
later to spea k of a rea l ity " i ndeterminate independently of measurement"
(a measurement thanks to which the overl y embarrassing quantum leaps
were to be " overwhel med " by the fascinating question of measurement) .
For Whitehead, i ndetermi nacy b y n o mea ns cha racterizes " rea lity," a s
opposed t o the determination brought a bout b y measurement. What we
address has always alrea dy determined itsel f, " thus and not otherwise,"
as a stubborn fact. If one can speak of indeterminacy, it is in reference to
the i mpossibi l i ty in princi ple, for every determinate fact, of determining
how it will be taken i nto account; that is, in the voca bulary of Process
and Reality, to the need for a decision with rega rd to the initial datum.
   As fa r as physics is concerned, the viewpoint proposed by Whitehead
is deeply relevant. If we follow him, we will say tha t quantum physics
" does what it can," continues to decipher the regularities it can, while the
new experi menta l appara tuses that have ena bled it to " reac h " atoms
have enta i led the loss of the deceptive limpidity of dynamics. Indeed,
                   ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I CS   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 7 1




these apparatuses, because they place measurement under the banner of
detection, detach " scalar quantities " from their dynamic explanation. We
do not demand that a measurement by detection be explai ned i n the
same terms as what it characterizes. We ask it to designate its respondent
in a reliable way: it is an electron that is detected . But detection itsel f, a
selective and finalized operation, is by no means sufficient to define the
behavior of what is detected; it can only define it as responsi ble for its
own detection . It ca ptures sca lar quantities, but these w i l l have to be
articulated with " vectorial reasons," a nd no longer deduced from these
reasons. In other words, whereas classical dynamics might seem able to
describe what the behavior of a dynamic system is " i n itself," qua obey
i ng wel l-determined i nteractions, the physics of detectors imposes upon
physicists a difficult referral from the "consequences," a ttested by the
appa ratus, to the description of the detected entity " i n itself," formaliter
in the sense of Whitehead, for whom this referral wi l l therefore never
succeed in reestablishing deduci bility.
   When, i n April 1 925, Whi tehead decided to atomize time, he was able
to propose a n i rreducible di stinction between the atomic, private charac
ter of the process of formal determi nation of an entity a nd the con
structed , social, as we will say henceforth, character of a l l continuity.
This amounts to rendering explicit why, i n agreement with Bohr's atomic
model, the difficult referral envisaged by the physicists is in fact i mpossi
ble. A qua ntum leap, characterized by a difference that is energetic, that
is, scalar, does not " ta ke any time" i n the physical, conti nuous sense of
the term . As an "atomic i ndividual event," it is i ndivisible, unana lyzable
in terms of a succession of i nstants.
   The actual entity is the enjoyment of a certain quantum of physical
time. But the genetic process is not the temporal succession: such a view
is exactly what is denied by the epochal theory of time. Each phase in the
genetic process presupposes the entire quantum, and so does each feeling
in each phrase [ . . . I The problem dominating the concrescence is the
actualization of the quantum in solido ( PR, 2 8 3 ) .
   With this description o f a " quantum " that is i ndivisible a n d yet exten
sive, in the sense that, as we sha ll see, it atomizes an extension that it
presupposes and confirms, Whitehead has raised to a metaphysica l power
the characterization William James proposed of the specious present (a
cha racterization that had i nterested Niels Bohr to the highest degree ) .
The specious present i s a l ways evaluated from t h e v iewpoint of its
completion-it will have been of such-and-such a thickness-since every
characterization " d uring" this interva l would constitute an i nterference
tha t would force the present to topple i nto the past. To express it in a
3 7 2   COSMO LOGY




wa y tha t evokes relativity: concrescence i n the forma l sense, a s long as it
is not completed, as long as it has not produced its own position, corre
sponds to an " elsewhere." It does not belong to the past of any other en
tity, a nd no other qua ntity ca n take it i nto account.
  Physical time makes its appearance in the " coordinate " analysis of the
"satisfaction " ( PR, 283 ) .
    Physical time does not ma tter only to our objective descriptions o f the
world . The la tter a re a lways social, a lways presupposing a twofold en
durance. As Bergson sa id, we must wa it for the suga r to melt, and this
wa iting i mplies the continuity of an a rticulating relation, presupposing
the endura nce of Bergson, who wa its, and that of what he ca lls " suga r,"
which is ca pa ble of existing in a crysta lline form or of testifying to its
liquid existence by the sugary ta ste ta ken on by tea . Yet these descrip
tions require an i mporta nt cosmologica l fea ture: the fact of a solida rity
between the world and ourselves i n the unison of "at the sa me time." Si
multa neity testified to this solidarity in The Concept of Nature, and it is
wha t perception exhibits i n a n a bstract mode by proposing to us an
externa l world "out there " perceived by me " here." We must also ask this
sol ida rity for an i nterpretation of the releva nce of physica l laws and the
interactions these laws involve. Wha t Whitehea d ca lls the coordinate
analysis of satisfaction must thus ensure the a dequacy of his philosophy
with the unison expressed by the " a t the sa me time," and enable the j us
tifica tion of the ( relative ) relevance of physica l laws, not, once a gain, be
cause physics is the " funda menta l science of ma tter " but beca use it has
pushed to the fa rthest point the risks associated with the explanation of
the solida rity to be i nterpreted .
   Science is either an important statement of systematic theory correlat
ing observations of a common world, or is the daydream of a solitary
intelligence with a taste for the daydream of publication. But it is not
philosophy to vacillate from one point of view to another ( PR, 329).
   Coordina te a na lysis a ssocia tes " time" and, more generica lly, "exten
sion " not with objectification in genera l but with the way an undivided
sa tisfaction will be divided by what will become its consequences, with a
pa rticular aspect of that objectification. I n terms of " coordinate divi
sion," the " position occupied " by a n entity is considered (is the object of
a feeling) a pa rt from how it is occupied. This is reflected by the adjective
"coordinate," which evokes a homogeneous characterization, the situa 
tion of each element being entirely defined by its relation to the others.
Wha t an entity has u ndivided enjoyment of is thus felt in an a bstract,
i mpa rtial mode as the " situation " of that entity, defined by its relations to
other equa l ly situated entities.
                   AC T U A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 7 3




  When we divide the satisfaction coordinately, we do not find feelings
which are separate, but feelings which might be separate ( PR, 284).
    The adoption of a position, when it is felt in the abstract mode that
only corresponds to the way in which the felt entity has situated itself, is
placed under the twofold banner of separabil ity and potentiality. Each
entity felt in this mode is felt qua situated in the place where it is, and in
such a way that it might have been elsewhere. Qua felt in the mode of co
ordinate analysis, entities can "propose " to or " i mpose " upon the entity
that is feeling them a way of situating itself that ratifies its belonging to
what Whitehead ca lls the "extensive continuum."
    For Whitehead, to be situated i n the midst of the extensive contin
uum by a unified feel i ng of the coordinate relations that have a l ready
been accepted and confirmed by the entities belongi ng to the nexus that
i s to be made " its world " designates the most generic social belonging.
The extensive conti nuum itself is noth ing other than the i mpartial a r
ticulation of a l l situa tions, that is, of a l l possible viewpoints on each
other, an expression of the solidarity of a l l these viewpoints, of their
belonging to a si ngle "community." As an expression of an accepted
solidarity, that is, a solida rity taken up as an i ngredient of their identity
by all actu a l entities ( i ncluding, in a nother way, by God ) , the extensive
continuum is " rea l ." In itself, however, it has no power to impose itself,
and exists only a s it is confirmed . It is " rea l " only to the extent that it is
prolonged, from decision to decision . Coord inate analysis objectifies the
standpoint that the entity is supposed to occupy within the nexus, but it
is up to this entity to rati fy its situation in the continuum, that is, its
belonging to the nexus. This is why Whitehead makes the continuum a
" real potentiality," that is, makes it re lative to a n actua l entity, or for a n
actual entity. By " a tomizi ng " the conti nuum, every adoption o f a posi
tion will carry out what the conti nuum cannot account for : the di ffer
ence between the past, which it has i n herited, and the future, which wi l l
i nherit from i t .
   Actual entities atomize the extensive continuum. This continuum is in
itself merely the potentiality for division; an actual entity effects this divi
sion [ . . . 1 with the becoming of any actual entity what was previously
potential in the space-time continuum is now the primary real phase in
something actual. For each process of concrescence a regional standpoint
in the world, defining a limited possibility for objectifications, has been
adopted. In the mere extensive continuum there is no principle to deter-
mine what regional quanta shall be atomized [ . . . 1 the factors in the actual
world whereby this determination is effected [ . . . 1 constitute the initial
phase of the "subjective aim." This initial phase is a direct derivative from
374    COSMOLOGY




God's primordial nature. In this function, as in every other, God is the
origin of novelty, aiming at intensification ( PR, 67).
   In other words, i f God, as is the case so far, i s he who proposes to each
entity its initial " datum," it is also God who proposes to it the standpoint
that will characterize it, the way it will atomize the extensive conti nuum.
Here, God is a n " orga n " in that, l i ke any organ, he is associated with a
socia l endurance a nd wi th its pa rticular mode of ca na lization, but he is
the organ of " novelty," aiming at i ntensification, for belonging to the ex
tensive conti nuum as proposed by the canal ization constitutes the condi
tion for a n actua l occa sion to provide this intensification . God is thus
what ma kes possi ble an adventure marked by solidarity, a cosmologica l
adventure, rather tha n the fra nk chaos of free-for-all positions.
   In fact, Whitehead wondered whether he should attribute to the soli
darity derivi ng from belongi ng to the extensive continuum the character
of a meta physica l genera l i ty or that of a " socia l fact," as for all belonging.
But we have here a limit on speculation: although it may not be meta
physically excluded for a process of concrescence to " escape " extensive
socia l canalization, refusing the proposed socialization, it is, by contrast,
impossible to i magine th is case, si nce such a case would exclude all the
stabilities presupposed and required by the intensification associa ted with
i maginative experience .
  Some general character of coordinate divisibility is probably an ulti
mate metaphysical character, persistent in every cosmic epoch of physical
occasions [ . . . 1 but [ . . . 1 it is difficult to draw the line distinguishing
characteristics so general that we cannot conceive any alternatives, from
characteristics so special that we imagine them to belong merely to
our cosmic epoch. Such an epoch may be, relatively to our powers, of
immeasurable extent, temporally and spatially. But in reference to the
ultimate nature of things, it is a limited nexus. Beyond that nexus, entities
with new relationships, unrealized in our experiences and unforeseen by
our imaginations will make their appearance, introducing into the uni
verse new types of order ( PR, 2 8 8 ) .
   Whether the extensive continuum i s metaphysica l o r cosmic, it ca nnot,
in any case, be confused with the spa tio-tempora l relations rendered ex
plicit by physica l laws. The releva nce of these laws presupposes a world
in which the intervals of space and time matter, while the coord ina te
character of situations within the extensive conti nuum does not, as such,
provide either measura bility or dimensiona lity. In other words, in the
positive sciences we never have to do with relations that ca n be reduced
to the conseq uences of " situations " in the midst of the extensive contin
uum. The latter is impartial articulation, whereas every position, including
spatio-tempora l position, is partial and refers to more specialized societies.
The various societies that designate solidari ty as spatio-temporal have
endura nce i n common. And as soon as i nteractions appea r on the scene
that articulate space and time in a specific way, we have to do with posi
tions marked by pa rtiality. If physica l laws must i nvolve dista nce, i t is
beca use all dista nces have henceforth ceased to be equivalent. This is
what physica l interaction affirms: distance matters.
     Before going further, however, a pause is necessary, for contemporary
physics invites us to go one step farther with regard to the relation of
contrast proposed by Whitehead between the extensive conti nuum and
physica l laws. This is the opportunity for a twofold test: of the social
conception Whitehead proposes of " physica l rea l ity," and of the contem
porary physica l scenarios that have the ambition of i ntroducing the gen
esis of differentiated interactions on the basis of what would, like the
extensive continuum, be the very embod iment of i mpa rtiality.
     Physicists today invoke the hypothesis of a primordial field character
ized by a perfect symmetry, that is, by perfect impartiality. The symmetry
of scale that characterizes this field i mplies the genera lized equivalence of
a l l the "situations" it allows to be defined . This is certa inly a physica l
field, i nhabited by particles and i nteractions, but a l l the interactions in it
have the infinite range that contempora ry physics associates with parti
cles of zero mass ( l i ke the photon ) : in their cases dista nce, that is, loca l
ization as well, does not matter. And the a nalogy with the extensive con
tinuum becomes even more captivating with the reason the physicists
give for the appea ra nce of d i fferentiated i nteractions, that is, also the
reason why " material societies" exist. It would be the result of an event
of " symmetry brea ki ng."
     Whitehead was right to trust the i nventiveness proper to physics. In their
own way, physicists, too, henceforth affirm that physically differentiated
particles are inseparable from a "socia l," that is also, "epochal," fact. For
"symmetry breaking" corresponds to a twofold correlative definition: that
of differentiated " actors," which endure, perpetuate themselves, and pre
serve their identity through what happens to them, and that of the partial
character of their respective behavior, of what makes a difference for them,
and of what difference they make for others. Physics thus describes the
appearance of " partia l " actors, inseparable from the role they play in the
"society " without which they would not exist. Defined in this way, these
actors and thei r behavior can be assimi lated to "collective effects," insepa
rable from the global event that constituted the symmetry breaking affect
ing the primordial field . We are very far from the localized entities that
Whitehead denounced as the " fallacy of misplaced concreteness " !
     Did physicists " discover" the extensive conti nuum? I f this were the
case, Whitehead 's cosmology would be finished, because, for them, there
376    COSMOLOGY




is no need of God . Symmetry brea king is expla i ned on the basis of the
sa me kind of laws that a l low the continuum to be cha racterized . Impa r
tia lity seems to be able to engender pa rtiality " by itself," tha t is, by
" sponta neous" brea king. Physics would i ndeed ha ve become " the" fun
da menta l science, which is indeed what ma ny who participate in this
adventure believe. This is attested by the speculative presentation tha t
turns the work of contemporary physics i nto the accomplishment of the
Pythagorea n drea m, the ascent towa rd mathematica l-aesthetic pri nci ples,
the symmetries of which everything we have to dea l with would be mere
deformed reflections.
    Th is specula tive presentation, which tra nsforms the adventure of phys
ics into an epic, a l so a l lows us to gra sp where the d ifference l ies between
extensive continuum and primordial fiel d . It is no coincidence that we
hea r of deformed reflections. In fact, what physicists expla in is by no
mea ns a " symmetry brea king" but rather a " symmetry hiding." They do
not explain how impa rtiality can genera te pa rtiality, how a new " socia l
fact " h a s come i nto existence. They expla i n how impartiality c a n b e both
preserved a nd hidden by a reorga niza tion of the primord ial field .
    For physicists, the conservation of symmetry is j ust as precious as the
hidden cha racter of this conservation. Certa inly, without the la tter there
would be neither physics nor physicists, only the impartial ity of perfect
symmetry, which excl udes a ny loca l a dventure . Yet this dra matizing
tremolo is a subproduct of the physicists' adventure, where perfect sym
metry wa s not a ssociated with questions like " why is there something
ra ther tha n a symmetrica l nothing ? " The issue was rather the ma i nta in
ing of a successful trick, " renorma lization," in situations where it should
fa i l . Both the primordial field and the " hiding of symmetry " of which it is
the theater ha ve the primary interest of elimi nating the poisoning impos
sibil ity of " renorma lizing," that is, in fact, the impossibil ity of defining,
certa i n interactions of finite ra nge (or, equiva lently, of defining the mas
sive med iating pa rticles that the physics of fields a ssociates with these
i nteractions ) . Symmetry, as both conserved a nd hidden, eliminates the
obstacle ba rring the way to the technique of definition by renorma liza 
tion, as it w i l l a pply t o the hidden zero mass/interaction of i nfinite ra nge
hidden " real ity."
    The physicists' proposition is thus indeed a n exploit: they ha ve, one
might say, succeeded in ha ving their cake and eating it, too: in ma i ntain
ing the genera l validity of their technique of definition, a nd in " expla in
ing " the a ppa rition of the experimenta lly defined interactions, which pres
ent obstacles to this technique. Yet this proposition a nswers a problem
prod uced by their own formalism. Wha t is saved is an a udacious setup,
inseparable from the adventure of quantum field theory.
                   AC T U A L ITY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I CS   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 7 7




    It is not a matter of " debasing " physics. Whitehead's God also re
sponds to problems raised by the audacious setup that constitutes the
scheme. The point is to affirm the positive d ivergence of the adventures
and thei r respecti ve importance so as not to fal l into the very trap to be
avoided . Nature bifurca tes enthusiastica lly, and the powder keg blows up
i f symmetry breaking hides the truth of its conservation. This, moreover,
is what is a ffi rmed by some speculative physicists: no longer the common
world a lone, but also so-ca lled physica l rea l i ty would be mere manifesta
tions of hidden primordial symmetries . . .
    The affirmation of divergence is not a defensive one. It is rather a de
manding one. Facing the enticing similarity between a physica l and a
metaphysical construct, the point is not to suspect that physicists have
trespassed and to conclude that they must be led back to thei r own terri
tory, but to connect the constructs to the respecti ve problems to which
they were an answer. This demands pa ying due attention to " technical
detai ls," with the trust that i f there is a n enticing similarity it is a bit like
the case of the ra bbit jumping out of the magician's hat: somethi ng is
concea led. Not that physicists would wi l l fully trick us. Ra ther, they them
selves are captiva ted by the beauty of the answer, and may easi ly forget
about the req uisites of their question . In this case, indeed, the question of
the " i nstability" of the primordial field, leading to the symmetry brea king
event, requires ( technical deta i l ) a definition of the field energy tha t al
lows such a question, a defini tion that is slightly di fferent from the one
that enters i nto the definition of a field. No big dea l, but the possi bility of
symmetry brea ki ngs is now i ncluded in the descri ption of the " pri mor
dial fiel d ." No surprise, then, that the physicists have no need for God i n
order to have partiality "emergi ng " from i mpartiality. Their field i s not a s
i mpartial as the extensive continuum. I t descri bes an impartial situation,
including the possibility of a partiality.
   The d ivergence between Whitehea d 's metaphysica l description and so
ca lled " physica l rea lity" concerns aesthetic appra isals and the questions
they entail. Whitehead emphasizes " novelty," the appearance of new modes
of partia l ity, as a cond ition for avoiding the bifurcation of nature. Theo
retica l physics privi leges impartiality, and creates highly i nventive ways
to i nterpret " apparent" partial ity as in fact deriving from something
" more funda menta l," that is, more i mpartia l .
   A n angry man, except when emotion has swamped other feelings, does
not usually shake his fist at the universe in general. He makes a selection
and knocks his neighbour down. Whereas a piece of rock impartially at
tracts the universe according to the law of gravitation.
   The impartiality of physical science is the reason for its failure as the
sale interpreter of animal behaviour. It is true that the rock falls on one
378    COSMO LOGY




special patch of earth. This happens, because the universe in that neigh
bourhood is exemplifying one particular solution of a differential equa
tion. The fist of the man is directed by emotion seeking a novel feature in
the universe, namely, the collapse of his opponent ( MT, 2 8-29).
   Physics is not alone i n privileging impartial explanation, making it the
only " rationa l " path, as confirmed by the progress of knowledge. When
biochemists discovered seemi ngly pa rtia l opera tions of detection a mong
living cells and between such cells, such as activation, reception, inhibi
tion, and so on, didn't they successfully " explain" this pa rtiality in
physico-chemica l terms ? It was the result of biochemical molecular inter
action, nothing more ! This, of course, leads stra ight to a bifu rcating
nature, at the risk of red uci ng biochemists themselves to a complicated
concert of physico-chemical i nteractions.
   Avoiding the bifurcation of nature thus means thinking of impartiality
as a pa rticular l imit case, and the (partial ) question of values as the generic
question. Such was Whitehead's position when he began to write Process
and Reality. And it is in these terms that one may think of the question of
the divine "orderi ng." Each entity is not proposed only one situation in the
midst of the extensive continuum. Its initial datum incl udes " possi bil ities
of va lue," that is, possi bilities whose realization will ensure both sol idarity
and partiality. When biologists identify biochemical operations with
physico-chemical interactions like all the others, they are not wrong, for
the molecules in abstracto are not different. What is di fferent is thei r
" role," as related to their belonging to a living society, and the questions
biochemists wi l l have to invent in order to identify them .
   It is also here that we find, in a new way, the question of conceptual
transformation that was to mark the composition of Process and Reality.
The danger of the divine ordering may be related to the divergence between
physics and metaphysics I have just proposed . Yet physicists construct their
descriptions in such a way that what is defined as responsible for something
will indeed enable an explanation of this something (which is not the case
at all in other sciences! ) . But isn't Whitehead's God " spoon-feeding " con
crescence? God, therefore, or more precisely the " nature of things " qua de
cided upon by his inexora ble evaluation, would find itself to be what is
primarily responsible. This divergence conceals a threatening convergence,
as the link between explanation and responsibility is common. This may
not be shocking when it comes to electrons or biomolecules, but the point is
also to think of the partial and vehement lament of Job.
   The agreement Whitehead sought wi th physics risks turni ng against
him, for his conception, physical in its inspiration, admits for the mo
ment, between the datum a nd the actua lity, only the kind of hiatus, ulti-
                   ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   37 9




mately rather poor, that he himself had noted between the vectorial field
and the electron, characterized by sca lar quantities: the pri vate appro
priation of the datum . A poor figure of actuality, threatening to restore
the figure of a God who is the " soul " of the world, the creator of a l l pos
sibility of " taking" a partia l or in novati ve position-the position would
not be ta ken in that case, but rather " adopted ."
   I must now live up to my commitment, and explore what can be contrib
uted to this difficulty by the conceptual transformation that turned physics
upside down with the quantum formalism "of the second generation ."
   Th is formalism has, in fact, exacerbated the hiatus between vectorial
and scalar, by opposing the conti nuity of a " functional reality " to the dis
crete character of measurements, and i ntroducing the need for a "choice "
of measurement. It has, in other words, given measurement a " decisive
role," indicating a completely new a rticulation between the scalar quali
ties issuing from this measurement, and the " vectoria l real i ty " with re
gard to which measurement is carried out. And to say " decisive role" is
obviously to open up the possi bility of conceiving an actuality whose
va l ue might not be the ratification of a previously settled choice. To risk
this possi bility, however, one must, of course, be situated as close as pos
sible to physico-mathematica l tech nical innovation, that is, as far as pos
sible from controversies over the interpretation of formalism.
   In fact, the very possi bility of attri buting a " decisive role " to measure
ment is associated with the introduction of the new physico-mathematical
notion of an "operator." Paying d ue atten tion to this notion guarantees
us against any untimely intrusion of speculation, for the relevance of op
erators has today been generalized to a l l physico-mathematical laws. I
will therefore concentrate on th is genera lization first, before introducing
the singularity of quantum mechanics.
   Whereas the formulation of the usua l physical laws defined their object
as inseparably uniting the two features necessary to sati sfy physicists
observable ( sca l a r ) definition and functional ( vectoria l ) definition-the
intervention of the notion of operator in the formulation of these laws
presupposes that these two features be treated separately. Scalar q uanti
ties, defi ning possible observations, a re henceforth relative to the action
of an operator on a function, which means that the " functional bei ng" to
which measurement as an operant q uestion is addressed is not defined
"in itself" in the terms of the answer. The general character of the hiatus
that Whi tehead emphasized is thus i nscri bed within the formal ism itself.
The " physical rea lity " i ntrod uced by the language of operators is no lon
ger what is to be descri bed " i n itsel f," but what " answers" the operant
q uestion .
3 8 0   COS M O L O GY




    It is not surprising that controversies over the interpretation of quan
tum mechanics have attained a degree of sophistication that recalls medi
eval quarrels, for rea lity as "answering" translates the impossi bil ity of
guaranteeing any kind of resemblance between the answer obtai ned and
what it was supposed to have answered . Yet the physici sts who created
the physics of operators, and now use it even in "classical physics," did
not frame the problem i n terms of resemblance. The language of opera
tors may wel l mark the renunci ation of the ascent from what is detected
toward the reasons of the being responsi ble for the detection, but it en
ables the satisfaction of a demand that defines the value of an " answer"
in physics i n another way. The answer obtai ned must be capable of bei ng
authenticated ; that is, it must not be able to be disqualified as an " arti
fact," qua prod uced by a n operation i ncapa ble of defining what it is ad
dressing as the " reason " for its result. In other words, what " answers "
must be a " respondent," in the sense of "guarantor" of the q uestion's
relevance. What the physici sts have created is thus their own way to dis
tinguish between a "good " and a " ba d " question.
    What is a "good " q uestion i n the formalism of operators ? In general,
an operator acting on a function produces another function. But the case
in which the operator qualifies as "a q uestion that has received its re
spondent" is the case where the result of the operator's action on a func
tion or vector is limited to the reproduction of the same function or vector,
multiplied by a determinate numerical quantity. These particular functions
or vectors are cal led the eigenfunctions, or eigenvectors of the operator
( " eigen " in German means " own," the operator's " own functions " ) . As
for the numerical quantities, they are called its eigenval ues. And it is to
such eigenval ues that the definition of the " answers " satisfying the physi
cists' demands for a respondent will correspond . If what a question ad
dresses can be represented in terms of the eigenvectors of the operator
corresponding to this question, the eigenvalue obtai ned will be the wel l
determi ned answer to the operant question . As a result, a physica l being,
if it can be represented by a set of the eigenvectors of an operator, can
th us be taken as guaranteei ng, answeri ng for, the adequacy of the ques
tion corresponding to that operator.
    We can understand this definition of a "good " or " a dequate " question
in the sense that the question add ressed by the operator to one of its ei
genfunctions (or vectors ) is addressed to someth ing defined as suscepti ble
of a nswering it without being transformed by it. This is where a specula
tive generalization of the physico-mathematical i nnovation consti tuted
by operators becomes possible. The great interest of thi s innovation with
regard to the hiatus verified by operators, and which Whitehea d had
                    ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 1




a l ready speculatively general ized , i s to display in an expl icit way that it
corresponds to a problem of knowledge: what is a good question ? This
may enable specu lative genera lization to display, in its turn, that the
problem raised by metaphysics is not that of a reality to be known, but to
be produced. The relation between operator and eigenvector, a lthough it
may sti ll bear witness to the " a bsolute agreement" between modern phys
ics a nd metaphysics, will thus nevertheless change the definition of the
agreement, i nsisting on the divergence between the parties . In physics, the
relation satisfies the physicists' demand for authenticating " good ques
tions ." In metaphysics, it might wel l designate satisfaction itsel f, the
superject concluding itself from its henceforth uni fied heritage, havi ng
itself become the uni fied feeli ng of a unique felt content.
    Such an adaptation impl ies that the point will be not to define the su b
ject as "operative," as the one that raises the question, the one that decides
how it wi l l question the world, but to situate it on the side of what is to be
prod uced : the subject is that for which the question of its own unification
as a superject arises. The Whi teheadian subject thus does not operate but
concludes itself from an operation which, when completed, will determine
the operator, the actual world of the subject. In other words, whereas the
physics of operators, as a scienti fic theory, designates a real i ty that must
be interrogated in order to be known, the theory of concrescence, as a
metaphysical proposition, may designate " reality " qua raising the ques
tion of the operations that must proceed in order for the subject to be
come the unified feeling of its (eigen) actual world . The " agreement" with
the physics of operators will therefore be stated as: the superject is the
subject that has become the "eigenfeeling" of that which, as " its actual
world," has become the operator correspondi ng to this feeling. Correla
tively, the world is not what a nswers to the subject, nor the respondent for
what the subject " knows " ; it is that which, vectorially, " operates " what
the subject is to feel .
    A s w e ca n see, unlike the o l d agreement Whitehead sought, the transpo
sition I am attempting implies renderi ng explicit the di fference between
what satisfies the problem of knowledge and the problem of production.
The physicists' satisfaction is when the system can be represented in terms
of the eigenvectors of the operator that corresponds to their questi on. A
sati sfaction in Whitehead's metaphysical sense is the final co-prod uction
of the subject and " its" world in such a way that it is henceforth impossi
ble to tell whether it is the subject's standpoint that determi nes the world,
or i f it is the site, the sta ndpoi nt, that calls forth its subject. Once the pro
cess is completed, once the superject has defined itself, the operator, the
henceforth actual world acting on the superject that is its "eigensubject,"
3 8 2   COSMO LOGY




should reproduce it equal to itself, affected only with an eigenvalue. In all
its details, experience is then one and individual: private.
   This doctrine, that the final "satisfaction " of an actual entity is intoler
ant of any addition, expresses the fact that every actual entity-since it is
what it is-is finally its own reason for what it omits [ . . . 1 In other
words, indetermination has evaporated from "satisfaction " [ . . . 1 thus,
in another sense, each actual entity includes the universe, by reason of its
determinate attitude towards every element of the universe ( PR, 45 ) .
   Fi nal, fully determi nate satisfacti on is such that the " that " o f "that's
what makes me feel " is j ust as inseparable from the " I " of "I feel " as the
intel ligible, the i ntel lect, a nd intel ligence are i nseparable in the philoso
phy of Plotinus. In the risky transposition that is guiding me, intel ligence,
obviously not an attribute of the intellect, could well be a name for the
"eigenvalue" of the satisfaction, the scalar value that physics associates
with the outcome of measurement, and which here becomes the " pri
vate," scalar response, inseparably enjoyment of " self" and of " what is
felt." And this value would then be at the same time a " decision referri ng
to what is beyond it" : " what wi ll have been felt," obstinate fact, " i mmor
tal object," one added to the many, whose consequences remain to be
decided, whose effects will be "occasional," according to the role and the
value that other occasions will confer upon it qua participating i n thei r
own satisfaction.
   Yet what about the " i nitial phase " ? How has the question of the " da
tum " been modified ? It is here, not in the general physical language of
operators, that we wi ll finally confront the singularity of quantum me
chanics. In quantum mechanics, the operators corresponding to the vari
ous measurable quantities have distinct eigenfunctions. If what is ques
tioned can be represented in terms of the eigenfunctions of a class of
operators, it is, by definition, incapable of being defined as a respondent
for the questions corresponding to another class of operators. This is why
physicists must define the choice of the question, that is, of the operator,
as an ultimate. If the choice of a measurement, and hence of the corre
sponding operator, is addressed to a quantum system that is not defined i n
terms o f the eigenvectors o f that operator, w e w i l l s a y that the measure
ment " perturbs the system," is unable to designate this system as its " re
spondent." This means that, according to the preparation of a quantum
system, it will be susceptible of giving a well-determined meaning to cer
tain measurements, but will be " perturbed " by others.
   What shoul d we reta in from this singularity ? The term " perturbation "
must be excluded, for it is relative to the ambi tion of knowledge. For
physicists, it interprets the di fference between a "good " question, that
                  ACTU A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 B 3




has found its respondent, and a question whose answer has no determi
nate meaning. What we shou ld retai n is that in quantum mechanics it is
impossible to make all the q uestions that can be raised, all the physical
quantities that can be measured, converge toward a being that would be
guarantor for the relevance of them all. This is why, in quantum mechanics,
operators are not j ust one mode of representation among others but a
necessity. Physicists are forced to admit not only that there is no answer
wi thout a question, but also that no question is the " right one," indepen
dently of the means they have taken ( preparation) to be able to receive a
determinate answer to this q uestion and not to another one.
   The "agreement " between physics and metaphysics, if it is to be re
newed, will not concern only operators, which mark the taking- into
account wi thin the very syntax of the physical theory of the hiatus that
had inspired Whitehead . It wi l l require the a bandonment of the " initial
datum," because this datum had the power of proposing, if not of impos
i ng, its perspective on the entity that appropriates it, and because, in
terms of knowledge, it is precisely this power that q uantum entities lack .
They do not dictate how they are to be questioned, but they are a respon
dent in the a uthentic sense only insofar as the person framing the ques
tion has undertaken the means to " prepare " them to a nswer.
   Of course, when it comes to metaphysics, one might say that God is
the one who " prepares " the datum, but i n this case the imbalance be
tween the power attri buted to God and the i nsignificant character of the
appropriation becomes blatant. All the more so as another possibil ity of
thinking has appeared : that the definition of the " datum " itself, qua op
erative, coincides with the final phase, when the su bject has become a
superject. God is then no longer a " p reparer," because " preparation"
designates concrescence i tself. And indeed, when Whitehead a bandons
the thesis according to which concrescence has as i ts starti ng point a n
already unified " datum," which it is up t o i t t o appropriate, when h e fully
deploys the " miracle of creation," entrusting unification to concrescence
itself, God will have ceased to be an "orderer," to become the "object " of
a hybrid feeling that initiates concrescence. As such, his role may be com
pared to that of an " i nstigator," operating as a " lure for feeling" for the
nascent concrescence.
   To God 's role as an instigator responds the need to d i fferentiate be
tween what the physicists would call "good " q uestions, because they
have a respondent, and the good ness that necessarily qualifies God 's in
terven tion. It may well be that what is to be contrasted are two meanings
of the word " relevance." Relevance as an issue is always primary. In
physics, the "good q uestion " is the relevant one, the one that is able to
3 8 4   COS M O LO GY




designate what answers as its respondent. However, when relevance ex
pl icitly becomes a val ue, that value designates the way a question gi ves
rise to its responden t. If I ask you a question at the right moment, in the
right terms, with the right intonation, so that you suddenly see a way
out where the situation was blocked, my question will have proved its
relevance by its effects, by the way that your experience is transformed.
In other words, your transformation is an answer, but it is by no means
an answer " to my questi on " : it answers for the relevance of the question
as a l ure that has initiated the process of which your experience is the
truth .
    The conceptual transformation that witnesses the disappearance of the
initial datum as the source and explanation of relevant novelty may be
interpreted as granting to relevance the meaning it receives in some of
our most important experiences: when a gesture, a question, a suggestion
give rise to thei r respondent without havi ng " deserved " it. Not the frus
trated insistence of the " You ought to understand," but the true miracle,
celebrated by the concord of two voices-Okay, now I understand/now
you understand-in the most rad ica l a bsence of guarantees that this con
cord designates something that is " the same." What was to be understood
did not preexist the understand ing, and belongs only to the person who
understands.
   As for the subject, it could be said that Whitehead 's has passed from a
rather literal interpretation of a saying of Pascal, "you would not seek me
unless you had a l ready found me," to a more complex one. In the literal
sense, the subject has al ready found the unity it seeks to become, since its
initial datum is deri ved from the divine ordering. But in the more com
plex version, "you" and " I " should not be able to be defined indepen
dently of the quest. In concrescent uni fication, feelings and what they aim
at gradually co-determine each other, unti l the "you found me! " a t the fi
nal stage, when feeli ngs become the feelings of a subject that has become
a superject, emerging from its uni fied feelings.
   It is better to say that the feelings aim at their subject, than to say that
they are ai med at their subject. For the latter mode of expression removes
the subject from the scope of the feeling and assigns it to an external
agency. Thus the feeling would be wrongly abstracted from its own final
cause. This final cause is an inherent element in the feeling, constituting
the unity of that feeling. An actual entity feels as it does feel in order to
be the actual entity which it is. In this way an actual entity satisfies Spi
noza 's notion of substance: it is causa sui . The creativity is not an exter
nal agency with its own ulterior purposes. A ll actual entities share with
God this characteristic of self-causation. For this reason every actual
                   ACT U A L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 5




entity also shares with God the characteristic of transcending all other
actual entities, including God ( PR, 222 ) .
   I f we recall the "miracle o f creation " associated with the vision o f the
prophet Ezekiel, we may say that this vision has now become even more
risky, that is, more complete. Whitehead has a bandoned any distinction
between settling the datum and appropriating it. Subjective uni fication no
longer has as an " objective " l ure the unity of the datum, those skeletons
that a re well-prepared and quite ready to come to life aga in. For the mir
acle of creation to take place, it is a multitude of d ried bones, not skele
tons in good working order, that must organize themselves, dress them
selves in the flesh of real, emotional beings, and gather themselves together
in the unity of an innumerable army. This is why skeletons a re not what
inspire the prophet. When Ezekiel spoke the word as he was commanded,
it was words comi ng from elsewhere that he repeated, whose meaning he
did not possess. At first, this meaning had no other locus than the quiver
ing of dispersed bones. It is as the miracle occurs that the prophet Ezekiel
will come into existence, as the person toward whom the eyes and ears of
this " one " army, that owes him its existence, are turned .
   The "subjective ai m," the aim of the feelings that will bring to existence
the subject whose feelings they are, thus has a divine endowment as its
initium. It is no longer the datum that testifies to God, but the initial aim
or lure, which is the activation of the many feelings qua " a i ming at." As
the process of concrescence proceeds, the " i nitial aim" will become a
" subjective a i m " : the aim at a subject producing itself as it determines its
world. But the initial lure does not constitute a final cause. It pertains to
the feelings themselves to operate, that is, to produce the subjective con
vergence that will make them the feelings of a superject, each of them be
coming correlatively the " feeling of an aspect of the actual world," a well
determined component affirming the inseparability of the world that
ma kes itself felt, and the superject, the " eigensubject" of this feeling.
  Each temporal entity, in one sense, originates from its mental pole,
analogously to God himself. It derives from God its basic conceptual
aim, relevant to its actual world, yet with indeterminations awaiting its
own decisions. The subjective aim, in its successive modifications, re
mains the unifying factor governing the successive phases of interplay
between physical and conceptual feelings. These decisions are impossible
for the nascent creature antecedently to the novelties in the phases of its
concrescence ( PR, 224 ) .
  However, a question a rises. If there i s n o longer any " i nitial datum "
offering a ready-made perspective o n the basis of which the entity would
be a mere " adoption of a position," isn't concrescence confronted by a
3 8 6   COS MOLOGY




tita nic task, in a ny case " unimaginable" in the sense that it would not
consti tute a " lure " for the i magination : to make a world on the basis of a
chaos of di sparate feel ings ?
   Th is objection must be examined more closely. Is the multiplicity of
felt data really chaotic ? Or, more precisely, in what sense is it chaotic ? To
envi sage this question, let us turn to the sixth ca tegory of explanation.
   That each entity in the universe of a given concrescence can, so far as
its own nature is concerned, be implicated in that concrescence in one or
other of many modes; but in fact it is implicated only in one mode: that
the particular mode of implication is only rendered fully determinate by
that concrescence, though it is conditioned by the correlate universe. This
indetermination, rendered determinate in the real concrescence, is the
meaning of "potentiality. " It is a cond itioned indetermination, and is
therefore called a "real potentiality " ( PR, 2 3 ) .
   The multi plicity o f data by n o means signifies " pure chaos," a pure,
disjoi nted multipl icity on the basis of which each concrescence would be
"creation of order ex nihilo." We do, of course, have to dea l with a
" nexus," a set, no longer a datum, sti ll less a " togetherness." The way in
which there will be a " togetherness " is henceforth the very q uestion of
concrescence. Yet the determination of the unique mode of i mplication
of each of the elements of the collection is nevertheless "conditioned " by
" the correlate universe." How are we to understand this conditioning
without making a datum emerge once aga i n ? How are we to differentiate
between what is really " pure multiplicity," the eterna l objects which, for
their part, a re pure potentialities, and that whose "condi tioned i ndeter
minacy " nevertheless designates a " real potentiality " ?
   To make explicit this rea l potentiality, which i s neither pure disj unc
tion nor preordered, I will allow myself a reference that interprets the
universe Whitehead qualifies as "correlate" on the basis of the notion of
"correlation." I must emphasize that I mean "correlation " i n the physico
mathematica l not the statistical sense. Here aga in, the difference desig
nates the invention and i mperative of relevance that belong to physics,
and does not by any means characterize purely statistical reasoning.
   In physics, correlations are neither calculated starting out from col
lected data, of the kind statistical enquiries attempt to reveal, nor from
actua l relations between two terms, l i ke interactions-for instance, the
force of gravity. An interaction is defined by its effects, by the determinate
way in which one being (or, more precisely, an enduring society ) contrib
utes to the determination of another, or by the way the behavior of each
testi fies to the existence of the others . Although gravitational i nteraction
has been cal led " a t a distance," it i mp l ies a loca l ized definition of the
                   ACTUA L I T Y   B E T W E E N   P H YS I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 7




bei ngs that i nteract. In Whiteheadian terms, the interaction is " socia l " ; it
is part of the way societies that a re sa id to " interact" integrate a sta ble
reference to one another within their respective adventures. In contrast,
correlations in physics enable an answer to questions that do not fit with
this definition of physical beha vior as mutua lly determined . Correlations
may i ndeed be said to exist " between " the entities belonging to a popula
tion, but they have no meaning when it comes to the beha vior of these
entities taken individual ly. They only intervene when it comes to charac
terizing the population itself. In other words, if one followed (or, more
exactly, if one could fol low) the behavior of a molecule as a function of
its i nteracti ons with all the others, the fact that correlations may exist
between these molecules would never i ntervene i n the calculation. The
d ifference between correlated and noncorrelated takes on meaning for
questions that can only be addressed to the population as such, because
they bear upon what this population is capable of as such, not as an en
semble of interacting bodies.
    Hi storically, correlations were i ntroduced to characterize the effect of
a hypothetical reversal of the d i rection of the velocity of each of the par
ticles that constitute a population (ga s ) . The operation of velocity rever
sal has been described as "creating correlations" between particles to
j ustify the fact that this operation may result in " a bnormal collective be
haviour" of the pop ulation, in this case to move away from thermo
dynamic equi librium instead of approaching it. More generally, the notion
of correlation corresponds to the possi bility of characterizing a population
as such on the basis of a contrast with the most simple situation, which can
be relevantly described by presupposi ng that what happens in one place
has no definable consequence elsewhere. When this hypothesis of "general
ized indifference" is relevant, one wi l l say that the correlations are of zero
intensity and range. This is the case with thermodynamic equili brium, as is
reflected by the emine � t simplicity of its macroscopic description. In con
trast, there is no longer any " i ndifference " when one speaks of "critica l "
situations . What occurs locally is said t o have repercussions i n the entire
population: i n the vicinity of the critical poi nt, the range and intensi ty of
the correlations undergo a dramatic increase.
   To bring up a somewha t evocative analogy, let us take two ( huma n )
populations, apparently simi lar, i n the sense that they allow themselves
to be described similarly in terms of economic i nteractions, that is, ex
changes defined in a mnesiac terms of supply and demand. A remarka ble
difference might appear on the occasion of an event a ffecting these popu
lations as such, like an earthquake or a n i nvasion . To simulate this d iffer
ence, however, modelizations wi l l have to associate with thei r actants a
3 8 8   COS MOLOGY




term of " memory," which has no influence on individual excha nge be
haviors, socia l ly defined as amnesiac, but becomes dominant when it
comes to asking how the population will respond to the test. In this sense,
correlations a re delocalized, since they characterize the mode of belong
ing to a population, not behavior that can be attri buted to the members
of this population. And they a re abstract, in the Whiteheadian sense, in
that they have no meaning in themselves but only from the viewpoint of
the event that " activates " them-we could say that the event " q uestions"
the population as such about the response it might become capable of.
Accord ing to the event, correlations may remain without consequence or
" make all the di fference."
   The fact that correlations, as physics has invented them, may give
meaning to what is neither pure multiplicity nor a system unified by inter
actions to which each individual behavior would be subject testifies to
what constitutes the strength of physics: its ability to introduce what is re
quired by the relevance of a description. In the present case, what the de
scription required is analogous to what the Whiteheadian crowd of initial
feelings requires, in that the question raised is what this crowd will be
capable of. One could therefore say that the initial phase of feelings desig
nates the data as correlated, and even defines the divine lure as a "creator
of correlations," so long as creation is understood as " activation " and es
pecially not as creation ex nihilo. In fact, the multiplicity of data is rich in
activatable correlations, for they constitute a " nexus," a " set of actual en
tities in the unity of the relatedness constituted by thei r prehensions of
each other or-what is the same thing, conversely expressed--constituted
by their objectifications in each other" ( PR, 24 ) . The correlated universe,
the universe as correlated , is thus an " activated nexus."
   It can thus be said that the " correlated universe " is not unified, but
may be characterized by a multiplicity of " correlations," relations that
are " non-loca liza ble," for they are not defined between terms but rather
by repercussions and repercussions of repercussions : a reciprocal imma
nence that entangles harmonies and dissona nces, convergences and di
vergences, captures and diversions. Each element refers to others and is
a reference for others, but each time in a way that is pa rticular, possibly
qualified only by the type of pattern or the " defining cha racteristic" that
designates a " social fact."
   This is why to cha racterize the crowd of feelings Whitehead could use
the very term he had used to characterize the " initial datum " : that of
" rea l potentiality." But more than physics, it would henceforth be lan
guages one should address to accentuate what matters here: the fact that
the determination of the indeterminate is no more a si mple adoption of
                   ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 8 9




position with rega rd to a datum than it is a " demi urgic" miracle. A con
crescence is no more of a " demi urge" than a statement, and no less, for
every statement has as its " rea l potentiality " the correlated multipl icity of
what coul d be called the " usages " that make a la nguage, and is the pro
ducer of a use that does not preexist it as such. It can thus be said of every
statement, whether it is produced in the manner of a watchword, redun
dant with regard to the situation, or like a poetic statement, actua lizing a
completely new usage, that it is conditioned by " the correlated universe "
of the language, that it is the rea liza tion of a " rea l potentia l i ty." But it
must then be added that a la nguage, qua real potentiality, raises the q ues
tion of its " reality," which is not to be confused with any of its rea liza
tions. In other words, the " usages " are not cases among which one has to
choose, like the various possibilities of translation presented by a diction
ary. Instead, they should evoke what these possi bilities are made to bri ng
about, the perplexed and undivided nebula whence the choice emerges:
"this is the word that (its."
   Let us return to the ontologica l principle that will ta ke on its ful l im
port at the end of this journey; that is, it will i mpose that God, who is a
ca use, m ust also be " expl ica ble" in terms of causes. We w i l l examine
later the theological q uestion that arises in this case, but we can show
here that what has a l ready been set a side is the threat of a God solely
responsi ble for the parti a l i ty of an adoption of position, and therefore
responsi ble both for " good " and for " ev i l ."
   A ccording to the ontological principle there is nothing which floats
into the world from nowhere. Everything in the actual world is referable
to some actual entity. It is either transmitted from an actual entity in the
past, or belongs to the subjective aim of the actual entity to whose con
crescence it belongs. The subjective aim is both an example and a limita
tion of the ontological principle. It is an example, in that the principle is
here applied to the immediacy of concrescent fact [ . . . J In another sense
the subjective aim limits the ontological principle by its own autonomy.
But the initial stage of its aim is an endowment which the subject inherits
from the inevitable ordering of things, conceptually realized in the nature
of God [ . . . J Thus the initial stage of the aim is rooted in the nature of
God, and its completion depends on the self-causation of the subject
superject. This function of God is analogous to the remorseless working
of things in Greek and in Buddhist thought. The initial aim is the best for
that impasse ( PR, 244 ) .
   We d o not yet know how the " inevita ble ordering," conceptua lly rea l
ized i n the divine nature, communica tes with the " initi a l aim" of a na
scent subject. What we know is that this ordering does not correspond to
3 9 0   COS M O LO GY




global calculation, from which the " best of subjective endowment " could
be deduced, but is " what is best for that i mpasse." Whitehead's God is
not " Leibnizian," in the sense that the globa l and the local do not com
mun icate in him, for him, and through him. Reality, says Whitehead, is
" incu rably a tomic," and God is not assigned to the service of an ideal,
placing what is local i n the service of some global best. In fact, such an
ideal would have brought to existence the sophism Whitehead denounced
as early as Religion in the Making: the one everyone winds up with who
tries to reconcile God 's assumed general will for the good with his rather
curious particular applications. The biblical God does not approve of the
friends who advise Job to submit his pretensions to the impenetrability
of the divine plan. Whitehead's God is the envisagement of " that" im
passe, Job's lament or friendly advice, and not of their role in a universa l
economy. And this is so, not by choice, out of respect for individual " free
dom," but by the necessity of the divine mode of functioning.
   The divine endowment thus corresponds to an individual possi bi l ity,
not to what individuals should accomplish in the name of interests that
transcend them. Here we find the concern that had led Whitehead, in Sci
ence and the Modern World, to i ntrod uce God as the principle of limita
tion: only what is actual has value, what is actually ta king a position,
that is, what is refusing as well . Thus and not otherwise. Whitehead
mod ifies, rearranges, inverts the rela tions, but never does he blame con
crete experience, including those that have been celebrated as exhi biting
notions he has abandoned .
    In Science and the Modern World, the divine l imitation made the dif
ference between the idea l and the individual . The ideal situation, insofar
as it resulted from an ordering of all the eterna l objects, gave no meaning
to any horizon, to any possibility of bri nging to existence the individual
decision to be a prehension of " this," rather than of everything presup
posed by " this." I f there were no limitation, each occasion shou ld have
" reflected " a l l the other events, the whole of nature. How, then, could it
be cal led " decision " ? Decision was thus associated with the " mental
pole" of an occasion, in contrast to its " physica l pole," with the former
" breaking off" from the latter's actual illimitability. In Process and Real
ity, the distinction between physical and menta l poles has been deeply
mod ified, since the physical pole is no longer placed under the banner of
illimitability but of (correlated ) multiplicity. Yet this distinction can now
be generalized to God hi mself, and it is, as we shall see, this characteriza
tion of the divine functioning that will make it possible to coordinate the
" ordering" constituted by eternal envi sagement with the local character,
relative to " that" impasse, of the initial di vine endowment. Correlati vely,
                  ACTU A L I TY   B E T W E E N   P H Y S I C S   A N D   T H E   D I V I N E   3 9 1




God will no longer be a principle but will have to satisfy, in his distinct
way, the categoreal obligations.
   In the first place, God is not to be treated as an exception to all meta
physical principles, invoked to save their collapse. He is their chief exem
plification ( PR, 343 ) .
    Like Whitehead himself, who reserves the fifth and last ( ra ther brief)
part of Process and Reality to this question, I will not try to approach
the rather thorny question of the divine functioni ng until the end of our
iti nerary, after having explored what Whitehead has j ust created . We
now leave physics behind; for the locus where the Whiteheadian con
cepts will have to be experi enced is the one from which the demand that
what exists must be the cause of itself has arisen. Not an electron, to
be sure, but a thinker: Job, for i nstance, demanding that his " lament" be
heard . It is therefore toward the adventures of consciousness that the
flight of speculative experience must henceforth orient itself.
                                                       C H A P TER TWENT Y - TWO




And They Became Souls




          HE INITIAL AIM    is the best for that impasse. But if the best be
         bad, then the ruthlessness of God can be personified as A te, the
        goddess of mischief. The chaff is burnt. What is inexorable in
God, is valuation as an aim towards "order "; and "order " means "soci
ety permissive of actualities with patterned intensity of feeling arising
from ad;usted contrasts " ( PR, 244 ) .
    It is sti ll with regard to " evi l " that metaphysics' correction o f the excess
subjectivity of consciousness, here expressing itsel f in a religious image, is
played out. From this viewpoint, the exa mple taken by Whitehead when
he announces, in a somewhat elliptical way, that " the chaff is burnt," is
particularly formidable. The prophecy of John the Baptist, to which the
el lipsis refers ( Matthew 3 : 7-1 2 ) is a prophecy of anger. The time of pa
tience is succeeded by that of impatience, of the good affirming itself in
the destruction of what resis ts it, in the elimination of what impedes it.
The prophet baptizes with water, with a view to repentance, but he an
nou nces the coming of He who was to baptize in the Holy Spirit, and also
in fire, of He who would sort the grain, and would have the chaff burned .
    But the worst is yet to come. The text to which Whitehead alludes not
only conta ins the usua l prophetic threats, but it proposes a formidable
novelty: the prophet's anger appeals to the piti less figure of a God who,
as he announces, is liable not to be held by the covenant. Or, more pre
cisely, by the covenant in the sense that it includes a divine commitment
to maintain that covenant with the Jewish people. Those who hea r him,
thunders the prophet, must know that i f God so wi lls, children for Abra
ham can come forth out of these stones !
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 3




   Were the words attributed to the prophet those of a Jewish prophet pos
sessed by impatience, or did they come later, inscribed in the Gospels by
those who thought that they were the true and new children of Abraham,
therefore capable of designating the chaff which had been, was, and would
be delivered over to the fire of God's anger ? In any case, even if the propo
sition comes from John, it introduces a terrible possibility, which was to be
exploited by the Christians, that God, while faithful to the covenant, might
be free from the election that seemed to be synonymous with it.
   A formidable contrast has been prod uced . The continuity of the cove
nant with the children of Abra ham remains a fact, but this fact suddenly
leaves the " how" of thi s continuity indeterminate. Of course, from the
viewpoint of Christian theology, it is the entire economy of the sacrament
of baptism that is announced here, by which God transforms into a mem
ber of his people, a child of Abraham, not, perhaps, stones, but any human
being, henceforth taken one by one. From the viewpoint of those who turn
val ues of universality into an ideal that j ustifies all means, there is no doubt
reason in this to praise God, History, or Humanity, for this proposition
opens up the covenant to all human beings. Nevertheless, the proposition
according to which no difference of origin counts when it comes to the
universality of salvation was coupled with divine anger, or with the sorting
process carried out in the name of the opposition between faithfulness and
infidel ity. In an attempt to avoid all excess subjectivity, one will limit one
sel f to saying that this new arrangement, which distinguishes divine faith
fulness to the covenant as such from the commitment bearing upon the
election of the Jewish people, is, inexorably, very interesting, liable to give
rise to new contrasts, and a vector of intense feelings.
   Wh itehead 's God is neither patient nor impatient, for these adj ectives
designate the adventures proper to societies. He is not at a l l constra ined
by any covenant whatsoever, for he "cares not whether an immed iate oc
casion be old or new, so far as concerns derivation from i ts ancestry "
(PR, 1 05 ) . More precisely, this derivation matters only through the con
trasts it has stabilized : the formidable innovation introd uced by John
would have no meaning without the l ineage of p rophets call ing Jews to
faithfulness, denounci ng infidelity. That the long worry of the chosen
people about the patience of its God could constitute a locus for a new
family of proposi tions, transforming the contrast negotiable between
faithful and unfaithful into an opposition, is a " fact" that we inherit, not
the manifestation of a divine i mpatience or of a divine proj ect. Yet, no
more than the new propositions that would eventua lly a l low the opposi
tion to be overcome, this fact is not inscribed either in any d ivine plan
dealing with the elevation of men or with the economy of Salvation . The
3 9 4   COS M O LOGY




initial moment of the aim was, of course, like any other, rooted in the
nature of God, but it was so in response to a " loca l " question: what is the
best for " that" impasse ?
   " To envisage " is the term proposed by Whitehead to describe a God
who conditions crea tivity, who bends creativity into a cosmic adventure.
Yet this term has henceforth received a more precise mea ning. It is speci
fied by the question: " what is the best for that impasse ? " the question
which, by the way, is that of Whitehead when faced by the impasses of
thought, whether they refer to professionals, to the bi furcation of nature,
or to the omni potent God of theology. And it does indeed work in an
inexora ble way, in the sense that it has the emi nently nonsocial character
already assumed by l i fe, as a j ustification of the robbery that is required
by the regime of existence of l iving societies: nothing of what a society
sta bilizes qua importa nt, qua j usti fying mai ntenance and imposition, can
escape the possibil ity of a new contrast, tra nsforming this importance
into an impasse urging escape. Yet what is at stake is stil l " that" i mpasse:
the divine envi sagement, like life, is a lways local and interstitial. Nothing
guarantees that the possibility of esca ping the impasse, i f it gains i mpor
tance, will not actual ize the trick of evi l : to insist on being born at the
wrong season .
   The reference to God's inexora ble va l uation thus does not ma ke him a
j udge. God does not j usti fy any j udgment. If he is a respondent, it is only
for the trust of the person who dares to appeal against a j udgment, since
God responds for the fact that no reason has the power to define as im
possible the new contrasts that would transform the range and the mean
i ng of a j udgment. The adventure of religions is thus indeed a social
adventure. The names men give to God do not testi fy to him, but to the
adventures of the human consciousness in search of its j ustifications.
   Quite obviously, all this does not mean, from a metaphysica l stand
point, that the names human beings give to God are pure fictions without
any importance. It signifies the need for a severe sorting process between
religious statements and metaphysica l statements, with the former testi
fying to what human consciousness has made itself ca pable of at a gi ven
epoch, and the latter accepting themsel ves as obligated only by the im
perative of coherence. Yet this sorting process, because it quite obviously
proceeds from a highly conscious demand, must itself find a meta physi
cal meaning.
   So far, we have primarily dealt with consciousness in an indirect way,
with rega rd to something other than itsel f. This mode is dominant in
Whitehead, and we will find it aga in in the fol lowing pages; but this time
the point will be to go further, as we are of course obl iged to do by a
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 5




minimum of coherence. Although Whitehead constantly insists on the
one-sided and especially partial cha racter of what we ca ll conscious ex
perience, deploying all that is blindly presupposed by the most reflexive
of such experiences, the vocation of speculative philosophy-the flight of
experience-designa tes this conscious experience as its most crucial is
sue. Or, more precisely, it designates as its most crucial issue the possibi l i 
ties of modifying t h e conscious experience o f those w h o expose them
selves to that flight.
    The d istinction is crucia l . The wager of ma king conscious experience
the crucial issue designa tes modern philosophica l thought, as defined by
what Whitehead ca lls the " subj ectivist principle." He himsel f will adopt
what he calls a " reformed " subjectivist principle in order to mark his
belonging to modern philosophy and to designate i ts l imitations. For the
subjecti vist principle has made conscious experience the central issue, to
be sure, but this issue does not designate the question of this experience's
modi fications, it designates it i tsel f qua unique source of certai nty and
j ustification. This is why the " subj ect" always dea ls with an "objective
reality " with rega rd to which the q uestion arises of what it can say about
it, what pertains to this rea lity, and what perta ins to itsel f.
   The difficulties of all schools of modern philosophy lie in the fact that,
having accepted the subjectivist principle, they continue to use philo
sophical categories derived from another point of view. These categories
are not wrong, but they deal with abstractions unsuitable for metaphysi
cal use [ . . . 1 The notions of the "green leaf" and of the "round ball " are
at the base of traditional metaphysics. They have generated two miscon
ceptions: one is the concept of vacuous actuality, void of subjective expe
rience; and the other is the concept of quality inherent in substance. In
their proper character, as high abstractions, both of these notions are of
the utmost pragmatic use. In fact, language has been formed chiefly to
express such concepts. It is for this reason that language, in its ordinary
usages, penetrates but a short distance into the principles of metaphysics.
Finally, the reformed subjectivist principle must be repeated: that apart
from the experiences of subjects there is nothing, nothing, nothing, bare
nothingness ( PR, 1 6 7 ) .
   In order t o affirm tha t nothing exi sts independently o f the experience of
subjects, and that there is therefore no sorting process to carry out on
the basis of the d istinction between subjective experience and objective
reality, one must overcome a terrible hesitation, a veritable " lea p of death."
This explains, no doubt, why modern philosophica l doctrines have made
na ture bi furcate. For i f a stable world is no longer there to confirm what
we think, to propose the ideal of a well-founded agreement, everything
3 9 6   COSMOLOGY




seems to be reduci ble to mere fiction, interpretations that no arbitrage will
enable to distinguish. And it is often by designating beliefs that are "of
fensi ve," in the sense of Wi lliam James, that philosophers proceed : if we
have no criterion defining " objective reality" against fictions, everything
will be no more than a matter of taste and color. We will be forced to
accept that the earth might j ust as well be flat, or fai l to contradict the
creationists when they maintain that God created each living species
separately !
   The common feature of all these "offensive beliefs " is that those who
evoke them trust the interlocutor not to ad here to them more than they
themselves do: a typica lly phi losophical rhetoric. Yet with proposi tions
evok ing the j udgment of God , which have litera lly " i nfected " Christian
history, the case is completely di fferent. Whereas phi losophers often act
as though the conscious subject could indifferently envisage all possibili
ties, and therefore needed a referee to carry out the sorting process be
tween fictions that are equa lly envisagable, those who listened to John
the Baptist may have felt their world tremble to its foundations. In this
case, words are efficacious. They insti ll offensive doubt and demand con
version. Yet it would not occur to us to search for a referee or to spea k of
fiction . Conscious experience has been mod ified as such. A cry may rise
toward the hea vens, but those who utter the cry are aware that thei r ex
perience is the only possible " referee," and even that the reasons they
themselves will produce come only after the decision. Independent of the
subject, there is nothing.
   With regard to those who utter such cries, one will speak not of con
sciousness that is sure of its pretensions or demands certai nties that have
finally been gi ven a foundation, but of a soul in distress. And the distress
of these souls testifies to what will be one of the major inventions of
Whitehead's philosophy, the invention of what he calls " propositions." I f,
on the sixth day, we became souls, it is not because language enables us
to manipulate the pros and cons, to wonder whether the earth is flat or
round. It is because language raises to its highest power the efficacy of
what cannot be confused with it, the efficacy associated with what White
head was to define as a genui ne existent. For propositions appear among
the categories of exi stence of the categorea l scheme, j ust as actua l occa
sions and eternal objects do (eight types of existent are defi ned ) .
  ( vi) Propositions, o r Matters o f Fact i n Potential Determination, or
Impure Potentials for the Specific Determination of Matters of Fact, or
Theories ( PR, 22 ) .
  N o category of existence is intelligible a s such, since the categories of
existence are req uired by the categories of explanation and thus cannot be
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 7




explai ned . In particular, no verb is possi ble, si nce verbs pertai n either to
explanation or to obligation; that is, they correspond either to what we
seek to understand or else to the way what comes into existence is pro
duced . But the sixth type of existent may seem q uite particularly enig
matic. What are " theories" doing among existents ? In fact, propositions
are rather curiously absent from most Whitehead ian studies. Perhaps
Whitehead's heirs are embarrassed to find in the midst of the metaphysi
ca l scheme a type of existent which, far from being appropriate to every
occasion, seems to pertain to the theory of knowledge in the sense that
it presupposes consciousness. In this case, they are " victims" of the casual
Whitehead ian manner: appearing in the scheme among " existents," prop
ositions then disappear, to reappear only after Whitehead has discussed
"symbolic reference " and "j udgment." They can therefore be taken, in the
same sense, as a means of characterizi ng the experiences that imply per
ception, proposi tions, in this case, marking the appearance of conscious
ness . There is nothing coincidental about this: Whitehead very proba bly
decided rather late to transform the problem, and to turn certa in aspects
of conscious experience into the privi leged witness to a type of efficacy
that would not be limited to consciousness. Not until the third part of
Process and Reality wi l l the " propositional feeling " be introd uced, cor
responding to the categoreal definition of the proposition as " i mpure
potential."
   How can we approach the difference between a statement correspond
ing to a perception or to a judgment, and a statement exhi biting proposi
tiona l efficacy ? Let us abandon prophecy, too dramatic an example, and
take Descartes contemplating a piece of wax and applying himself to
doubt, to separating the attri butes that may pertain to the "objective real
ity " of the wax from those which, beca use they are variable or unreliable,
do not. How can we descri be Descartes 's experience, as he conscientiously
constructs the motivations of a verdict that should enable him to impose
upon "anybody" a definition of "extended substance " that is exemplified
nowhere in the worl d ? Does he doubt, or isn't the " doubti ng self" instead
a part of the data of the problem whose solution Descartes is construct
ing ? Does the emotiona l tenor of his experience speak of the risk of refus
ing to the wax what belongs to it? Or else, doesn't the risk l ie elsewhere ?
Perhaps with the possi bility of founding his theory, of infecti ng his reader
not so much with experience of doubt as with the mode of j udgment that
doubt will authorize ? Every time an experience is questioned in this way,
not on the basis of the word s that present a theory but of the way that
theory inha bits thinkers, of the issues that actually obsess them, of the
risks to wh ich thei r theory exposes them, the " reformed subjectivist
3 9 8   COSMOLOGY




theory " is activated . " Beliefs " no longer demand a referee, because what
they propose ma kes the thinker think.
    As the reader will have understood, the flight of speculative experience
here returns to what had been at the origin of the flight itself, White
head's "cry" : " That's a bsurd ! " i nspired by the philosophical and scien
tific statements that make nature bifurcate. The example he borrowed to
criticize the use made in modern philosophical doctrines of the su bjectiv
ist principle, "I see a green leaf there," is the parad igmatic example of a
statement that is clear from the viewpoint of consciousness and con fused
from the viewpoint of propositional efficacy. The question that imposes
itself, in fact, is " so wha t ? " Now, however, the point will no longer be to
criticize. The contrast between " that which " we percei ve and what we
a re aware of in perception will no longer constitute an argument without
being interpreted, correlatively, in a positive way: an exploit of percep
tion that will be named " symbolic reference." One will, of course, still
have to "correct " the excess subjectivity attested by the privilege ac
corded to the " that which " as opposed to the " what," but this time lan
guage will no longer intervene as what explains this privilege: this argu
ment is valid only when it comes to understanding the difficulty proper
to phi losophica l language. Correcting the excess subjectivity of skeptical
and critical phi losophers, the point will be to celebrate what Whitehead
will ca ll a veritable " fortune."
    If Whitehead 's exposition situated propositions " a fter" " symbolic refer
ence " and " j udgment," it is because the point was to manifest that speech,
or la nguage, thanks to whose gift we have become souls, must be ap
proached from two distinct angles. Accord i ng to the fi rst, language is
" made to express" the reliefs of an experience that is not i nitia lly linguis
tic, and this is why thi ngs are then " easy to say," as i f words referred to
matters of fact that they limited themselves to describing. According
to the second angle, however, the point wi ll be to redescribe this experi
ence by introducing " propositions." Accordi ng to the first approach, lan
guage is marked, one might say, by redundancy and ca n therefore be re
duced to an instrument of communication, "there is an elephant," whereas
according to the second one it will exhibit itself as designating creativity,
which is the ulti mate. The first angle of approach will become, retroac
tively, as insepara ble from the second as the description of the living or
ganism, imposing its obstinate values at the cost of the destruction of
other societies, is inseparable from originality, which is the justification
of life. I f we wish to make the analogy explicit, we will say that the re
dundancy of language, insofa r as it rati fies an elimination, is a robbery
whose j usti fication designates propositional efficacy.
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   3 9 9




   Before we come to propositions as such, Whitehead has thus proposed a
kind of genealogy of the experiences that language requires but does not
explain. Such a genea logy is complementa ry to the " adventure of the
senses," but here the emphasis will be on the importance of a bstraction.
This is why we will start from the trap represented by the misplaced con
creteness associated with some of these a bstractions. In particular, the two
"errors " of construction noted by Whitehead in his critique of modern
schools of philosophy testify to this error: that of vacuous actuality and
that of quality as inherent in a substance. Vacuous actuality refers to what
would be devoid of su bjective experience. It is connected with the a bstrac
tion of simple loca lization, when we say, "This stone is where it is, and it
just 'is.' '' As far as the concept of a quality as inherent in substance is con
cerned, it corresponds to the influence of logical abstraction, which among
all relations privileges the attri butives ones: the leaf is green, and Socrates
is mortal. Linguistic expression is appropriate to this twofold a bstraction
in a privileged way, designating a world in which things that are contem
porary with one another, and with myself, appear, the bearers of sensible
qualities but bereft of any relation with one another other than spatial.
   This time, therefore, the point is no longer to criticize but to approach
what sets the trap. The world " placed as a spectacle and as logic," the
world that "appears to us," which we perceive in the way Whitehead was
to call " presentational immediacy," is certa inly a tra p as soon as philoso
phers try to construct their concepts while profiting from the abstractions
exhibited by the spectacle. Yet these a bstractions have nothi ng to do with
the categories we wou ld proj ect upon a mute reality. If this were the case,
a science such as physics, which depends on the measures of distance and
time, a nd therefore on the a bstraction constituted by simple loca l ization,
wou ld be " the daydream of a solitary intelligence with a taste for the day
dream of publication " ( PR, 329 ) . We must think of the percei ved world as
an audacious and sophisticated montage, whose metaphysical generalities
are to shed light on its selective a nd biased character, but in the sense that
this selection privi leges something important, testifying to important as
pects of a systematic order, without which we would not survive for an
instant.
   Perception in the mode of presentational immediacy, beca use it pro
poses a world made up of things that exist " simultaneously," indifferent to
one another, each one defined by its position relative to the others, would
be a daydream without the solidarity that Whitehead has interpreted in
terms of coordinate analysis, with each actuality confirming and prolong
ing the extensive continuum in which it situates itsel f. Yet we must not
confuse the indifference of what coexists in the " now " of simultaneity
4 0 0   COS M O LOGY




with the impartial articulation of coordinated situations. Nothing is less
impartial than presentational immediacy, than the experience of a " slice "
o f the world without past o r future. This experience exhibits the impor
tance of transmuted feelings (the attribution of color, for instance, to a
nexus) as wel l as of the social mode of extensiveness that cha racterizes
societies insofa r as they endure. Neither simultaneity nor "colored things "
exist outside of visual perception, but they translate a "cerebra l " trust in a
community of enduring beings that actualize a separation between " space "
and " time" according to interdependent modes. That tiger I see, and that I
see looking at me, may well be my way of inheriting the past: it is never
theless prudent that I wager that the past has not had my vision as its sole
heir, and that I think about runni ng away. Nor is this trust peculiar to
perception, for it is that without which detection would not have any
meaning either. I f the source of the smell that orients a butterfly's flight did
not endure on its own account while the butterfly is flying toward it, there
would be no butterflies.
   The indifference of presentational immediacy to contemporary actuali
ties in the environment cannot be exaggerated. It is only by reason of the
fortunate dependence of the experient and of these contemporary actu
alities on a common past, that presentational immediacy is more than a
barren aesthetic display ( PR, 324 ) .
   Presentational immed iacy obviously al lows a resumption of the dis
tinction Whitehead made i n The Concept of Nature between what we
are aware of in perception and what we percei ve. The ultimate fact con
stituted by the mind's " foothold " in nature, the relation of cogredience
between the percipient event that is " here " and the duration that is " now,"
is henceforth commented on in terms of " fortunate dependence." The fact
that perception itself induces us to pay "due attention" to the tiger is our
" fortune," the biased and selective wager we inherit with regard to what
ma tters . However, speculative interpretation will accentuate what The
Concept of Nature left i n the shadows, since Whitehead limited himsel f
to associating the percipient event with what he called, " roughly speak
i ng," " bod ily l i fe ." This dimension of experience obviously does not tes
tify to the " rea l " world as opposed to the abstraction of immed iacy. But
it testifies in a nother way, which Whitehead will ca ll "ca usa l efficacy " :
we a pprehend reality qua " making itself felt." I n other words, the idea
that what presents itsel f now in the mode of indifferent coexistence " has
made itsel f felt " through a route of sophisticated experiences that ends
up in a perception " there " is by no means, as some empi ricists would
maintain, an i ntel lectual hypothesis. On the contra ry, it is these empiri
cists who fa ll into the trap by denying what we know but what our lin
guistic statements can say only " rough ly."
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 1




    Whitehead never tires of crossing swords with H ume on the question
of causal ity. In the name of his system, H ume has denied the obvious. He
has denied what everyone knows: what " I see," I see " with my eyes," and
the feeling this " wi th my eyes " corresponds to testifies to the primordial
cha racter of the "causal efficacy " that his system turns into a j udgment
derived from " habit," with no regard, as we have seen, for what oculists
and prohi bitionists would think a bout that. Yet there is not even any
need for their testimonies. It is with an a lmost sadistic delight that White
head notes the a bsurdity in which H ume ends up when he underta kes
to reduce to the constraints of presentational immediacy a case where
bodily experience, instead of being inconspicuous and steady, makes it
self brutally felt: the experience of a man who blinks his eyes while a
l ightning bolt tears through the darkness.
   The sequence of percepts, in the mode of presentational immediacy, is
flash of light, feeling of eye-closure, instant of darkness. The three are
practically simultaneous, though the flash maintains its priority over the
other two, and these two latter percepts are indistinguishable as to prior
ity. According to the philosophy of organism, the man also experiences
another percept in the mode of causal efficacy. He feels that the experi
ences of the eye in the matter of the flash are causal of the blink. The man
himself will have no doubt of it. In fact, it is the feeling of causality which
enables the man to distinguish the priority of the flash; and the inversion
of the argument, whereby the temporal sequence "flash to blink " is made
the premise for the "causality " belief, has its origin in pure theory. The
man will explain his experience by saying, " The flash made me blink ":
and if his statement be doubted, he will reply, "I know it, because I felt it "
( PR, 1 75 ) .
   Philosophers who have adopted the subjectivist principle, including
Kant, who raises causality to the dignity of an a priori category, have
exaggerated-the favorite sin of philosophy. They have ignored the crowd
of vague feelings, which are hard to put into words but nevertheless bear
a quite different message, that of a " presence," not of a "presentation." We
may wel l describe the world as i f it were given to us as a spectacle or a
picture, and eliminate the notion of "cause," which does not belong to
the picture: the "causes " nevertheless make themselves felt. Of course, they
take on a meaning completely di fferent from the wel l-defined "causes " of
our reasoning: they designate the "efficacy " of those presences that testify,
simultaneously and inseparably, to a body and to things.
   The "causal feeling " according to that doctrine [n.b., that of Hume]
arises from the long association of well-marked presentations of sensa,
one precedent to the other. It would seem therefore that inhibitions of
sensa, given in presentational immediacy, should be accompanied by a
4 0 2   COS M O LOGY




corresponding absence of "causal feeling " [ . . . j Unfortunately the con
trary is the case. An inhibition of familiar sensa is very apt to leave us a
prey to vague terrors respecting a circumambient world of causal opera
tions. In the dark there are vague presences, doubtfully feared; in the si
lence, the irresistible causal e{fzcacy of nature presses itself upon us; in the
vagueness of the low hum of insects in an August woodland, the inflow
into ourselves of feelings from enveloping nature overwhelms us; in the
dim consciousness of half-sleep, the presentations of sense fade away, and
we are left with the vague feeling of influences from vague things around
us ( PR, 1 76 ) .
   The point i s n o longer to criticize, hut t o enunciate importance. Hume
made the mistake of trying to separate the i nseparable. Reducing percep
tive experience to presentational immediacy, he could only reintroduce
what he had first eliminated, in the guise of mere habits linked to our
associations: " this then that " becoming " this, therefore that." As we have
already seen, Whitehead also speaks of habits i n The Concept of Nature;
yet these a re not the habits of an individual, but of experience. For him,
these habits constitute not what should be d iagnosed, or even denounced,
but the veritable " fortune " of perceptive experience, what we a l l owe to
a past of which we are not the author.
   If perception is not a " daydream," it is because a l l perceptive experi
ence is in fact made up of two distinct perceptive modes, one pertaining
to presentational immediacy, and the other to causa l efficacy. It is in terms
of a particular, enduring articulation between these two modes that
Whitehead names " symbolic reference." The perception of that yellow
patch striped with black that I see over there is inseparable from a brutal
emotional transformation, giving its meaning to what is perceived : "a ti
ger! " or rather, "do I have time to run away? " What Whitehead calls
" symbolic " is not something referring to something else, inaccessible or
not. It is what we have in common with all animals endowed with per
ceptive experience. The emotion that may seize Christians when the host
is offered to them is, of course, more complex than the one that invades
a rahhit at the sight of a predator, but i f the Christians' faith approaches
the ideal called " simple faith," it does not, as such, require any particular
conceptual i nnovation. And when we " understand " a word, it is often in
the mode of a meaning " that goes without saying." The word, as an au
dible object uttered "there," is a " symbol," whereas meaning, sometimes
laden with emotion, refers to causal efficacy. We understand a word " be
cause it has a meaning."
  It is mistake to think of words as primarily the vehicle of thought. Lan
guage also illustrates the doctrine that in regard to a couple of properly
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U LS   4 0 3




correlated species of things, it depends upon the constitution of the percipi
ent subject to assign which species is acting as "symbol" and which as
 "meaning." The word "forest " may suggest memories of forests; but
equally the sight of a forest, or memories of forests, may suggest the word
 "forest " [ . . . J but we do not usually think of the things as symbolizing the
words correlated to them. This failure to invert our ideas arises from the
most useful aspect of symbolism. In general the symbols are more handy
elements in our experience than are the meanings. We can say the word
"forest " whenever we like; but only under certain conditions can we di
rectly experience an existent forest. To procure such an experience usually
involves a problem of transportation only possible on our holidays. Also it
is not so easy even to remember forest scenes with any vividness; and we
usually find that the immediate experience of the word "forest " helps to
elicit such recollections. In such ways language is handy as an instrument
of communication along the successive occasions of the historic route
forming the life of one individual. By an extension of these same principles
of behaviour, it communicates from the occasions of one individual to the
succeeding occasions of another individual ( PR, 1 82-1 8 3 ) .
   For Whitehead, the word is not the murder of the thing, but an i nstru
ment of communication that helps things to prolong themselves, to make
felt in our experience the causal efficacy associated with the past. Cor
relatively, language is here placed under the banner of red undancy, not
of thought. Only our relative d i fficulty in resuscitating vivid memories
makes the d i fference between the word qua symbol and what it evokes
qua its meaning.
   Symbolic reference has major pragmatic importa nce. The rabbit's
intense experience is fortunate: without it, it would no doubt not have
survived . The irrepressi ble relation between words and things is the daily
bread of human experience: without it, no language. But to talk a bout
fortune, or l uck, is also to ta lk about possibility of misfortune. Symbol ic
reference is always a risk, a nd this risk is also first and foremost prag
matic, as is testified by all the l ures ( l u res for feeling) prod uced by both
preys and predators . Here, however, a problem a rises: butterflies can also
be " l ured ." There does not seem to be a frank d istinction between what
I have called detection and what Whitehead ca lls " symbolic reference."
Except that, unlike detection, which I have risked associating with what
is incoercible, symbolic reference, because it is an articulation between
two distinct perceptive modes, opens up the possibility of hesitation and
of learning. The bird that has, more or less at random, spotted a cater pil
lar imitati ng a twig will begin to test all the twigs in its vicinity. "Twig"
henceforth signifies "might be a caterpillar! "
4 0 4   COSMOLOGY




   In fact, symbolic reference places us at a crossroad. In one sense, it con
stitutes a primary fact, the source of many perplexities for consciousness.
If a thunderbolt is, rather indubitably, the cause of your (incoercible)
blinking, it is not certain, in contrast, that the emotion that i nvades you,
ma kes you tremble, is "caused " by what you see there, in front of you.
One thinks of William James's undecidable question: am I moved because
the world is moving, or does the world seem to me to be moving because
I am moved ? On the other hand, however, we must not exaggerate. We
are not, as some claim, " imprisoned " i n the network of our symbols and
our meanings . What is true of the bird, who is able to learn, is even more
true for us. We can learn more, even about what moves us. And we are
(sometimes ) able to question a symbolic reference as such, to verify the
"correctness " of the articulation between symbol and meaning.
  Symbolism can be justified, or unjustified. The test of justification must
always be pragmatic [ . . . I The rightness, or wrongness, of symbolism is
an instance of the symbolism being fortunate or unfortunate; but mere
"rectitude " [ . . . I does not cover all that can be included in the more
general concept of "fortune." So much of human experience is bound up
with symbolic reference, that it is hardly an exaggeration to say that the
very meaning of truth is pragmatic. But though this statement is hardly
an exaggeration, still it is an exaggeration, for the pragmatic test can
never work, unless on some occasion-in the future, or in the present
there is a definite determination of what is true on that occasion. Other
wise the poor pragmatist remains an intellectual Hamlet, perpetually
adjourning decision of judgment to some later date. According to the
doctrines here stated, the day of judgment arrives when the "meaning " is
sufficiently distinct and relevant, as a perceptum in its proper pure mode,
to afford comparison with the precipitate of feeling derived from sym
bolic reference ( PR, 1 8 1 ) .
   If there is a privi lege of consciousness, it does not consist in symbolic
reference, which is attested j ust as well by the way chi mpanzees scatter
when an alarm signal sounds. Nor even in the deliberate manipulation of
symbolic reference, as is attested by the extraordinary i nvention by that
chimpanzee, observed by ethologists, who prod uced cries of alarm, then
calmly went to fl irt with a female abandoned by her fleeing male. Con
sciousness is surely in command, however, when ethologists determine
what an animal's "symbolic reference " articulates, when they use lures
not to trap an animal and feed upon it, but to correctly identify what
percept is articulated with what a ffect. It is not that these scientists "es
cape " pragmatic j ustification. Yet in their case, success does not designate
a hunger to be assuaged , but their concern to separate what concerns the
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 5




animal from what they themselves feel . They a re not hungry, but are con
cerned for truth.
   The fact that the day of j udgment may a rrive-relative, of course, to
the formulation of a doubt-i mplies that symbol ic reference may be
ta ken up i nto new adventures. Pragmatist philosophers exaggerate when,
referring all our constructions to their success, they forget that we a re
also capa ble of putting these constructions deliberately to the test, that is,
of seeking other types of success. Factual truth, for Whitehead, counts in
a sense similar to the fallibilist sense of Popper: not because it opposes
error, but because it presupposes the explicit awareness that " we might
be wrong," which someti mes ma kes the " day of j udgment" happen.
   "It is only a theory, and it might be contrary to the facts " is a concern
proper to i ntellectual life. The experience of a di sappointed expectation,
or of an ambiguous sign that " attracts an animal's attention," ma kes it
turn its head, or prick up its ears i nstead of runn i ng away without fur
ther ado, a l ready exhi bits the feeling of a possi ble contrast between a
" theory" correlated to a percept that belongs to the " immed iately pres
ent" world, and this world i nsofa r as it is or is not capable of "causing"
that which, emotionally, the theory evokes: terror, attraction, a ppetite,
and so on. The head that turns, the ea rs that stand up testify to a possible
contrast, foreign to detection, between the world i n the "causa l " sense
and the " theory " that i nterprets it. But it does not testi fy to the fact that
the animal experi ences a feeling of the theory qua theory.
  But a felt "contrary " is consciousness in germ. When the contrasts and
identities of such feelings are themselves felt, we have consciousness. It is
the knowledge of ideas, in Locke's sense of that term. Consciousness re
quires more than the mere entertainment of theory. It is the feeling of the
contrast of theory, as mere theory, with fact, as mere fact. This contrast
holds whether or not the theory be correct ( PR, 1 8 8 ) .
   Consciousness, as the " feeling o f the contrast o f theory, a s mere theory,
with fact, as mere fact," is a l l the more important in that our genuine
" fortune," the multi tude of our interpretations" exposes human percep
tion to error. The two go together: this may be a reason why on the sixth
day, receiving language, which ma kes interpretations and significations
proliferate, we became souls, concerned with making a di fference be
tween the correct and the noncorrect.
   The link between consciousness and theory, felt "as mere theory," an
nounces, of course, the intervention of the propositions that Whitehead,
as we know, baptized " theories." And we may understand here that
propositions first intervened in Whi tehead's thought " a fter " judgment,
oriented toward the contrast between correct and incorrect. His goal was
4 0 6   COSMOLOGY




to emphasize that judgment constitutes only a sma l l part of i ntel lectua l
experience, and t o provide himself with the means t o venture toward
imagi native experience, in which consciousness really ma kes a d ifference
with regard to perceptive hesitations.
   For example, consider the Battle of Waterloo. This battle resulted in the
defeat of Napoleon, and in a constitution of our actual world grounded
upon that defeat. But the abstract notions, expressing the possibilities of
another course of history which would have followed upon his victory,
are relevant to the facts which actually happened. We may not think it of
practical importance that imaginative historians should dwell upon such
hypothetical alternatives. But we confess their relevance in thinking about
them at all, even to the extent of dismissing them. But some imaginative
writers do not dismiss such ideas. Thus, in our actual world of today, there
is a penumbra of eternal objects, constituted by relevance to the Battle of
Waterloo. Some people do admit elements from this penumbral complex
into effective feeling, and others wholly exclude them. Some are conscious
of this internal decision of admission or rejection; for others the ideas
float into their minds as day-dreams without consciousness of deliberate
decision; for others, their emotional tone, of gratification or regret, of
friendliness or hatred, is obscurely influenced by this penumbra of alterna
tives, without any conscious analysis of its content ( PR, 1 85 ) .
   Perceptive experience, even i f i t has symbolic reference a s its fortune,
and the fact that we may be mistaken as its concern, does not suffice to
describe our experience. It does not give meaning to the interest of the
Battle of Waterloo for those who l ive themselves as the hei rs of the his
tory i t has decided . The multiple ways we " feel " the past, be it i n the
mode of that which, settled once and for all, leaves us free in the face of
an indeterminate future, or i n that of a debt we wi l l never finish paying,
do not call for a del i berate, pragmatic putting-to-the-test. Whereas judg
ment seems to prepare the definition of truth i n the logical sense, the
imagi nation reflects the fact that theory cannot be felt as theory without
the truth, in a logical sense, being recognized as importa nt, to be sure,
but pertaining to an extremely specialized i nterest.
   In fact, propositions a pparently intervened i n Whitehead's thought in
the same sense as symbolic reference and j udgment, i n the conti nuation
of a battle agai nst a logicist approach to thought. More precisely, the point
was to show that the "theories" privileged by this approach, because they
designate a well-determi ned state of affairs, which might or might not
verify them, are characterized by the red undancy associated with sym
bol ic reference. Veri fication, in the logical empiricist sense, has as its
cond ition the definition of a state of affa i rs whose meanings have already
                                          A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 7




been chosen by symbol ic reference and considered as having successfully
surmounted the test of judgment. The " truth " of a statement such as
" Socrates is a man " does not raise the sl ightest problem : the statement
comes at the end of the reasoning process, making explicit what has been
decided well before it.
   It is merely credulous to accept verbal phrases as adequate statements of
propositions. The distinction between verbal phrases and complete propo
sitions is one of the reasons why the logicians' rigid alternative, "true or
false," is so largely irrelevant for the pursuit of knowledge ( PR, 1 1 ).
    Logicist philosophy a ssigns a primary importance to the question of
the correspondence between a statement and a sta te of a ffa i rs, confus
ing " verbal phrase " and proposition, that is, the possibi l i ty of syntacti
cally orga nizing a series of words in a way that m ight correspond to
a state of a ffa i rs, and the felt contrast of theory, as mere theory, with a
state of a ffa irs qua mere state of a ffairs. This is why it marks a clear
propensity to focus on chimerica l or fictive beings, or on offensive be
l iefs, which, defined i n a purely l i nguistic mode, cannot generate any
true hesita tion .
    In The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had a l ready d istinguished be
tween " demonstrative " and " descriptive " statements ( CN, 1 1-1 2 ) . A
purely demonstrative statement exhi bits the redundancy associated with
symbolic reference. I f I were to move, I could point out what I am tal king
about. In contrast, when I say that Homer is the a uthor of the Iliad, my
statement is descriptive, since we know nothing a bout him except that
fact. If, however, I am tal king about the Iliad, my statements will once
again be demonstrative to experts, for their experience wi ll integrate a
contrast between what I say and such-and-such an aspect of their own
reading experience. Yet the same might be true if I have read a novel or
seen a film i n which " Homer " was depicted so that I remember it as if I
had k nown him. The fact that this Homer is a fictional character matters
l ittle: what matters is the contrast between the descriptive mode of verbal
functioni ng, presenting itself as sel f-sufficient, and the demonstrative
one, in which words activate symbol ic reference.
   The point to be emphasized is the insistent particularity of things expe
rienced and of the act of experiencing. Bradley's doctrine-Wolf-eating
Lamb as a universal qualifying the absolute-is a travesty of the evidence.
That wolf eat that lamb at that spot at that time: the wolf knew it; the
lamb knew it; and the carrion birds knew it. Explicitly in the verbal sen
tence, or implicitly in the understanding of the subject entertaining it,
every expression of a proposition includes demonstrative elements. In
fact each word, and each symbolic phrase, is such an element, exciting
4 0 8   COSMOLOGY




the conscious prehension of some entity belonging to one of the catego
ries of existence ( PR, 43 ) .
   Any verbal statement may function i n the mode o f a l ure for feeling,
but a statement is incapable of defining how it will function. Thus, the
very famous statement " this stone is grey " may be prod uced in the a b
sence of any stone, especially if it has been uttered in front of an audience
of logico-empi ricist philosophers . Perhaps in the same discussion, the
statement " the king of France is bald " will sound forth, or " the moon is
a piece of white cheese," unless discussion turns to unicorns. The possi
bil ity of tal k i ng a bout a unicorn, a bout a k i ng of Fra nce today, a bout
a celestia l white cheese or a n a bsent grey stone i mplies that the corre
sponding statements are not to be confused with the expression of prop
ositions. Even fiercely Republican Frenchmen can hear tal k a bout the
" present king of France " without flinching, if they are logicians. Nor do
these statements i nd icate a ny particular urgency with regard to the dis
tinction to be made between what has never existed, wha t no longer ex
ists, what is defi ned as false, and what is stil l available for designation.
There is no hurry, beca use everybody knows a bout that. The only ques
tion is how best to formulate th is d ifference generaliter.
   In other words, if the sta tement " this stone is grey " can " work " in this
case, if it does not i nspire astonished looks on the faces of the l isteners
as they wonder what stone the speaker could possi bly be talking a bout, it
is because its production, in this mode, has a very particular environment
as its condition. "This stone," perhaps placed in contrast to " this unicorn,"
presupposes the existence of the community of specialists for whom the
contrast is a watchword, causing no unease, inspiring no worry, no thought:
pure communication, fully belonging to the routines of logicism. Neither
the stone nor its color is of interest to the specialists, but only the way
thei r attention may eventually be attracted to new formulations, impor
tant for them, of the relation between language and states of affairs. The
statement itself is often nothing more than the signal that the community
has to deal with one of its favorite problems, and the specialists will wait
patiently for the eventual appearance of what Whitehead would call
genuine propositions, which will sed uce or horrify them, or at least give
rise to the feeling of a possi ble contri bution to a controversy, or a con
trast, with regard to the state of affairs that constitutes the consensus of
the community.
   A vague impression of uneasiness, of a " felt contrary," on the part of
one of the specialists l istening to a col league talking about the grey stone.
Is the specialist conscious, or not ? The matter is undecidable, si nce the
mere fact that she asks hersel f the question will produce consciousness
                                            A N D   THEY   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 0 9




and i ts verification : " I heard what was just said, therefore I was con
scious." In contrast, the question of consciousness no longer arises if our
specialist's body suddenly freezes, while the diffuse uneasiness is trans
formed into the feeling of a contrast between a statement heard and wha t
becomes a " fact." A specific aspect of H ume's position, which she had
perhaps never thought of explicitly i n that way, has become relevant in
that it contrad icts the statement she has j ust heard . The sta tement has
done its job as a l ure : listening has become fully conscious, with each new
statement nourishing a process of verification of disagreement, while the
renewed understanding of Hume becomes ever more explicit, prod uced in
a way that did not exist prior to the disagreement, in a way that perhaps
comes into existence for the first time. An epochal change.
   Here we must pa use, for the contrast I have just described leads us to
associate propositions and thought, or consciousness, in a specific way.
This, i ndeed , is how Whitehead first introd uces them. But when, in the
third part of Process and Reality, which is devoted to the " theory of pre
hensions," he moves on to generic considerations, independent of our
particular modes of functioning, the contrast between conscious thought
and symbolic reference will disa ppear. This contrast belongs to social
adventures that designate us i n our di fference from ra bbits . O ther forms
of experience, assigning other degrees of i mporta nce, might a lso have
been conceivable. It is possi ble, for i nsta nce, to imagine bei ngs endowed
with another kind of memory, for whom an experienced scene imposes
itself with the vivid ness of the present, and who use words as markers,
not as "endowed with meani ng." It would then be the word that would
be associated with the past, with a past classificatory convention, and
that should be evoked . The association between proposition and verbal
consciousness is i mporta nt, to be sure, but it should not be exaggerated .
   When Whitehead i ntroduces propositions in a generic mode, he wil l
introduce them in relation t o " propositional feeli ngs," a n d these w i l l con
cern both the routine use of words and words that turn an experience
upside down: both the rabbit head i ng as usual for his lair and the one that
flees when the silhouette of a predator suddenly appears. In short, propo
sitions wil l no longer intervene in the discussion of the contrast between
" symbol ism" and "conscious thought." The question wil l be generalized
to the role played by a proposi tional feeling in the experience of which it
is an ingredient.
   In order to reca ll the former distinction, I will cal l " propositional effi
cacy " the capacity of a propositional feeling to make a path of occasions
bifurcate, to " mark an event " or to " mark an epoch." The di fference is, of
course, hard to discern, si nce as soon as I evoke " the Battle of Waterloo "
4 1 0   C O S M O LOGY




as an example of what might be, i n certain experiences, bereft of any
efficacy, I feel that efficacy. The di fference i s thus relative to a " social en
vironment," not to the "propositional feeling " as such . On the other hand,
this d ifference also concerns the rabbit with its perceptive habits, the al
fal fa field, the rabbit hole, a familiar tree, and the efficacy upon i t of the
sudden noise or of a sil houette appearing unexpected ly. The d ifference, in
this case, is crucial for survival: it designates the rabbit "on the watch,"
" always ready to flee."
   The point is not to affirm that every occasion is susceptible of admit
ting " propositional feelings." What is at stake certainly concerns the rab
bit, probably not the electron . But it does impose a certain correction of
the excess subjectivity associated with consciousness. We are so perme
ated by the opposition between objective statement and fiction that we
must evoke decisive i ntellectual experiences- " but that isn't what Hume
says! "-to make recognizable the efficacy proper to language, its func
tion as a " l ure for feeling." We need to recal l that there are " words that
kil l " and " words that change everythi ng." Yet once propositional efficacy
has been recognized , it must be situated , and it must be admitted that the
" propositional feeli ng " to which it testi fies is j ust as relevant where we
evoke habits of experience, that is, in any case, for the totality of experi
ences marked by awareness, or the contrast between what we are aware
of in perception and what we perceive. In this case, of course, theory is
not felt as theory, but a habit does constitute a " theory."
   Whitehead 's discovery of the general iza ble character of propositional
feeli ng, that is, of propositions qua l ure for feeling, was no doubt one of
the events that ma rked the writi ng of Process and Reality. As usual, he
did not note the event, a nd left it up to the reader to d raw all the conse
quences. This may be the reason why propositions are rather neglected i n
Whiteheadian studies. Yet the style of this event is typically Whitehead 
ian. When, in The Concept of Nature, Whitehead had dissociated recog
nition from any psychological or neurophysiological discussion, rather
add ressing what it requi res, the object that is there "once again," he had
already placed the Platonic "great question," the one that permits the in
vocation of the Ideas, under the banner of the greatest genera l ity. Here,
the generality that propositional feelings wi ll al low us to conceive is the
difference between the cases that Whitehead groups as " primitive," i n
which t h e categories of transmission a n d transmutation suffice, that is,
in which " conformal " reprod uction predominates, and the cases i n which
partiality matters, and we are led to speak of " recognition," of " i nterpre
tation," and even of origi nality and novel ty. This is the generality White
head had designated when, in Science and the Modern World, he distin-
                                            A N D   THEY   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 1 1




guished between " physical " occasions and " mental " occa sions. I n Process
and Reality, every occasion has officially received a menta l pole, and the
genera lity m ust be reformulated . It is needed in order to express the
rather radica l contrast between the electron and the physicists who dem
onstrated the existence of the electron.
  The low-grade organism is merely the summation of the forms of
energy which flow in upon it in all their multiplicity of detail. It re
ceives, and it transmits, but it fails to simplify into intelligible system
( PR, 254 ) .
   The proposition will thus henceforth b e li nked to the question o f a b
straction as such, an a bstraction that is not in the first instance cognitive,
nor linguistic, for it a lready designates the " what" of perception, that is,
the meaning associated with a symbol ic reference as wel l. Accord ing to
Leibniz, it is preferable to hear Socrates tell why he is drinking the hem
lock, rather than to describe in all their details the corporeal, muscular, and
physiological movements that would ( ideally) reduce his gesture, from the
cup to the l ips, to the result of " physical causes." For Whitehead, even if it
were completely described, Socrates' gesture could never be ana lyzed i n
terms o f " i mpartial " causes. Yet this only enriches the Leibnizian contrast:
in a ny case, being able to listen to Socrates' reasons constitutes a very
fortunate simplification, and any simplification, fortunate or unfortunate,
has its reason . This reason refers to the ingression of an eternal object into
a feeling, in a mode associated with a selective and partial " how," a b
stracting from what does not matter to it.
   With propositions, then, eternal objects will intervene in a way that is
new, but as always perfectly d istinct from the one they have been sus
pected of playing as Platonic ideas in d isguise. Their ingression will be
synonymous with novelty, originality, and partiality. Transmutation, which
                                                              °
conditions perception, signals a new mode of ingression for an eternal ob
ject, but it cannot give meaning to the fact that " what is transmuted " may
be endowed as such with a meaning, even with the simplest " being there."
As for the suddenly perceived predator, it is not a simple contrasting com
position of colored patches " over there." The colored " nexus," coexisting
with the other components of my world in the indifferent mode proper to
presentational i mmed iacy, has suddenly been transformed into a testi
mony to their active cond ition: "it's a tiger! " In The Concept of Nature,
Whitehead could only emphasize the importance of active conditions, the
attention due to the role they play, for to go further would have required
questioning the mind, which was the ultimate. Here, however, the sudden
attention to what actively conditions this colored contrast reflects the fact
that the eternal object that makes ingression with a proposition is new
4 1 2       C O S M O LOGY




with regard to physical feelings, which wil l henceforth be defined as the
"subjects of the proposition."
   In fact, when Whitehead introd uces propositions with the status of
existents, his first problem wi ll be to distinguish them from eternal ob
jects . Every time he had evoked a concrete case requiring eternal objects,
it was to an experience, of which a propositional feel i ng is an ingredient,
that he had referred . "This is a circle." The major contrast defined by
Whitehead between eternal objects and propositions is that, whereas
eternal objects say nothing a bout their ingressions, propositions
   [ . 1 are the tales that might perhaps be told about particular actuali
        .   .



ties ( PR, 256 ) .
   Eternal objects are " pure " potentials, that i s , without particular refer
ence to any actuality, any particular epoch. This is why conceptua l feel
ings belong to any concrescence. In particular, they are required so that
from physical feelings may derive feelings of " how" what was felt was
felt. This means, correlatively, that they do not communicate as such with
any particular experience, whether conscious or not. We never have the
experience of an eternal object as such, for every experience is always
"such-and-such " an experience, whereas the eternal object refers to " any"
experience.
   In contrast, every proposition is " i mpure," requiring the cosmic epoch
in which the subjects of the stories that " might be tol d " exist. The color
blue requires visual organs, at the least. Even a mathematical truth, such
as " one plus one equals two," is l inked to a cosmic epoch, Whitehead
specifies, an epoch in which there exist societies enduring enough for the
notion of two bei ngs existing " at the same time " to have meaning.
   There is no difficulty in imagining a world-i.e., a cosmic epoch-in
which arithmetic would be an interesting fanciful topic for dreamers, but
useless for practical people engrossed in the business of life. In fact, we
seem to have been only barely rescued from such a state of things. For
amid the actual occasions located in the wilds of so-called "empty space,"
and well removed from the enduring objects which go to form the endur
ing material bodies, it is quite probable that the contemplation of arith
metic would not direct attention to any very important relations of things.
It is, of course, a mere speculation that any actual entity, occurring in such
an environment of faintly coordinated achievement, achieves the intricacy
of constitution required for conscious mental operations ( PR, 1 99 ) .
   Whitehead defi nes a second i mportant contrast between eternal ob
jects and propositions, or, more precisely, a contrast that gives impor
tance to the " perhaps" that appears in the first contrast, the tales that
might perhaps be tol d. Unlike eternal objects, which cannot be said to be
                                             A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U LS   4 1 3




true or false, it belongs to the definition of proposition to have to be
" true" or " false."
  But its own truth, or its own falsity, is no business of a proposition.
That question concerns only a subject entertaining a propositional feel
ing with that proposition for its datum ( PR, 25 8 ) .
   I t i s crucial to emphasize that the proposition i n itself ca nnot b e said to
be true or fa lse, any more than the eternal objects: in itself, it is indetermi
na te with regard to the way it wi ll be entertai ned . As a lure-" what might
be " sa id, or felt, about particular actual entities-it raises a question. It is
the decision with regard to the fact that the proposition will or will not be
realized, whether or not the correspond ing propositional feeling will be
an i ngredient of the entity's final satisfaction, that determines the " truth " of
the proposition. The role that propositional feeling will play, the meaning
that will be associated with it, the decision concerning the " might be," also
depends on the prehend ing subject of the proposition.
   Quite obviously, the truth of a proposition has nothi ng to do with logic.
Logical truth belongs to consciousness, and we cannot ha ve consciousness
of the i ngredients of our satisfactions. Nor does this truth designate the
question of "attention to truth." A proposition, true because its feeling is
the ingred ient of an experience, may nevertheless be entertained in the
mode of derision: "No, you idiot, we're in Africa: that's not a tiger, it's a
zebra." The negation, as wel l as the affirmation, i mply the entertainment or
realiza tion of a proposition. Entertai nment merely means that the entities
designated as its subjects by the proposition actually assume, in a feeling
that is an i ngredient of the entity's satisfaction, the role that the proposi
tion assigns to them. Again, however, the role that the feeling will play in
satisfaction is not itself determined .
   The primary mode of realization of a proposition in an actual entity is
not by judgment, but by entertainment. A proposition is entertained when
it is admitted into feeling. Horror, relief, purpose, are primarily feelings
involving the entertainment of propositions ( PR, 1 8 8 ) .
   The truth o f a proposition thus corresponds, more o r less, to the mean
i ng " true" that Wi lliam James associated with pure experience: it is an
ad herence. But ad herence m ust be separated from any psychologica l con
notation. One adheres as soon as what is proposed " ma kes sense," inde
pendently of the mea ning that wi l l be conferred upon it. The pigeo n that
learns to tap with its bea k on a circular form in order to be fed no doubt
" entertains" a proposition, i n the mode of a purpose. With propositions,
Whitehead thus has the means to a ffirm the inadequate character of any
description that would place perception under the banner of neutral i ty.
Any " objective " concrete perception presupposes that a propositional
4 1 4   C O S M O LOGY




feeling has been entertained , that the proposition is " true," but the enter
taining of a proposition makes it a " l ure" for other feelings: it " makes
one feel," and always in a determinate mode.
   Horror, rel ief, and purpose all imply " bod ily life," the causal efficacy
associated with the body. Are we committi ng an inj ustice against the but
terfly, or on the contrary doing justice to its d ifference, if, refusing per
ception to it, we refuse it a propositional purpose, relief, or horror ? And
what about the eye that blinks when l ightning flashes ? That hesitation
which speculative phi losophy can make explicit, but not, quite obviously,
decide, will i ntervene every ti me a being, unlike an electron or a falling
stone, exhi bits a partiality that seems to have to be associated with an
experience entertaining a proposition, but we lack any imagi native ac
cess with regard to that experience. What properly characterizes detec
tion is "I cannot imagine " : I can, of course, evoke i ncoercible nausea, but
this is precisely the contrary of an i mage.
   Propositional feelings are not, however, specifically a l l ied with what
we can imagi ne, any more than conceptua l feeling are. Instead, proposi
tions are closely linked to what Whitehead generically calls " originality."
Their feeling is the capture of a particular-that is, partia l-relation be
tween felt entities, and more precisely the capture of those entities qua
articulated by a particular relation .
   In the proposition, the eternal object, in respect to its possibilities as a
determinant of nexus, is restricted to these logical subjects [ . . . I this
eternal object is the "predicative pattern " of the proposition [ . . . I thus
the physical feeling indicates the logical subjects and provides them re
spectively with that individual definition necessary to assign the hypo
thetic status of each in the predicative pattern. The conceptual feeling
provides the predicative pattern (PR, 257-25 8 ) .
    Like all feelings, propositional feelings derive from a n integration be
tween conceptual feelings and physica l feel ings, but in this case concep
tual feel ings and physical feelings are articulated in a new way, which
could be associated with a " mobil ization." The question is no longer
" how" to feel, but it also bears upon " what" is felt. The proposi tion sig
ni fies that the " how," of which the ingression of an eternal object is a
determination, now designates particular " l ogical subjects." Proposi
tional feelings eliminate from physica l feeling everything that exceeds the
role of logical subject, which felt entities are cal led upon to play. Even if
it means, of course, that what is elimi nated becomes the su bject of other
feelings, which can create the kind of dramatic contrast accord ing to
which " the word is the murder of the thing."
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 1 S




   In a proposition the logical subjects are reduced to the status of food
for a possibility. Their real role in actuality is abstracted from; they are
no longer factors in fact, except for the purpose of their physical indica
tion. Each logical subject becomes a bare " i t " among actualities, with its
assigned hypothetical relevance to the predicate ( PR, 25 8 ) .
   The difficulty raised in Science and the Modern World by the question
of whether eternal objects might not ultimately be " what" is prehended ,
tra nsforming actuality i nto a k i nd of ra tification of the ideal situation,
i s thus solved . The brea king off ( SMW, 1 7 1 ) that Whitehead associated
with " menta l " experience is none other than the pred icative pattern, and
it does not need to refer to a principle of limitation: it is l i mited, and may
infect experience with limitation. The modes of experience that give pri
macy to the a bstraction ( for instance, that of presentational immediacy ),
correspond quite precisely to the working of a propositiona l feeling.
What is felt is literally placed in the service of the predicative pattern; it
is henceforth felt only as what this pattern ind icates as its terms. The
proposition is the vector of a bstraction.
    When the cry "a tiger! " marks the horrified entertainment of a new
proposi tion in perceptive experience, the delicate contrasts between col
ors are eliminated , the colored patch is no longer anything more than a
logical subject. Yet, of course, the possibility of such a logical subject be
longs to the epoch when animals endowed with perception came into
existence on earth. Otherwise, the proposition would litera lly " have no
meaning." When John the Baptist proposes that God could transform
even the stones themselves into the children of Abra ham, the stones that
the prophet was probably designating did not tremble with hope; their
endura nce as stones was not d isturbed, for the logica l subjects with which
the problem of belonging to the people of God arises were not incl uded in
their experience. For them, the statement of the problem has no meaning.
Its efficacy is restricted to those who could say to themselves with regard
to themselves: "am I, or could I become, a subject of election? " In fact,
the very gesture that designates the stones excludes them . They are logical
subjects of the proposition, in the sense that they a re bereft of everything
that makes them real stones. "Even stones!" None of the fea tures that
characterize the chosen people as the logical subject of the proposition of
covenant constitutes a guara ntee any longer, except perhaps endurance.
  Evidently new propositions come into being with the creative advance of
the world. For every proposition involves its logical subjects; and it can not
be the proposition which it is, unless those logical subjects are the actual
entities which they are. Thus no actual entity can feel a proposition, if its
4 1 6   COSMOLOGY




actual world does not include the logical subjects of that proposition.
The proposition " Caesar crossed the R ubicon " could not be felt by
Hannibal in any occasion of his existence on earth. Hannibal could feel
propositions with certain analogies to this proposition, but not this prop
osition ( PR, 259).
    One might as well be talking to a stone! This is the desperate exclama
tion of a mathematics teacher when a student does not prod uce the "[ get
it " that signa ls the entertainment of the propositional feeling required by
mathematical definitions, even though they appear fully expl icit to the
teacher. Mathematical language, by the spectacular contrast between its
intel ligibi lity, when the logical subjects of a proposition belong to the
experience of the person who hears a statement, and the radica l perplex
ity of the person for whom " that makes no sense," strongly exhibits the
relation between propositions and the creative advance of the worl d . Yet
it ca n be said, more generally, that it is the proper character of all lan
guage to give their ful l importance to propositions, not insofar as they
themselves have the power to ca use, in the sense of the ontological prin
ciple, but i n that their entertainment l ures us into feeling, thinking, speak 
i ng, in short, becomes, in the most various ways, a n ingred ient o f the
experiences that will fol low it.
   What we ca l l " memory " or " image " are, of course, saturated with
propositions. During his multiple expeditions to many lands, Caesar had
the opportu nity to cross many rivers, but we remember that " Caesar
crossed the Rubicon," and if we remember this, it is because when he and
his soldiers, ful ly armed, crossed this river (which no Roman army could
cross on pain of bei ng declared outlaws), they knew they were crossing
" the Rubicon " : not a mere river, but a frontier/image that made them
topple into an unforeseeable future. This is why the Rubicon was " what
had been crossed " for all the soldiers, right from the first step taken by
Caesar's horse. As far as the physical ad venture of the encounter with the
cold water of the river is concerned , it does not belong to the proposi
tiona l image, except, perhaps, in the personal experience of a soldier, or
for a novel ist who might evoke the episode under the banner, for instance,
of the contrast between the greatness of the moment and the prosaic char
acter of the sensation.
  One of Caesar's old soldiers may in later years have sat on the bank of
the river and meditated on the assassination of Caesar, and on Caesar's
passage over the little river tranquilly flowing before his gaze. This would
have been a different proposition from the more direct one which [ am
now considering. Nothing could better illustrate the hopeless ambiguity
of language; since both propositions {it the same verbal phraseology.
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 1 7




There is yet a third proposition: a modern traveler sitting on the ban k of
the Rubicon, and meditating on his direct perceptions of actual occasions
can locate. relatively to himself by spatio-temporal specifica tions, an
event which inferentially and conjecturally he believes to include a por
tion of the past history of the Rubicon as directly known to him [ . . . 1
Then there is the proposition which m ight have been in the mind of one
of the crowd who listened to Antony's speech, a man who had seen
Caesar and not the Rubicon ( PR, 1 96 ) .
   Every proposition, o f course, i s abstract, even the one that incl udes a s
its logical subject a " Caesa r " whom the soldier sitting beside the river had
known well, even the one that ma kes Caesar hi mself think, "I, Caesar,
have crossed the Rubicon," although his horse has barely begun its move
ment. Yet abstraction explains nothing. On the contrary, it is the proposi
tion's regime of existence, the feeling of which it is the object, and the role
this feel ing wil l play in experience, that decide upon the abstraction and
its role, even the simple descriptive statement that may float in school
time memory: " Caesar, that was the guy who crossed the Rubicon . . . " Is
the statement still a lure for feeling? The question has become undecid
able, in the sense that the proposition's efficacy, what it lures to, no longer
implies the risk taken by Caesar, any more than " the moon is made of
white cheese " implies an epoch when moon and white cheese were food
for a proposition that designates and articulates them. Dead a bstractions
of scholastic knowledge, or of the "cases " of ana lytic philosophy.
   With language, the proposi tional efficacy " Caesar has crossed the
Rubicon! The times are changing, and nothing will be as before! " is ex
hibited, as well as red undant routine. But language does much more than
" express " an epoch, that is, a society and the logica l subjects that are
part of a n experience qua socia l . It is itself the operator of changes of
epoch, on every scale. Such is, ultimately, the reason why we became
souls when we recei ved language. And what we call " souls " must there
fore designate the multiple epochs that a re entangled in a human person.
The soul has no other identity than the propositional efficacies to which
the innumerable habits of a particular human experience are vulnerable.
Yet nei ther this multitude nor the vul nera bi l i ty itself designates " lan
guage " as such, but each language, what makes sense for each language,
what another la nguage is often unable to translate.
   Mathematics teachers must trust " mathematical language " qua trans
lata ble i nto a l l la nguages . This is why they persevere, hoping that their
statement, in one of its particular versions, or else the effect of the con
trasting succession of such versions will bring a bout a change of epoch
for the student, the correlative rea lization of the logical subjects and of
4 1 8   COS M O LOGY




propositional feeli ng, "So that's what you meant! " As far as John the
Baptist is concerned , he speculated on the propositional efficacy of his
furious and oh-so-e1oquent gesture: "Even the stones! " This gesture pre
supposed an epoch, that is, auditors whose language presupposes the
possibility of enterta ining the proposition that ma de them the logical
subjects of the covena nt. For this is what would make them vulnerable to
the propositional efficacy of the proposed modi fication, of the i nclusion
of new logica l subjects in the proposition "covenant," of the incl usion of
anyone at a l l ! And all those who " heard " the prophetic excla mation ad
hered, were infected, even i f some of them su bsequently refuted the state
ment, shrugged thei r shoulders, and forgot. The proposition is indi fferent
to its consequences, it does not say how it should be felt, and obviously,
not every enterta inment signifies a change of epoch, even at the level of
an individual thread of experience. Nevertheless, the fact that the prophet
himself could utter this terri ble statement is inseparable from the voca
tion he enterta ined for it, a vocation which presupposes that, sharing the
sa me language with his auditors, he was addressing their "soul." He in
tended to make an epoch topple, to infect with a previously i nconceiv
able alternative the experience of the proposition that ma kes the Jewish
people the subject of the covenant.
   In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead had made what he cal led
"abrupt realization " the source of error, truth, a rt, ethics, and religion. He
takes up this passage explicitly in Process and Reality, while stating the
importance of propositions ( PR, 1 8 9 ) . When Whitehead cites himself, it is
not to cover his tracks, to create the impression of a false unity, but, quite
the contrary, to celebrate a reunion: not with hi mself, but with what had
already obliged him to think. He succeeded in "saving " a statement, as a
mathematician must save, in the new formal language that he explores, all
the relevant mathematical truths already acquired. In this case, then,
" propositions " enable Whitehead to recuperate the thesis of the " great re
fusal " for which, in Science and the Modern World, he had needed God .
   The abrupt rea lization of Science and the Modern World had been
placed under the banner of li mitation. To the i mporta nce of propositions
" rendered not true" by a decision corresponded the necessity of an ab
straction bearing upon what is actually decided . What Caesar's decision,
when crossi ng the Rubicon, renders " not true " must be li mited; otherwise,
his decision could be assimilated to the behavior of an electron, blind with
regard to what " really" determines it and to its many repercussions. As I
have emphasized , it is i mpossible to know whether Whitehead had taken
the measure of the risk he was running by ma king God intervene as a
principle of limitation . The undecida ble character of the question il lus-
                                           A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U LS   4 1 9




trates, moreover, the abrupt character of real ization: " what seems to you
to be an impl icit consequence of my position, you may of course make
me admit it, a nd you can even make me admit that I 'should have' k nown
it, and even, i f you are in the mood for torturing, that I in fact knew it;
but whatever I may be led to admit subsequently, the fact is that I had
perceived my position, or the problem, in that way and not otherwise." In
any case, the risk has henceforth been avoided . The propositions ren
dered " not true " by a decision are significant insofar as a nother decision
might, socially, have made them true. Did Caesar render " not true " the
propositions that woul d have l ured him i nto submission to the Senate or
into flight, consideri ng the offensive character of the act he was commit
ting? Or did he just decide to cross the river i n spite of them? Error, truth,
art, ethics, and rel igion are so many examples exhibiting propositional
efficacy i n conscious adventures marked by risk, the possibility of fai lure,
and the explicit cal l upon the future.
   When, i n the eighteenth century, the new proposition resounded : " a l l
men a re equal i n right " (and not: a l l a r e equally the children of God ),
what was a ffirmed was the risk taken with regard to social states of a f
fai rs, a nd it was the future that was appealed to. This mea ns, more tech
nical ly, that it was i ndeed the future that was to be infected. Those who
would actually be i n fected by it might very wel l deny human equal i ty,
limit its import to specific circumstances, negotiate its consequences,
ra ise its problem. Nevertheless, if they are truly infected, if they belong to
that epoch in which this proposition makes sense, the equality that desig
nates all men as its logical subjects will be included in their experience,
by way of contrast, when the word " ma n " or " huma n " is pronounced. It
will be, in this sense, " true."
   It is here that the " scars " ( PR, 226-227 ) left by what negative prehen
sions have eliminated take on a l l their importa nce. I am not speaking of
the " rendered not-true " that is a positive, conscious part of experience
but of the many repercussions of the abstraction that are part of propo
sitional efficacy-what is described a fterward by means of sentences
such as "they should have known that . . . " or "how could they not under
stand that . " The " emotional tone " associated with sca rs l i nks the
            .   .



Whiteheadian notion of epoch to a rad ical historicism: the adventure of
propositions " makes an epoch," but the way it ma kes an epoch al lows us
to understand that those who refute a statement a re j ust as m uch part of
the same " history " as those who a ffirm it or as those who echo the inter
stitial expression of what has been rendered not-true.
   Oliver Cromwell's cry echoes down the ages, "My brethren, by the bow
els of Christ I beseech you, bethink that you may he mistaken " (SMW, 1 6 ) .
4 2 0   COSMOLOGY




   The obstinate insistence of a realized propos ition is obviously neutral
with regard to the di fference between good and evi l . If the proposition
" a l l men are equal i n right" opens up new possibil ities of evil on the part
of those who reject it, it also opens such possi bil ities for those who re
ceive it in a positive sense. For once a propositional feel i ng has infected
experience, nothing is harder to imagine than that experience might not
entertai n it. There will be evi l consequences of the revolt of a furious
mathematics teacher i n front of her student, " deaf as a stone." This is
why a lso it is so easy to " transcend one's epoch." From the d i fficulty each
of us has in accepting that the way we think and feel belongs to an epoch
may well follow "they are all racists without even knowing it! " uttered
agai nst those who do not belong to our particular epoch, in which each
person is supposed to be the logical subject for a proposition of equality.
Those who ad here can then become " hogs," that is, transform the pro
posed equa l i ty i nto a vector of legiti mate destruction, j udging " the
others " qua needing, voluntarily or by force, to be educated toward the
universal . Rendering " non-true " (/ know, but still!) the propositions deal
ing with the historica l character of equality between men, they a re the
designated prey for the trick of evil.
   We require to understand how the unity of the universe requires its
multiplicity. We require to understand how infinitude requires the finite.
We require to understand how each immediately present existence re
quires its past, antecedent to itself; and requires its future, an essential
factor in its own existence [ . . . I Again we require to understand how
mere matter-of-fact refuses to be deprived of its relevance to potentiali
ties beyond its own actuality of realization ( MT, 8 3 ) .
    Propositional efficacy i s obviously required b y speculative philosophy,
whose speculation dea ls precisely with the possibility of " leaps of the
imagination," without which its statements would not make sense. O f
course, every statement is saturated with abstractions, a n d every abstrac
tion, of course, works as a " lu re for feeling," demand ing, in order to as
sume meani ng, an entertainment that it does not explain. Yet it is the
singularity of speculative abstractions to exhi bit this demand. " Social
abstractions " translate symbolic references that are rel atively stable, and
propose themselves most often as designating a state of affai rs or as de
riving from consensual obviousness . John the Baptist's prophetic state
ment speculates on a change of epoch, but he was careful not to announce
it; otherwise, that statement would be enterta ined as a witty remark or a
" mere speculation." Speculative a bstractions, for their part, wager on the
interstices of our social a bstractions, not to disqualify them but in order
to activate what lurks in these interstices, the " feeling " of the abstraction
                                            A N D   T H E Y   B E C A M E   S O U L S   4 2 1




as such . They are meant to disclose misplaced abstractions and their
pow er, a power that may infect us to the point that we can read, with a
stra ight face, that it is the sequential association between the lightning
and the blinking of the eyes that makes us conclude that the l ightning is
cause of the blinking .
    With the existents known as propositions, then, Whitehead h a s pro
vided himself with the means for speculative philosophy to account for
what is required by the efficacy it cla ims. A verita ble " machi ne" for sug
gesting " non-conforma l " propositional feelings, it is " epocha l," of course,
because the propositional efficacy i t aims at designates the socia l ab
stractions of a language which, in multiple ways, has stabil ized the bi
furcation of nature. Its effects on di fferent readers, who would not be
infected by these abstractions, a re unpred icta ble. Yet we can spea k of
it as i f it were a language, i n the same sense as the mathematica l or
physico-mathematical languages. Like them, it exhibits abstraction:
Whitehead ian " applications" a re abstract language machines that make
the routine dimension of verbal statements, thei r redundancy with regard
to perceived things, shrink to a minimum, and deploy propositional effi
cacy to the maximum.
    Yet propositions open up sti ll other questions. In particular, they may
entail a new flight of experience toward the "order of nature," which has
become a "cosmos," and open up some hypotheses with regard to the
" l ure for feeling" provided for each entity by " God."
    The fact that propositions can play so many roles, in so many ques
tions, is a good indication that their entertainment, or what Whitehead
calls their " truth," is neutral with regard to their meaning. It is the role
pla yed by the propositional feeling in satisfaction that is not neutra l, and
is never neutra l . Making sense is neutra l, but it ca lls for a signification
that is never such . A proposi tional feeling is, therefore, somewhat l i ke
the conceptual feeling of those eterna l objects called " sensa," eminently
available for the most disparate experiences. Unlike a sensum, a proposi
tion is always relative to an epoch, but once that epoch is given, it may be
engaged in the most diversified adventures or, more precisely, the most
divergent ones.
    Another way of talking about " what makes sense " is to say " that's
relevant." And releva nce is always what Whitehead has associated with
God. Divine intervention-the a nswer to the question "what is the best
(or this impasse? "-is certainly not thereby clarified, but the concept of a
proposition already creates the necessa ry distance between envisaging
and actua lizing. If God 's answer is propositiona l, it is indeterminate with
rega rd to the way i t will be " enterta i ned " by final satisfaction or even to
4 2 2   COSMOLOGY




whether, i n the final a na lysis, it will be entertai ned at a l l . And this i nde
terminacy is definitiona l : if it is a divine proposition that initiates the
subjective aim of a concrescence, God does not precede actuality, does
not enterta i n an idea l conception of what it shou ld prod uce, a nd there
fore will not judge it by the sta ndard of that conception. Here, the term
" relevant " takes on its fully conjectural and limited value, thanks to which
an occasion is i ndeed an " occasion," a singular moment, not a simple as
pect of the world as it would be envisaged by God . What Whitehead a f
firmed, without qu ite being able to j ustify it, in Science and the Modern
World, can now be understood : only actuality is value.
    As for the efficacy proper to propositions for what Whitehead ca lls
"cosmos " or " creative advance of nature," Process and Reality remains
silent on the subject. Whitehead did not even find it appropriate to return
to the set of texts written about perception before he ela borated the con
cept of propositiona l feeling. As Lewis Ford remarks, Whitehead was
much more concerned with the difficulties of his theories than with the
explanation of what no longer seemed to him to pose problems.
    I sha l l therefore try, before finally turning to God, to render explicit cer
ta in "cosmic" perspectives opened up by propositions, making use above
all of Modes of Thought ( 1 938), Whitehead's last book. In this work, we
no longer rea d of eternal objects or of propositions. Not that White
head had (once aga i n ) cha nged his position : quite the contra ry, this is
an i nstance of the freedom of an author who has henceforth gained the
freedom to address questions that are concrete-that is, by definition,
"sociologica l " ---co ncerning societies and i mplying trad itions of thought.
Whereas eternal objects a nd propositions belong to the metaphysics of
actual occasions, our modes of thought, for their part, bring to the fore
front imaginative adventures centered on what matters to us. Yet the
penumbra of metaphysical propositions wi ll make itself felt in the way the
question of the bifurcation of nature will be taken up once again: Modes of
Thought is the most poetical of Whitehead's works. The point is no longer
to resist or to a ffirm, but to celebrate what metaphysics has allowed to be
constructed, the fact that " nothing can be explained as normal."
                                                  C H A P TER TWENT Y - T H REE




Modes of Existence, Modes of Thought




          MPORTANCE IS PRIMARILY
      I
                                      monistic in its reference to the Uni
        verse. Importance, limited to a finite individual occasion, ceases to
        be important. In some sense or other, Importance is derived from
the immanence of infinitude in the finite.
   But Expression is founded on the finite occasion. It is the activity of
finitude impressing itself on its environment. Thus it has its origin in the
finite; and it represents the immanence of the finite in the multitude of its
fellows beyond itself. The two together, namely Importance and Expres
sion, are witnesses both to the monistic aspect of the universe and to its
pluralistic character. Importance passes from the World as one to the World
as many; whereas, Expression is the gift from the World as many to the
World as one ( MT, 20).
   Expression, i n Modes of Thought, actively requires t h e tw o meanings
we can give it, designating subjective satisfaction as a final decision-thus
and not otherwise-and as a decision for one future i nstead of another. It
is that which will make itself felt, that which, in one way or a nother, will
have to be taken i nto account. It does not, therefore, by any means desig
nate the Leibnizian idea that a subject expresses " the" world, in the sense
of being its reflection, deduci ble from a certai n viewpoint. Whitehead's
association between expression and "gift" rather brings to mind the way
Wi l l iam James characterizes the " chance act " : Its origin is in a certain
fashion negative: it escapes, and says, Hands off! coming, when it co mes,
as a free gift or not at all (DD, 1 54 ) . Individual satisfaction fashions its
own perspective, its own divergence, and as such it will give to the wo rl d
the gift of a new expression of itsel f, of what might perhaps make a
di fference.
4 2 4   COSMOLOGY




   Yet the fact that Whitehead talks about i mportance before talking
about expression is significant. When he wrote Modes of Thought, he no
longer had to struggle to conceive of an occasion as causa sui, and cou ld
therefore give meaning to its correlate: to the world dependent on an in
dividual decision- " Hands off! "-which will come l ike a gi ft. Individual
expression is i mportant.
   Whereas expressions refer to creativity, to the many becoming one and
being i ncreased by one, i mportance, for its part, refers to the Uni verse as
"one," that is, to the Uni verse in its cosmological perspecti ve. Nor i s this
perspective foreign to indivi dua l experience, for, as Whitehead a ffirms,
i mportance " passes " to the world as many.
   The verb " to pass " is the verb that, as we sha l l see, Whitehea d used
on the last page of Process and Reality to characterize the dynamics of
the relationship between God and the world. Yet God is not, of course,
what explains: he is what is required, in terms of the conceptua l scheme,
by the cosmological perspective. " Passage " then means that this perspec
tive belongs to experience, in the mode of feeling that a decision will not
only have consequences beyond itsel f, but matters to somethi ng other
than itself. Unlike a throw of the dice, indi fferent to the consequences
that depend on it, a free gift impl ies that the feeling of waiting is an ingre
dient of the occasion. The q uestion "what is expected of me here? " is too
i mportant in human life to be ignored.
   The full solemnity of the world arises from the sense of positive achieve
ment within the finite, combined with the sense of modes of infinitude
stretching beyond each finite fact. This infinitude is required by each fact
to express its necessary relevance beyond its own limitations. It expresses
a perspective of the universe. Importance arises from this fusion of the fi
nite and the infinite. The cry "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die "
expresses the triviality of the merely finite. The mystic, ineffective slumber
expresses the vacuity of the merely infinite ( MT, 78-79) .
   " The full solemnity of the worl d " does not transcend the " fact " b u t i s
required b y the fact as soon as the latter is experienced in the mode o f
positive accomplishment or-which a mounts t o the sa me thing-of de
feat or betrayal . The fact itself then demands relevance beyond itself, and
both cry and mystica l slumber bear wi tness to this, even i f, each in their
own way, they testi fy to it i n the mode of what Whitehead, in Science and
the Modern World, cal led " the great refusal," a decisive mode because of
the importance for them of the propositions they render " non-true."
   Here, what is to be thought is no longer an order of nature, for a form
of dualism always corresponds to the definition of such an order: that of
statements of knowledge tha t cannot help but presuppose and rati fy a
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 2 5




contrast between those who learn the attention due to what they deal with
and what they have to deal with. The point will be to attempt, experi men
tally and with my own means, to inhabit the cosmological perspective
opened up by Whitehead in Modes of Thought. Like all experimentation,
this one has a goal . What matters here is to explore the proposition that
the q uestion of the cosmos does not transcend positive knowledge a ny
more than the solemnity of the world transcends positive individual achieve
ment. It merely demands that attention be paid to this knowledge itself, to
the way that, although it deals with societies, it testifies to the question of
the importance, beyond itself, of individual expression.
   What matters here is thus the plural ity of modes of knowledge. Let us
take this simple q uestion as a starting point: why do biologists, in gen
era l, have no doubt that the order they a re trying to understand is that
of a living being, whereas the order that physicists a re in the habit of
baptizing " la ws of nature " has given rise to such a doubt, to the opposi
tion between rea lity as it supposed ly is "in itself" and as we define it as an
"object of knowledge " ?
  The laws of nature are large average effects which reign impersonally.
Whereas, there is nothing average about expression. It is essentially indi
vidual. In so far as an average dominates, expression fades (MT, 2 1 ) .
   The enduring social continuity that physicists descri be by a function re
quires and translates the dominant " i mpartial" character of the modes of
taking-into-account called " i nteraction," which the physico-mathematical
function characterizes in terms of a rticulations between well-defined vari
ables. The exploit constituted by the production of a physico-mathematical
function is thus radically asymmetrica l . The techno-conceptual creativity
of those who formulate it implies the most extreme partiality, the most ex
treme importance accorded to the struggle against any possibility of confus
ing scientific statements a nd "opinion." But the statement, for its part, ren
ders explicit the way in which societies reproduce by respecting a median
conformity that we baptize " laws " or " regularity " : in their cases, the diver
gence always constituted by an i ndividual expression has no i mportance.
Correlatively, the " reality " of what physics baptizes as an " individual prop
erty " (of electrons, atoms, molecules maintaining themselves in conformity
with themselves ) can always be placed in doubt, identified with the func
tional articulation of experimental relations and thus made relative to the
questions raised by the experimenter.
   In contrast, a l iving society must be approached in terms of q uestions
that render explicit its partial character: what is food or poison for it, what
will al low it to reproduce, what wi l l provide it the opportunity to survive,
what wi ll kill it. In other words, functional articulation in biology has as
4 2 6   C O S M O LOGY




its respondent a society characterized not in terms of conformity, but of
selective choices that are extremely partial, precise, varied, and someti mes
unexpected with regard to what does and does not count, with rega rd to
what is relevant and what may be neglected. With rega rd to what matters.
Biologists ca nnot confuse the choices with which they deal with a transla
tion of their own questions, an answer to their own demands. To take up
Heisenberg's famous saying, they are neither actors nor spectators, but
" inquirers." In one way or a nother, the " biological function " refers to be
ings for whom the logical roles it makes explicit matter.
    Here, the point is no longer to "j ustify life " from a cosmological view
point, but to celebrate it. The contrast between life and nonlife does not,
of course, designate the cosmic epoch in which the question of impor
tance emerges. This contrast designates our mode of thought in the first
instance, the full solemnity of the difference between those of our modes
of description that presuppose and confirm the possibi lity of neglecting
the relevance of individual expression, and those that must recognize it in
the guise of partia lity. " Life is robbery " : every living society impl ies the
creation of a way of enduring whose importance is paid for by an active
differentiation between what its maintenance requires and what threatens
it. Whereas nothing in the description of copper alludes to the fact that its
encounter with sulfuric acid will have as its consequence a social catastro
phe for the molecules of copper, the least cell or the slightest bacterium
exhi bit the partial character of their relation with other societies, prey or
poison, in their environment. Whereas the physico-mathematical function
refers to a homogenous world, to the environment of a society as de
scribed by the same variables as those that describe its own social behav
ior, the history of life tells the story of the creation of multiple, selective,
and innovative a rticulations . In biology, functions a re related to issues.
    I will first turn to Religion in the Making to find the terms of that cele
bration in Whitehead, for it is here that the term " expression," associated
with a rather unexpected reference that I have decided to take seriously,
appears for the first time with properly cosmic echoes.
   Expression is the one fundamental sacrament. It is the outward and vis
ible sign of an inward and spiritual grace r . . . 1 There is then a commu
nity of intuition by reason of the sacrament of expression proffered by
one and received by the other.
   But the expressive sign is more than interpretable. It is creative. It elic
its the intuition which interprets it. It cannot elicit what is not there. A
note on a tuning fork can elicit a response from a piano. But the piano
has already in it the string tuned to the same note. In the same way the
expressive sign elicits the existent intuition which would not otherwise
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 2 7




emerge into individual distinctiveness. Again in theological language, the
sign works ex opere opera to, but only within the limitation that the re
cipient be patient of the creative action ( RM, 1 3 1 -1 3 3 ) .
   I n Religion in the Making, the emphasis was o n human experience,
and the expressive sign rather clearly i mplies " human i ntu ition," as it can
be exhibited for i nstance by the proliferation a nd reception of a grimace,
a gesture, a word, or a sound . This sign thus refers to what Whitehead
calls the "symbol ic." And yet, the fragments cited may also describe what,
in Modes of Thought, Whitehead decided to ca ll "expression," the way
each actuality " proffers " its divergence, which will have to be taken i nto
account and wil l contri bute to bringing forth what will i nherit from it. In
this case, however, the one a nd only funda mental sacrament would des
ignate creativity, as attested by any given concrescence. Each initial feel
i ng is a n " expressive sign," giving rise to the creative process that will
ma ke it come i nto being as the feeling of a su bject.
   Ta king seriously the reference to sacrament that Whitehead associates
in Religion in the Making with what he calls "expression" by no means
signifies conferring a ny kind of privilege upon the conception of the su
pernatural associated with the Catholic rel igion. The sacraments a re in
teresting i n that i n Cathol ic doctri ne they designate the question of a re
producible i ntervention of the supernatural within the natura l . Such a
question implies a " mode of thought" inhabited by the contrast between
this type of intervention and a nature defined by its own regularities. In
th is sense, the sacraments al low the question to be raised of what we call
" regularity." On the other hand, among Cathol ics the efficacy of the sac
rament is said to be " objective." The sacra ment must actually produce
what it signifies; its signification cannot itsel f be reduced to a " secondary
quality." The contrast is thus irred ucible to a form of symbolic efficacy, as
we say today, testifying only to human subjecti vity. The sacraments de
mand a " realism" that is precisely what Whitehead su bscri bes to when he
emphasizes, still a nd again, that all feeling is the feeling of an object, and
that objects are what have to be felt.
   Quite obviously, the way that, prolongi ng Whitehead, I i ntend to gen
era l ize the notion of sacrament transforms the meaning of the contrasts
associated with it by Catholic doctrine. It is our modes of thought that
are under investigation, not an actual opposition between natural and su
pernatural, or between " merely" subjective and objective. What is at stake
is a farewell to a " nature " capable of defining itsel f, a farewel l to the pos
sibility of attributing to " natural entities " a behavior, properties, or capaci
ties that would enable a general definition of what is meant by " i t can be
explained ' natural ly.' "
4 2 8   COSMOLOGY




   The question of the conditions under which the sacraments are effec
tive has provoked passionate theologica l discussions. On what does this
efficacy depend ? What is the share of divine grace, and what is that of
man ? What is the share of the person who administers, and that of the
person receiving ? With the theologica l formula ex opere operata, White
head adopts a position in this discussion: the sacrament is efficacious
independently of the person administering it. The priest's sacramental
words are valid as soon as he is a priest, independently of his state of sin
or of grace. The only condition is that the person receiving the sacrament
not present an obstacle. What is an obstacle ? That is another delicate
theological question.
   For Whitehead, when he was writing Religion in the Making, the ques
tion of obstacles obviously impl ied what is called " social environment" in
Process and Reality. The stones do not tremble with hope when John the
Baptist designates them . However, this definition of an obstacle no longer
holds if we ta ke the risk of accepting that what is cal led "expression " in
Modes of Thought is stil l valid as " one and only fundamental sacrament."
For here, expression is that whereby each actual entity, whatever it may
be, transcends all the actual entities from which it inherits, including God .
And, in this case, the relation between sign and response has neither mea
sure nor j udge, and the notion of obstacle therefore becomes completely
indeterminate. The efficacy associated with the sacrament of expression,
the "one and only fundamental sacrament," cannot be refused to any crea
ture of creativity, any more than Leibniz refused a soul to any monad .
   The great line o f difference does not separate the organic from the in
organic, but crosses the one and the other by distinguishing what is an
individual being from what is a collective or mass phenomenon, what is
an absolute form and what are massive, molar figures and structures.
These are the two levels or two aspects of the calculus [ . . . 1 individual
beings are probably the last and sufficient reasons [ . . . 1 But the lower
level is no less irreducible, because it implies a loss of individuality
among its components, and relates to different kinds of composite collec
tions material or secondary forces of linkage. Clearly, one level is folded
over the other, but above all each one conveys a very different kind of
fold [ . . . 1 What must be radically distinguished are the pleats of matter,
which always consist in hiding some part of the relative surface that they
are affecting, and the folds of form, which on the contrary reveal to itself
the detail of an absolute surface that is cop resent with all of its modifica
tions (LP, 1 3 9-1 4 0 ) .
  To t h e Leibnizian contrast described b y Deleuze between folds and
pleats, between actual ization in the soul and realization in states of a f-
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 2 9




fa irs, correspond s the d istinction constructed hy Whitehead hetween the
indivisihle unit of suhjective satisfaction and the pragmatic value it will
assume a s part of the many for other occasions. Ohjective immortal ity in
itself signifies the loss of the i ndivid ua l i ty of what has heen accomplished,
and the relevance of physical laws testifies to the possi hi lity that nothing
then " counts " other tha n a transmission dominated hy conformity. The
loss of individual ity does not, however, as in Leihniz, proceed from a
contrast hetween two modes of descri ption, two levels, two aspects of
a calculus, hut from the " perishing " that tra nsforms individua l i ty i nto a
fact, whose val ue depends on future decisions. Ohjective immorta lity
mea ns that what fol lows is responsi hle for the new modal ity in which the
gift of i ndividual expression will he ta ken into account. What is certa in is
that no occasion will inherit the way the suhject made the multipl icity of
its feelings hold together, in all i ts deta ils, the way it was co-present to
each qua i mmed iately its own.
    Yet if the loss of individual ity does not perta in to modes of descri ption,
hut designates the " perishing " of the satisfied suhject, the "one a nd only
fund a menta l sacrament " constituted hy express ion does not suffice to
ensure the difference hetween a disorderly universe and a "cosmos." For
there to he a cosmos, what has heen decided, what the individual has
made of itself, and what it has unified as its datum must he ahle to " ma t
ter," that is, to succeed in infecting its environment with the consequences
of the fact that it is this expression that was prod uced and not some
other. From the piano respond ing to the tuning fork, to the understand
ing that responds to a word , the " expressive signs" we can evoke do not,
in fact, correspond to the one and only sacra ment, for a l l of them require
societies capable of granting i mportance to individual expressions, or, in
Lei hnizian terms, of giving meaning to pleats of matter that certa inly
hide, hut that also exhihit a selective and partial manner of pleating in
one way rather than in another.
    Ohviously, what we are approach ing is the question of what I have
called the "culture of interstices," which I have associated with the "cos
mological justification" of living societies. The term "culture" referred , he
yond the " fact" of the interstices where l ife l urks, to their i mportance, that
is, to the way l iving societies can simultaneously canalize and be infected
hy what l urks: origina lity. And we ca n henceforth give a name to what
may well he specifically associated with this origi nality, what the efficacy
of a " sign" as such testifies to. It perta ins to propositional feel ings to open
up new possibilities of " fold ing one level over the other." The relations
hetween levels, the gift of the i nd ividual expression, may then he multi
ple, adventurous, a nd capable of originality.
4 3 0   COSMOLOGY




   And of course, the most exacerbated example of adventures that relate
importa nce and expression, social belonging and origina lity, is la nguage.
No one ca n be sa id to be responsible, guarantor, depository, or a uthor of
a language, for no individual expression has the power to modify it unless
this modification is taken up by others: unless it infects them. La nguage
exists only in a collection of individua l expressions, but these expressions
translate at the same time a social " fact," a "cosmic rea lity," without which
neither language nor spea kers would exist: the efficacy proper to these
expressions capa ble of infecting human experience, that is, j ust as much
the " patience " of human experience with regard to this infection.
   The question of " sacraments" is thus not closed . To unicity, to the one
and only funda menta l sacrament, corresponds the indefinite multipl icity
of entities. But the question of the importa nce of a n individual expres
                                '
sion must a lso be raised, a nd it can only be ra ised accord ing to the
essentially plura l modes of what societies ma ke possi ble and what they
impede, what they are una ble to entertain. The prophet's a udience trem
bles, but not the stones.
   The unique sacrament of expression might then cal l for a sacra mental
plura l i ty: " the" sacraments, in the sense that each one correspond s to
a di fferent ritua lization, that is, communicates with the social question
raised by the " patience " of a society qua cond ition for the efficacy of a
sign. In Modes of Thought, of course, Whitehead no longer spea ks of sac
raments, but the cosmic mea ning he confers upon expression and i mpor
tance translates the same obligation to think in a del iberately " a nti
natura l ist" mode. Importance, which " passes from the World as one to the
World as many," and expression, " the gift from the World as many to the
World as one," testi fy, by the plurality of the ways that one passes and
the other gives, to a cosmos, in contrast to the neutra l ity of creativity. As
in Religion in the Making, then, the point is to propose a " mode of thought"
that articulates what the scientific and religious modes of thought oppose,
but the question of the "culture of interstices " obliges us to reunite: the
possi bility of descriptions that " expla in" certa in living societies, and the
ineffa ble mystic sentiment that leads " living persons" themselves to live in
immed iate unison with the cosmos.
   Let us take first the scientific achievement of biochemists, demonstrat
ing that a specific i nterwea ving of chemical processes produces an overa ll
behavior analogous to a form of " calculation," assigning to the interact
ing elements roles of a quasi-logical kind. Even if the biochemist-modelizers
announce that an apparently finalistic functioning has been reduced to
molecular behaviors tha t are perfectly compatible with physico-chemistry,
they a re in fact celebrating the signal novelty constituted by an interweav-
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 1




ing of chemical processes that become, as such, capable of being descri bed
as " working" in a way that is both intelligible and partial, giving original
consequences to the presence or a bsence of certain ingredients i n its envi
ronment, that is, giving them a signification.
   The discourse on successful reduction will turn the analyzed case into
the representative of a genera lity, and the person holding this discourse
will often make common cause with other defenders of the same genera l
ity. Yet "Whiteheadian" biologists, for their part, would be more "con
crete " : thei r result, even if i ts site is a la boratory populated by a chemist's
instruments, has issued from questions that differ from those of chemists.
For chemists who wish to obtain a given type of synthesis a nd no other,
what matters is the success of " their" synthesis. The result will belong to
them, and they must deserve it. Biochemists, too, must succeed and de
serve, but their questions are d irected to a success that has alrea dy ta ken
place: the chemical interweaving " holds," " works," a nd " functions " be
fore them a nd without them . In one way or another, the state of affa i rs
they study implies that the molecules play " roles" which it is, of course,
their job to decipher, but each of which, as they k now a priori, should
be the partial expression of a function without which they would not ex
ist as such . From the viewpoint of this function, each molecular behavior
is required, but none of these behaviors explains the function: i t is the
function i tsel f that explains i tself through them.
   Wherever there is a region of nature which is itself the primary field of
the expressions issuing from each of its parts, that region is alive ( MT, 22 ) .
   Once aga in, this is not a ma tter o f " mystery " b u t o f a tra nsformation
of the mode of descri ption . In one way or another, i t is as if the biochem
ists were not the first " i nterpreta nts," as if what they deal wi th was sim
plifying, or schematizing, or a bstracting "on i ts own account," i n a way
that can be described, and that ca n even be " explained," but on condition
tha t all the relations that ma tter i n this ca se have been identi fied and
a rticulated . The expla nation i s not reductive, beca use the q uestion it
answers is not that of the chemist-what molecules a re present, a nd how
do they interact?-but that of the biochemist: how do these processes
ma nage to . . . ?
   If one ha d to associate the i ntelligi ble, l ogical simplification presup
posed and made explicit by biochemical models with the efficacy of a
particula r sacrament producing what it signifies, that is, in this instance,
the importance of a partial articula tion, distinguishing success a nd catas
trophe, life and death, it would be to the efficacy of the sacra ment of ma r
riage. Each such articulation is a n entreaty to the universe: " What God
has united, let nothing brea k asunder." To this sacra ment corresponds the
4 3 2   C O S M O L O G Y




efficacy of functional " signs " or " sensi bi l ia," signs that m ust be felt i n
order for the roles required b y the function t o b e a rticulated .
    With the time for marriage, however, what a lso begins is the time of
" marriage against nature," of articulations between heterogeneous things
as such. The intense traffic of signs, the multiplicity of traps, mimes, lures,
and poisons woven by the lives of plants, insects, and parasites, had fasci
nated Bergson, who, in Creative Evolution, turned the contrast between
the perfect precision of instinctive action a nd the clumsy hesitations of
intell igent action into the terms of a choice between two divergent direc
tions ca rried out by life. What Bergson celebrated with insti nct translates
the original successes proper to " functional societies " : what succeeds may
be called " requisition," the " grasping " of a being qua " playing a role" in a
function . The orchid that presents a mime of the sexua l organs of a female
wasp increases its chances of contact with the male wasp, which improves
its own chances of reproduction. The pa rasite that affects the bra in of
an ant so that it goes to immobil ize itself at the end of a blade of grass
increases its chances that the infected ant may be grazed a long with the
grass by the herbivore, as is required by its own reprod uctive cycle.
    It is very important, from the viewpoint of the modes of thought ca lled
for by living beings, to emphasize the extremely va ried field of relevance
of what is ca lled a " model " in biology. Biochemica l models exhibit highly
complex functions, a rticulating a rather la rge number of varia bles, most
often requiring computer simulations. But what also lend themselves very
well to modelization are the multiple modes of etho-ecologica l definitions
of living beings, accord ing to the " functional " signs they give or are sensi
tive to, what those signs elicit, with what conseq uences, and so on.
    I will therefore associate the efficacy of the " sacra ment of marriage "
with what is the privi leged field for modelization in biology, exhibiting
the efficacy of functiona l signs, whether they refer to functions that a re
i nternal ( the quasi-technology of intra- and intercellular detections, cap
tures, and regulations ) or external, between wasp and orchid, or between
ants, or between the butterfly and its fema le, whose smell it can detect a t
a distance of severa l miles. The model ma kes explicit the a rticulation o f
roles played b y various, d isparate actors, i ndependently of thei r personal
experience: wha tever the butterfly's experience may be, the odoriferous
molecule i ntervenes in the d irection of its flight, and the fema le, source of
the odor, may be at the arrival point.
    Ca n we already speak of a propositional efficacy, i n the sense tha t it
designates a "culture of i nterstices " ? A model renders a proposition ex
pl icit, but what enterta ins this proposition-with ad miration, astonish
ment, or amusement-is none other tha n the biologist. This is why the
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 3




relevance of such a modelization communica tes, in our modes of thought,
with " na tura l selection," the great sieve, indifferent to what it reta i ns, as
long as it improves the chances of survival and reproduction . The model
defines, in Lei bnizian terms, the modes of " pleating," or pa rtia l, prag
ma tica l ly verified simplifications that constitute the success of living soci
eties insofar as they endure and infect. But the model is mute about what
we cannot i magine, the efficacy of the functional sign itself, what it " does "
to the experience it infects.
   What does the wasp that has been seduced by an orchid " feel " ? The
butterfly detecting the odor of a fema le? The a nt rushing to a ttack an
intruder ? We ca nnot i magine, and the models do not tel l us, but they are
also--a nd this is highly interesting-completely neutra l in this matter.
This corresponds wel l to the defi nition of marriage: whatever you feel
towa rd your spouse, you are united. Ethologists know that they must
certainly not attri bute to insects and pa rasites-the two types of l i vi ng
beings which, according to Bergson, embodied the tri umph of instinct
experiences that would imply the possibil ity of a disa ppointed, furious,
or frustra ted wasp, of a butterfly looking forward to a del ightful encoun
ter, or of a heroic ant overcoming i ts fear. Perhaps one could say that for
such beings, action must be stated in the infinitive: "copulate," " go," " a t
tack," as close as one can get to an imperative without a subject. In any
case, it is i mportant to i nsist, once again, on the fact that impotence i n
imagi ning by no mea ns signifies a bsence. The experiences of a wasp, a
butterfly, or even a biologica l macromolecule a re unknown to us, and
they are certa inly di fferent. It is possi ble that, unlike a macromolecule,
the wasp's experience includes the sense of a continuity of experience. It
is possible that, i n its case, the reception of a " functional sign " is the ex
perience of a bi furcation of experience. Ultimately, we do not know what
constitutes for us the experience of a word when we are not paying spe
cific a ttention to it either. Nor is it an accident that Natha lie Sarra ute has
named the obscure multipl icity of tiny experiential bifurcations " tro
pisms," a term used for plants and butterflies, successfully conveyi ng the
extent to which such bi furcations populate the adventure that is both
required and smoothed over by the continuous construction of a " l ivi ng
person ." Our imagination presupposes and implies attention to the truth,
and to all the contrasts a rticulated around this a ttention . It cannot there
fore bear directly on "a word," " this word," without ma king it change its
nature, without transforming its reception into an i maginative experi
ence. But some writers and other artists may succeed, by reinventing the
very mea ning of attention to truth, in evoki ng something of experience
" outside of persona l requisition."
4 3 4   COSMOLOGY




   The fact that models a re relevant, although they cease where we can
not imagine, tra nslates the proper efficacy of the " sacra ment of mar
riage," the disjunction between experience and requisition. The sacra
ment is efficacious, whatever the spouses feel a bout it. The model renders
explicit the way that d ispa rate beings a re in a situation of correla tive
requisition, requiring one another, and its releva nce consists precisely in
the fact that here i t is requisition alone that matters, independent of the
question of expression or the experience that gives rise to the functional
sign. With functiona l signs, biologists thus celebrate life as " imposition "
in the sense Heidegger gave to this term, a functiona l, calculating taking
into-consideration. One might also say that it is here that the (Hegel ian)
notion of the proposition as the murder of the thi ng ta kes on a precise
meaning. If the proposition in genera l impl ies and carries out a form of
robbery, red ucing its logical subjects to the status of food for a possibil ity
( PR, 2 5 8 ) with no concern for thei r individuality, the properly biological
proposition carries out this operation to the letter.
   Everything changes, however, once we can associate the notion of prop
osition with its "entertainment" in an experience that is not that of the
biologist. Everything changes when we enter into the doma in of behaviors
to which ethology owes its existence, because these behaviors have i m
posed the interest of describing animals in " thei r " envi ronment, not in one
that ha s been artificially prepa red . We can spea k, of course, in the broad
sense, of the ethology of ants or spiders, but the difference between envi
ronments in this case is not crucia l: we know, or we think we know, what
ants and spiders need to behave in a " typica l " way. In contrast, when we
are dealing with a rat or a bird, the difference between a " natura l " and an
"artificia l " environment becomes importa nt, as is attested by the confron
tation between the ethologica l and experimental modes of thought, and is
also attested by the suddenly highly questionable cha racter of models that
interpret behavior from the viewpoint of its selective va lue alone.
   Where is the cha nge to be situated ? Here I wil l fol low the suggestion of
Deleuze and Guatta ri, according to whom we can designate the kind of
animals ca pable of obliging our modes of thought to take this change into
consideration. The animals in question are the ones called " territoria l " :
   A rt may begin with the animal, o r a t least with the animal who marks
out a territory and builds a home (the two are correlative, or even merge
sometimes, in what is called a habitat). With the territory-home system,
many organic functions are transformed: sexuality, procreation, aggres
sion, food, but this transformation does not explain the appearance of
territory and home, but rather the reverse; territory implies the emer
gence of pure sensory qualities, which cease to be merely functional and
                       M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 5




become expressive features, enabling a transformation of functions
(QPh, 1 74 ) .
   This suggestion, fully developed i n A Thousand Plateaus, fits admira
bly with the sociology of life that Whitehead demanded . The point is
(obviously ) not to attempt a reduction of art to territorial signs, but to
celebrate the irred ucible cha racter of the event na med " territory." Every
thing cha nges " with" territory, " with " the emergence of signs that are no
longer merely " functiona l " but " expressive," that make sense or symbolic
reference " for" the animal itself.
   The ca se of the butterfly attracted by an odor, and that of an " intruder,"
recognizing by an odoriferous mark that he is penetrating into someone
else's territory, do not have much in common. No biochemist will risk
underta king a model that actua lly articulates the way that the detection
of the odoriferous molecule matters, its consequences for the animal that
"smells " : the intruder's unease, its hesitations, its attention on high alert.
Here, indeed, " what" is d iscerned discloses other discerni ble thi ngs, for
instance, the possi ble presence of the legitimate owner of the territory into
which the hesita nt intruder is venturing. The animal is " aware" of the fact
that it is not at home.
   We are entering the doma i n where reference to " molecules" becomes
a byword, concea ling the fact that here d ue attention must be paid to
propositiona l efficacy as such. We are entering the doma i n where the
" culture of i nterstices " must manifest itself, that is, the notion of " l iving
person" as well, whose constantly reinvented conti nuity presupposes
both infection and ca na lization-in short, original i ty.
   The fact that models are fairly inoperative in this case does not by any
means signify that we have reached a mysterious point at which behavior
becomes " inexplicable," but simply that the framing of the explanation
has changed . Independent of any hypothesis about animal consciousness,
the reference to territorial behavior as such implies that a series of con
trasts has a meaning " for" the animal, matters " for" it, and ethologists, l ike
a piano string " responding" to a tuning fork, will be irresistibly ind uced to
make the animal the subject of their description. Henceforth, the individ
ua l lives in " its " environment, or " mil ieu," and ethologists, when they de
scribe the radical difference between the behavior of the " i ntruder" and
that of the " legitimate owner," no longer reconstitute but accompany with
thei r words the risks experienced as such by those they are describing.
Here, i magination is not a vector of a misplaced anthropomorphism but a
risk i nspired by an irresistible " community of intuition ."
   In other words, upon the traffic of functiona l signs-which, of course,
continues-the open question of possible communities is superimposed,
4 3 6   COSMOLOGY




with their ritua ls, distances, synch ronizations, rhythms and j ingles, their
perceptions. And upon the risks evol ution has sanctioned throughout
biological evolution a re superimposed, in our modes of thought, the risks
experienced as such by the individual, by the intruder whose tense, ner
vous body hesitates, testi fying to the fact that it "does violence to itself,"
by the rabbit that hesitates to flee, or by the monkey isolated in its cage,
who gnaws on its ta il while the experimenters discuss the possibi l i ty that
animals may suffer.
   Pursuing the theme of sacraments, one might celebrate the territorial
event in the terms that define the sacrament of baptism. Just as baptism
introd uces the members of God's people one by one into their native land,
so the " territorial " sign may be described not merely as the enterta inment
of a proposition as such, but as an entertainment implying a feel ing of be
longing: my territory, my male, my people, my habits, my discipline. With
the territorial animal, the notion of a " common world " assumes a mean
ing, under the banner both of a contrast-the community to which one does
or does not belong-and of the appearance of " symbolic reference"
expressive features that are perceived, there, in relation to our trembling,
hesitant, appetitive, assured bodies, which are " here " : the percipient event.
   How far should we extend the consequences of this innovation if it
gives meaning to the contrast between " me " and " not me," " mine" and
" not mine" ? The animal whose fur sta nds on end when it identifies an
intruder could surely not experience the radica l metamorphoses of the
experience of itself and its world that must be traversed by what we cal l a
butterfly, from la rva to winged creature. I f we refer here, once again, to
the great bifurcation that Bergson observed in the history of life, between
instinct and intelligence, we can then wonder whether another novelty
might not be correlated with it: living as " having a body." For Bergson, in
telligence can be identified by its hesitation, clumsiness, and approximate
character, tra nslating an interpretative distance that is foreign to the sen
sible certainties of a butterfly flying toward a female. Yet hesitation, cl um
siness, and approximation cannot be stated without presupposing a feel
ing of the di fference between " self" and " one's body," a feeling of the body
as property, itsel f endowed with properties with which one has to make
do. In other words, the association between " percipient event" and " bodily
life " that Whitehead pointed out in The Concept of Nature can also be
phra sed as " having a body."
   The sacrament I associate with " baptism " would thus celebrate a con
j unction in experience a mong what we designate as " having a world,"
" having a body," " being able to hesitate," " ta king risks," and so on . Its
efficacy would have as its correlate the fact that learning from these ani-
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 7




ma ls may also mean learning with them, i mplying that a common world
is possible with them. And this is indeed what is tra nslated by the risks
proper to ethology, risks that translate the ful l solemnity of the event that
is indicated by the " ethological mode of thought."
   The first risk is that of " psychologizing projection." To spea k of a
" community of intui tion " i s not to speak of any guaranteed adequacy of
interpreta tion, truth, or intersubj ective fusion. As is demanded by the
objective efficacy of the sacrament, the risk, that of an " empathetic "
ethology, translates the new stakes tha t take on meaning for ethologists,
and which are those of " symbolic reference." Moved by your expression,
I may also be as completely wrong a bout the consequences as I infer
them, as the ethologist may be wrong a bout what this chimpa nzee show
ing his teeth means. To spea k of " community " is to spea k of creation of
the problematic space in which the question of i nterpretation assumes
mea ning-of what has been understood or misunderstood, of trust and
of deceit, of hesitation and of veri fication. As Bergson said, i t is when life
makes the choice of intel ligence compared with instinct that the notion of
error itself may be formulated . Here, then, the expressive sign, as a vector
of a bstraction for a problematic experience, may be said to be fully and
simultaneously lure and decoy, eliciting temptation, hesitation, frustra
tion, or disappointment. In short, when a society is no longer " functional,"
but gi ves mea ning to a " community," its interstices make themselves felt
by a l l the proposi tions enterta ined, which a re therefore " true," but whose
mea ning it is sometimes better to verify.
   Another risk proper to ethology is that ethologists, unbeknownst to
them, may observe behaviors tha t they themselves have brought a bout,
that is, that they may have " d omesticated " those they thought they were
j ust describing.
   Here aga in, risk ind icates the objective efficacy of the sacrament. The
members of the people of God a re introduced one by one, and i t is only
one by one that animals can be domesticated, that is, in this case, led to
admit a particular human i nto their " d omus " : a singular, i mportant per
son, whose gestures and a ttitudes may be interpreted as " thei rs," as the
" signi fica nt other" on whom they a re counting and with which ( or
whom ? ) they l ive. If domestication is possible, it is no doubt because hu
man beings understand something of the importance of the hesitations,
temptations, fears, approaches, and flights of the animals they seduce.
How they interpret what they understand is a wholly different question:
what domestication celebrates is that nether the sed uced nor the sed ucer
may be defined in terms of functiona l signs that ma ke a social, specific
world for the insect. The expressive sensibilia that are being invented
4 3 8   C O S M O LO G Y




between themselves, laboriously, painfully, ind icate that this time the ad
venture of life designates the individual, or the living person, as an active,
vibrant site of the negotiation that takes place within it a mong fear, curi
osity, and attraction . A site that testifies both to the infection and to the
canal ization through which what is new becomes important.
   Finally, in ethology, there arises the thorny q uestion of the innate and
the acquired . There is no debate about the " innate" character of the behav
ior of ants and butterflies, but the question arises of the " innate" character
of human intelligence, homosexuality, or aggression and of birdsongs, or
of the long, complex parades that precede and seem to condition that
functional behavior known as copulation .
   Intell igence, homosexuality, and aggression are categories that are too
"coarse " for the question to be elaborated in an interesting way. The ques
tion becomes interesting, however, in those cases where it is clear that the
behavior under d iscussion is closely linked to properly functional urgen
cies, that is, to matters of selection . Through the question of whether
someth ing that is " innate " and as such is supposed to be the direct prod
uct of selection, can "expla in" the behavior and hence the experience of
the individual, the question arises of the articulation between the two
" sacra ments," corresponding respectively to functional individual ity and
to the possibility of a common world .
   The natal is the new figure assumed by the innate and the acquired in
the territorial assemblage. The affect proper to the nata, as heard in the
lied: to be forever lost, or refound, or aspiring to the unk nown home
land. In the natal, the innate tends to become displaced: as Ruyer says
[n.b., Raymond Ruyer, in La Genese des formes vivantes] , it is in some
way prior to or downstream from the act; it concerns less the act or the
behavior than the matters of expression themselves, the perception that
discerns and selects them, and the gesture that erects them, or itself con
stitutes them [ . . . ] This is not to say, however, that behavior is at the
mercy of chance learning; for it is predetermined by this displacement,
and finds rules of assemblage in its own territorialization. The natal thus
consists in a decoding of innateness and a territorialization of learning,
one atop the other, one alongside the other (MP, 4 1 0 ) .
   Once aga in, i t i s William James who may help u s to understand what
Deleuze and Guattari borrow from Ruyer, and more precisely that aspect
of Wil l iam James that has incited the most controversy, the one that a f
firms that the truth, or i mportance, of an idea is nothing other than its
process of verification, the creative process in which the eventual conse
quences of these ideas are produced and put to the test. Let us take as an
example of " act" the wel l-known case of the sexua l display tha t precedes
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D ES   O F   T H O U G H T   4 3 9




copulation, when a couple of storks is consti tuted, for exa mple. Copula
tion responds to a functional imperative that must be satisfied in order
for there to be storks in this world . This imperative is not satisfied until
the outcome of the d isplay, " downstream," but can we say that the storks
obey it from the beginning, that is, that this d isplay behavior is " innate " ?
For Ruyer, i t i s more adequate to say that a t the outset each stork is for
the other an object that is " va lorized " : i mportant and interesting, el icit
ing. It may be innate, but must be " decoded " in order to get at its func
tiona l meaning. The i mperative to be satisfied would have the status of
a kind of " fleeing ghost," becomi ng specified as the d isplay unfolds, as a
va l ue that is more and more significant: " my male," " my female." The ef
ficacy of functional sensibilia, of what must be felt in the mode of the
infinitive " to copulate," would then be cond itioned by a learning process
resulting in the creation of an object henceforth discerned, selected, in
short, " recognized ." "That's him," "that's her," "that's our home " will then
be celebrated in unison every spring, when the members of the stork
couple find one a nother upon their return from a d istant migration.
   To follow Ruyer, Deleuze, and Guattari, it is precisely at the moment
when perception, in the sense that Whitehead described it in The Concept
of Nature, becomes relevant, that the innate loses its power to explain, can
no longer explain behavior independently of the way it itself acquires a ter
ritorial meaning, the way it is " decoded ." The innate no more explains
territorial behavior- "my place," "your place -than an idea spea ks its
                                                              "



truth independently of its process of verification. The innate is explained in,
by, and for the being that produces itself qua belonging to a " community."
   A mode of ethological thought celebrating the events that transform the
meaning and the stakes of terms such as innate, acquired, world, env iron
ment, ind ividual, group, congener, behavior, and so on can certainly not
avoid the critical questions that ethologists ask themselves a bout their
perceptions and their interpretations. It might, however, distance them
from any nostalgia for the verification processes designating what physi
cists or chemists call "objectivity," as wel l as for the model izations corre
sponding to what selectivist biology designates as the only good explana
tion: the power of natural selection . In this sense, such a mode of thought
might be vital for our scientific ideals, d istorted as they are by the conflicts
between the imperative of "objectivity " and the insistence of relevance.
    In fact, this last point gives us a typical example of what Deleuze and
Guattari cal l the " territorial ization of learning." When working scientists
" lea rn," objectivity is the imperative idea, on which the possibil ity for
knowledge to survive qua " scientific " depends. Yet learning is not ex
pla ined by objectivity, which is only satisfied downstream once what is
4 4 0   COSMOLOGY




relevant in each case has been recognized, once the due type of attention
has been determined . Then, and only then, will scientists have become
what Kant wanted them to be: j udges interrogating " their" object. With
regard to the sciences in which the imperative of objectivity does not
need to be "decoded," nor learning territorialized, where what the scien
tist dea ls with has an a priori, " method ical " definition of objectiv ity
imposed upon it, they become the sad analogy of behaviors qual ified as
" purely instinctive," expl icable by the imperatives they obey.
   Correlatively, for scientific learning to concl ude successfully, for the
imperative of objectivity to finally be satisfied, the scientist's question
must ultimately be able to designate its " respondent." Not, of course, in
the same sense in which the female stork " responds" to the male's ad
vances, but nevertheless in the sense that what has been discerned, selected,
and erected by the question " is appropriate," does indeed address some
thing that matters for the being under interrogation. Physicists have
learned to interrogate the atom on the basis of its spectra of emission and
absorption of l ight, and their success attests to the fact that electromag
netic radiation matters to the atom, and that it does not matter for the
atom's nucleus. Physics is relevant and inventive in that it takes the great
est account of this contrast it has learned to recognize, and it therefore
cannot, any more than any experimental science, inspire the dream of an
"objective" ethology, transcending the diversity of animal behavior to
ward a common definition. A successful question, here as elsewhere, is the
one that finds its respondent, that lea rns to discern what matters to what
is interrogated . The mode of thought of ethologists studying a territorial
animal can therefore not help but differ from that of biologists special iz
ing in bacteria, because the fact of bei ng here or there may make a major
difference for an animal i f a territorial boundary passes between " here"
and " there" whereas it makes none for a bacterium, to which, however,
the detecta ble difference " more or less sugary " matters. With regard to the
imperative of having to make a difference between a "good question,"
finding its respondent, and a misplaced or a rbitrary question, it designates
humans, of course, and the imagination whose power is celebrated by
thei r mistrust.
   When we come to mankind, nature seems to have burst through an
other of its boundaries. The central activity of enjoyment and expression
has assumed a reversal in the importance of its diverse functionings. The
conceptual entertainment of unrealized possibility becomes a major factor
in human mentality. In this way outrageous novelty is introduced, some
times beatified, sometimes damned, and sometimes literally patented or
protected by copyright. The definition of mankind is that in this genus of
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 1




animals the central activity has been developed on the side of its relation
ship to novelty [ . . . l In animals we can see emotional feeling, dominantly
derived from bodily functions, and yet tinged with purposes, hopes, and
expression derived from conceptual functioning. In mankind, the domi
nant dependence on bodily functioning seems still there. And yet the life
of a human being receives its worth, its importance, from the way in
which unrealized ideals shape its purposes and tinge its actions. The dis
tinction between men and animals is in one sense only a difference in de
gree. But the extent of the degree makes all the difference. The Rubicon
has been crossed (MT 26-27).
   Julius Caesar knew that crossi ng the Rubicon had nothing to do with
"crossi ng a river." The Rubicon had its own importance at the time of the
Roman Republ ic, and was the object of expl icit utterances. The decision
to cross it was thus inseparable from an utterance. Julius brought an ex
clamation i nto existence-" Caesar crossed the Rubicon!"-in order for
it to fashion Caesar's destiny, for better or worse.
   Verbal statements are obviously not the only " l ures for feeling " that
we fashion for ourselves. In some circ umstances, turning one's back or
shrugging one's shoul ders can-and we know this the moment we do
it-render present the as yet unrea lized possibilities of a relationship, a
brea kup, for instance, or the del icate q uestion of the repa ir of the irrepa
ra ble. Not to mention the multiplicity of " th i ngs," talismans, fetishes,
l ucky charms, sorcerers' objects, testaments, experi mental apparatuses,
and a l l our writings: so many socially maintained and stabil ized ways
for charging a being that we fashion to intervene in our l ives and those
of others, to modify their course . The list is open and might even
include-why not ?-the scan of his wife's brain exhibited by some fa
natica l theoretician, declaring to a dazzled audience that this is the gen
uine portra it of his beloved ( who, fortunately, is j ust as fanatica l ) . For
even the scan might, for someone able to endow it with expressivity,
cease to be mute with regard to what counts in a portra it. It i s not the
tender l a ugh of a face that will have been eliminated in the name of
physica l measurement, it is the physico-mathematica l structure that will
laugh tenderly.
   There is no sorting process to be carried out here, no d istinction to be
made between apparent and legitimate efficacy. The efficacy of read ing is
as mysterious for those who are not readers as is the efficacy of a tal isman
or a pilgrimage for others. The fact that Galileo may be rad ica lly trans
formed whi le, like a child, he is rol ling balls along an incl ined plane re
quires an entire epoch, as does the fact that a Catholic may share the body
of Christ, " his" body, where others would perceive " a " piece of bread .
4 4 2   COSMOLOGY




    I f the distinction between animal and human is initially marked by the
proliferation of belongings that are territoria l-that is, also epochal
this proliferation does not explain novelty. It is rather that by which this
novelty " explains itself," that is, inseparably, is social ized and causes so
cial divergence. Galileo's experience incl udes the knowledge that others
might compare him to a child while he himsel f discovers the power of
" facts." Catholics, when not defined by an "animal faith," or " blind faith,"
know that one must belong to the community of bel ievers to accept the
piece of bread in the way that is appropriate to the body of Christ. There
is a prol i feration of belongi ngs, but some belongi ngs are produced under
the banner of a contrast, confronting belonging with the real possibility
of nonbelonging. And it is here, of course, that we also find the theme of
the "great refusa l " : all the propositions rendered nontrue by a decision
link i mportance and divergence i rred ucibly.
    The efficacy proper to the sacrament of the Eucha rist, that is, the
miracle of transubstantiation, may be appropriate for cha racterizing
the Rubicon crossed by humanity, for it is precisely with regard to it
that a contrast is proposed that is addressed, not to a living person, but
to a decision as such. And here, adhesion, marking the enterta inment of
a proposition, ca uses divergence: the community of Christians ad heres
to the proposition "this is my body " in the mode of a " scandal of fa ith,"
not with the child's beatific happiness, "this is my mother. " Here, too, a
d i fference may be introduced between animal " faith" and the profes
siona ls' a dherence to their categories, when this adherence boasts of its
obviousness " w i thout q u a l ms ." To take up the Lei bnizian disti nction
between " the pleats of matter " and the " folds of the soul," here we can
no longer ignore the " sou l " in favor of " matter," and our descriptions
can no longer l i mit themselves to celebrating the invention of a " fold
ing ove r " accord ing to the contrast between what is m i ne and not
mine, or the production of the expressive signs that give mea ning to a
community.
    The specificity of human experience is not defined by its limitations, but
rather by " leaps of the i magination " that respect no limitation. Of course,
community of intuition still rules and even proliferates. But it may also be
experienced as such. In addition, the entertainment of a new proposition
is felt as an event. Our modes of thought, as soon as they concern hu
mans, have this specificity as their question, including, perhaps above all,
the doctrines that make nature bifurcate, with their expl icit or impl icit
dua lism. For both their "subject," clai ming a freedom that does not be
long to any creature, and their "objective reality," defined by a highly ex
aggerated coincidence between explanation and submission, testify to the
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E ,   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 3




great refusa l . Hesitation, the felt risk of error, may be replaced by terror in
the face of the somewhat inflated risk of the production of chimaeras and
arbitrariness. If no difference can be made between objective and subjec
tive, everything is permitted!
    With the experience Whitehead was to cal l " intellectual," risk itself
henceforth becomes material for propositions, turning experience into a
logica l subject, red uced to the status of food for a possibility. And it is
this risk, rather than any " defining characteristic," that best designates
how souls matter for us: they are what we risk losing, what might be cap
tured, reduced to wandering, enslaved . Between " self-righteous people,"
who know what the good is ( a case of community adherence), and hogs,
clever territoria l animals, the difference is trivia l . Correlatively, losing
one's hold becomes, in a somewhat exaggerated way, what will be i denti
fied with the paradigmatic disaster, or else with the precondition of any
initiation or any spiritual transformation.
    In other words, we have to deal here with the exorbitant novelty of so
cieties impl icitl y exhi biting the i mportance of the possible, or of what
might have been, and producing the means to raise the partiality of per
spectives to its pinnacle. For the difference between what will and will not
be recognized as legitimate, what will or will not be recognized as val id, is
no longer a " social fact," but what is at sta ke: a problem whose terms are,
of course, socially defined, but in a way tha t makes interstices proliferate.
This is shown j ust as much by the minutiae of moral casuistry and exami
nations of conscience as by the ferocity of scientific controversies. Atten
tion to truth demands sensitivity to new signs and the production of new
tests. The devil is in the detai ls, the difference between artifact and cor
rectly established experimental fact demands passionate i nterest, the devi
ous i magination of competent colleagues.
    The fact that Whitehead, apparently quite i nnocently, ca lls this novelty
" i ntellectua l feeling" may mean that the point is not to describe a l l our
" spiritua l " adventures. Instead, it is to designate with great precision, so
as to correct any excess subjectivity, the Rubicon that has been crossed .
What " m ight be " is no longer declared by hesitation demanding verifica
tion but becomes what matters as such .
   In an intellectual feeling the datum is the generic contrast between a
nexus of actual entities and a proposition with its logical subjects members
of the nexus [ . . . I This contrast is what has been termed the "affirmation
negation contrast." It is the contrast between the affirmation of objectified
fact in the physical feeling, and the mere potentiality, which is the negation
of such affirmation, in the propositional feeling. It is the contrast between
" in fact" and " m ight be," in respect to particular instances in this actual
4 4 4   COSMOLOGY




world. The subjective form of the feeling of this contrast is consciousness
( pR, 266-267).
   The cry of the sol itary consciousness, its refusa l to conform, its heroic
affirmation that it is possible to be right, even one against all, suffice to
show that there is nothing neutra l a bout " intel lectual feelings." An i ntel
lectual feel ing may be a vector of heroism, to the point of martyrdom; a
vector of stupid arrogance, to the point of the opposition between the
future science of neurons and the opinion that " bel ieves " in motives, rea
sons, and intentions; a vector of eradicative passion, to the point of the
systematic persecutions of peoples who cultivate it otherwise. Yet it is
also what some ethologists know how to cultivate. They know with lu
cid ity, when performing as the advocates or active protectors of ba boons,
chimpanzees, or gorillas, that the abil ity of these beings to inspire our
sympathy or our love may be what they will owe their survival to, but
they also know that it is not what defines these beings' proper value. Or
again, it is what is demanded of his readers by M ichel Foucault, who
designates himself as a positivist historian and undertakes to describe the
social power at work not only in the repression, but also in the produc
tion of the feelings we associate with what is true, j ust, and interesting.
   In any case, the fact objectified in " physical feeling" is not a simple per
cept. It may designate physical feelings that are as sophisticated as possible,
but it always designates them by introducing an operation of transubstan
tiation that de-territorializes them: " my gorillas," for whom I would give
my life, are also "goril las," who, for their part, confer a wholly different
sense upon our attachment. " My " most authentic " feelings " about the dif
ference between good and evil, the true and the ill usory, cannot be d isen
tangled from social habits induced by the apparatuses of power.
   Yet we must not exaggerate. The feeling of such contrasts matters, but
only intermittently, and the import of each contrast is limited.
  Consciousness flickers; and even at its brightest, there is a small focal
region of clear illumination, and a large penumbral region of experience
which tells of intense experience in dim apprehension ( PR, 267).
   The q uestion that begins with intel lectual feelings is that of exaggera
tion, the power granted to the abstractions deri ved from the " clear" zone
to define a situation. As Lei bniz said, Buridan's ass, confronted with two
fields similar from every viewpoint, would not remain stumped: the
slightest deta il, the cry of a bird, a fragrant breath of air, apprehended i n
a confused way, would make the difference. Yet it is quite possible that
" Buridan the philosopher" might, because there are no good reasons to
choose, confer such power upon intellectual feeling as to a ffi rm that only
a violent decision, the expression of a freedom i dentified with arbitrari-
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I ST E N C E .   M O D E S   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 5




ness, can decide the question . This is why Leibniz's mora l advice, Dic cur
hic, does not demand that a decision be j u stified but intends to induce the
development of a sensitivity to the concrete of this situation, hic, agai nst
the genera l ities authorized by conscious abstraction, against the excess
differentiation between the l imited zone of clear thought and the penum
bra of physical feelings accepted without question . Leibniz himself did
not rely on his abstractions, ceaselessly testing his system in his encou nters
with his numerous correspondents, experiencing what they demanded to
see recognized, what he was capa ble of recognizing, what formu lation
could satisfy them.
   Each occasion is an activity of concern, in the Quaker sense of that term.
It is the conjunction of transcendence and immanence. The occasion is con
cerned, in the way of feeling and aim, with things that in their own essence
lie beyond it; although these things in their present functions are factors
in the concern of that occasion. Thus each occasion, although engaged in its
own immediate self-realization, is concerned with the universe (MT, 1 6 7).
   The concern of the Quakers, or the Friends, which Whitehead evokes, is
not the disquiet inq uietude or Unruhe-that al lowed Lei bniz to gather
                 -



in the same register the disquiet of the thinker, the hesitation of Buridan's
ass, or the readiness of a rabbit on alert, but a lso that of the penci l stand
ing on its tip, which the slightest sol icitation would make fal l to one side
or the other. Whereas the person who follows Leibniz's advice must resist
the power of what imposes itself as clear, what ma kes the Qua kers trem
ble is not to have been silent enough to feel what obscurely dema nds to be
felt. In both Lei bniz's and the Quakers' cases, however, the point is to ad
dress, by means of distinct intellectual feelings, an excess su bjectivity that
itself exhibits the efficacy of intel lectual feelings, to address the way we
ask the zone of clear illumination in which our reasons are formulated to
define what a situation demands, and to silence the interstices in which
alternatives lurk.
   The contrast between the means used by Lei bniz and Whitehea d re
flects a contrast between their respective epochs. Although the Lei bnizian
analogy, al lowing the sou l 's disquiet to belong to the same plane as the
insta bil ity of the pencil, could be effecti ve in the seventeenth century, it
became da ngerous in the twentieth century. In Lei bniz's time, it could
make a breath of humor waft over statements laden with hatred and po
lemics, over a theology ha unted by the dark question of grace, in whose
na me Protestants and Cathol ics were kill ing one another. Today, power is
on the side of the specialists of the pencil, and the instabil ity of the pencil
poised on its tip is destined, almost inevita bly, to appear as the " finally
objecti ve" explanation of the sou l 's disquiet.
4 4 6   COSMOLOGY




   As for the proposition according to which every entity is " concerned,"
in the Quaker sense of the term, it inspires the most surprising contrast
with all our territorial physical feel ings, with all our social j udgments con
cerning what is " ours " and what pertains to an unstable pencil. It acts as
a revelator: what appears clearly is the contrast between the seriousness
with which every proposition intended to assi milate us to an unsta ble
physica l system is entertai ned and the outlandish character, inspiring only
irony, of a proposition that would inaugurate the inverse movement, as
sociating with a cosmic suspense each process of sel f-determination, be it
that of the sl ightest electronic occasion or that of a painter adding the last
touch to her work, on which its success or fai lure may depend.
   The soul may certainly be said to be " disquiet " when it refers to a living
person. But what emerges with the soul is the possibil ity, among others, of
the Quakers' " concern," that is, the experience of the " full solemnity of
the world." This is why Whitehead could integrate the Quaker sense of the
term "concern " into his cosmological, speculative thought. What Quaker
concern brings into existence cannot be reduced to a worried hesitation,
for it escapes all final appropriation: the Quaker God will never be " their"
God . The same holds true for the regi me of thought induced by the White
headian scheme, whose singularity is to provide an expl icit disclosure of
the efficacy of the sacrament of transubstantiation. For this regime of
thought, which can be said to be del i berately speculative, includes within
it a speculation on the possibil ity that it might become a habit, a mode of
thought. Not in the sense of an " uprooting" from every community, a de
valuing the living person, but rather in the mode of the " humor of thought " :
a stable articulation between two regimes of signs, the " territorial " signs
that give rise to a " community of intuition," and the " speculative " signs,
bringing a bout the experience of what " might be thought " : " facts " as wit
nesses to a cosmos. Fully deployed intel lectual feeling, exhibiti ng the j usti
fication of life as a "culture of interstices," does not coincide with critique,
or with a break, but it has trust as its cond ition: letting go does not mean
losing one's hold .
   Here, then, with the ci rcle closed, w e have once again encountered the
function Whitehead attributed to his categories, each appl ication of which
was to coincide with a leap of imagination: for we have to do with a cul
turalization of the " miracle of transubstantiation" itsel f. Each experience,
always initially objectified according to the propositions of a special ized
territory, must be able to be ca lled upon to undergo a transformation that
gives its importance to the conscious contrast " a ffirmation/negation," but
that does not appeal to the " last judgment " of a critical operation, pro
ductive of new territorial ities that could be opposed to others. Quite the
                      M O D E S   O F   E X I S T E N C E ,   M O D ES   O F   T H O U G H T   4 4 7




contra ry, the speculative character of thought is marked by the impossibil
ity of constituting " applications " into appropriable states of things, " my"
world designated in "my" language. Speculative language will never be
"my" language, in the sense that it will never ha ve to end up in the forma
tion of j udgments, whether they have the form of an a ffirmation, a nega
tion, or even of a suspension of wha t is pronounced . It does not enable a
pronouncement, but it pronounces, and this is its efficacy: its expressions
bring into existence a " m ight be " tha t no art of consequences can trans
form i nto a verified " state of a ffa i rs." Yet it nevertheless matters, as did
the appearance of expressive signs transforming, without denying them,
the imperatives corresponding to functional signs, by d isplacing them
downstream.
   The q uestion inspired by this analogy might be: what about down
strea m ? Does an imperative of truth finally find satisfaction in it? If this
were the case, there would no doubt be an analogy with Spinoza 's third
genre, or with a certain version of Nietzsche's will to power, or else with
peace accord ing to Leibniz. I shall return to this point a t the end of our
itinera ry. What must be emphasized a l ready is that there will certainly be
no q uestion of celebrating God as truth . Divine envisagement-what is
best for that impasse?-does indeed belong to the " speculative regime"
of thought. God is its logica l subject, and the feeling of the proposition
does not req uire a j udgment concerning the ex istence of God, i n the
social sense, implying the possibil ity of a " last j udgment." Its veri fication
depends on its effects, and these designate the person who enterta ins
such a proposition qua aware of the contrast between a given j udgment
and the way i n which, immersed in the cosmologica l hypothesis, this
j udgment might be " transubstantiated ."
   In other words, every " that's true," every adherence to a proposition
concerning God, constitutes a fact that, in the " inevitable ordering of
things," is j ust as much a participant in an impasse. Whitehead 's God does
not " j udge " the propositional feelings tha t ta ke God as their subject, ac
cording to any kind of truth value tha t would transcend their enterta in
ment. For speculative thought, he is not associated with truth but with
relevance . J ust as, i n Science and the Modern World, God 's power was
defined by the " worship" he inspi res, in Process and Reality, the impor
tance of the propositions tha t ta ke God as their subject refers to the d i f
ference they ma ke for the experience that enterta ins them, to their effi
cacy in the transubstantiation of individual experiences.
   Whitehead's metaphysical God does not recogn ize his own, he does
not read in our hearts, he does not understa nd us better than we do our
selves, he does not demand our recognition or our gratitude, and we shall
4 4 8   COSMOLOGY




never contemplate him in his truth. None of these negative propositions
denies its positive as factually inexact; it denies i t as perta ining to the fal
lacy of misplaced concreteness. All belong to the mode of thought that
celebrates my relation to my self and my belongi ngs, to my body, to my
feeli ngs, my intentions, my possibilities of perception . No thinker thinks
twice. It is the risks of thought that a re exhibited as such with speculative
propositions, and if an i mperative of " truth " exists that is satisfied down
stream, it cannot be separated from the exercise of thought itsel f.
    Thinking promotes general indifference. It is a dangerous exercise never
theless. Indeed, it is only when the dangers become obvious that indiffer
ence ceases, but they often remain hidden and barely perceptible, inherent
in the enterprise. Precisely because the plane of immanence is prephilo
sophical and does not immediately operate with concepts, it implies a sort
of groping experimentation and its layout resorts to measures that are not
very respectable, rational, or reasonable. These measures belong to the
order of dreams, of pathological processes, esoteric experiences, drunken
ness, and excess. We head for the horizon, on the plane of immanence,
and we return with bloodshot eyes, yet they are the eyes of the mind. Even
Descartes had his dream. To think is always to follow the witch 's flight
[ . . . I Usually these measures do not appear in the result, which must be
grasped solely in itself and calmly. But then "danger " takes on another
meaning: it becomes a case of obvious consequences when pure imma
nence provokes a strong, instinctive disapproval in public opinion, and
the nature of the created concepts strengthens this disapproval (QPh, 44 ) .
   We know nothing of the " measures " t o which Whitehead, the most
amiable of phi losophers, had recourse, except perhaps for the strange
frenzy of his insertions, implying a highly unreasonable strategy of com
munication. Yet the result, taken in itsel f and calmly, that is, a labyrinth
of proposi tions del i berately fashioned to " induce " the " sheer disclosure"
proper to a speculative regime of thought, can indeed have "a strong, in
stinctive disapproval " as its consequence. For the q uestion, crucial for
philosophical opinion, "is this really serious? " will always be answered
only by a double series of consequences, which never cease being revived,
like the zigzag of a witch's fl ight: those that make being exist as i mpor
tance, and those that make thought exist as expression .
                                                    C H A PTER TWENT Y - FOUR




God and the World




      1 HE FINAL SUMMARY            can only be expressed in terms of a group
           of antitheses, whose apparent self-contradictions depend on ne
           glect of the diverse categories of existence. In each antithesis there
is a shift of meaning which converts the opposition into a contrast.
   It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that
the World is permanent and God is fluent.
   It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the
World is one and God many.
   It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual emi-
11ently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual eminently.
   It is as true to say that the world is immanent in God, as that God is
immanent in the World.
   It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World
transcends God.
   It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World cre
ates God.
   God and the World are the contrasted opposites in terms of which
Creativity achieves its supreme task of transforming disjoined multiplic
ity, with its diversities in opposition, into concrescent unity, with its di
versities in contrast ( PR, 347-34 8 ) .

Anyone might think that the philosopher who wrote those l ines, three
pages before the end of Process and Reality, is summarizing a careful
argu mentation in which he will have demonstrated how it is possible to
affirm antithetical statements at the same time, in the mode of " it is a s
4 S 0       COSMOLOGY




true . . . " And my reader is no doubt preparing for a new fl ight of experi
ence, for the new leaps of imagination that should be brought about by
ta king into account the categories of existence whose neglect, Whitehead
affirms, explains why the antitheses take on a contradictory character. As
usual henceforth, the circle that announces the leap seems to be there:
that a series of opposi tions may be transformed into so many contrasts
testifies to a cosmos, and it is the di fference between cosmos and neutral
creativity that requi res Whi tehea d 's God . The way Whitehead is going to
oblige us to thi nk of God and the World should in itself constitute a tes
ti mony to the role of God in the World.
    [ . . 1 There is no meaning to "creativity " apart from its "creatures,"
        .



and no meaning to " G od " apart from the "creativity " and the "temporal
creatures," and no meaning to the "temporal creatures " apart from "cre
ativity " and " God " ( PR, 225 ) .
   We know what to expect: w e will be obliged to think of God and the
World in a regime of reciprocal presupposition, a ffirming creativity as
the ulti mate. God and the actual occasions will be descri bed in a mode
that makes them both the creatures of creativity and the cond itions of
creativity. A new flight of speculative experience will begi n.
   And yet, in this case, the leap of imagi nation d i d not take place. White
hea d 's interpreters have remained perplexed and even " a ppal led," and in
any case rooted to the soil of their disagreements. The divergent interpreta
tions and hypotheses with regard to the manner of " mod ifying," " prolong
ing," or " completing " Process and Reality succeed one another. As if, in
this case, the conceptual assemblage could not suffice, could not become a
matter of " sheer disclosure."
   In fact, the triumphalist character of Whitehea d 's " fi na l summary"
should not impress us overmuch . On November 1 1 , 1 94 7, that is, a few
weeks before his death, Whi tehead , spea king of Process and Reality,
fragments of which were perhaps going to be reed ited , a ffirmed the true
credo of his resea rch to Lucien Price:
   "In the preface to it," said he, "I wrote something which ought to have
been repeated in the opening sentence of the first chapter, and repeated at
frequent intervals all through the book: namely, how impressed I am with
the inadequacy of any human being's attempt to express such philosophi
cal ideas at all; how utterly beyond our scope are these universal processes.
All one can do, in venturing on such subjects, is to offer suggestions "
( DANW, 3 5 9 ) .
   However, one must not turn the inadequate cha racter o f human thought
into the specific explanation of the d i fficulties encountered by readers
when it comes to divine experience. When Whitehead spea ks of the inad-
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 1




equacy of human attempts, he is not ta lking about God in particular but
about all the ideas proposed in Process and R eality. What is more, pre
cisely in the case of God it was most important for him that the attempt
should not end in defea.t, in the thesis of a " l earned ignorance," an expe
rience of the impotence of human intell igence in the face of an infinite
perfection that makes the categories appropriate for finitude pass to their
respecti ve limits and col lapse together. Whitehead knows that many of
his readers will be Christians, or at least " infected " by Christian theologi
cal notions. And Lucien Price reports the brutal judgment Whitehead
pronounced in this regard: "I consider Christian theology to be one of
the great d isasters of the human race " ( DANW, 1 71 ) .
   The theological figure of a creator God, omnipotent, perfect, paternal,
omn iscient, providential , and j udge, never inspired anything but the
strictest d isapproval in Whitehead, right down to the end . Constructing a
concept of God, he could not, of course, envisage repai ri ng the historica l
disaster humanity had undergone, but he certainly undertook to create
the means to fight against its consequences where this was possible for
him: in philosophical thought.
   The secularization of the concept of God's functions in the world is
at least as urgent a requisite of thought as is the secularization of other
elements of experience. The concept of God is certainly one essential
element in religious feeling. But the converse is not true; the concept of
religious feeling is not an essential element in the concept of God's func
tion in the universe. In this respect religious literature has been sadly
misleading to philosophic theory, partly by attraction and partly by re
pulsion ( PR, 207 ) .
    I t must therefore b e accepted that the " suggestions" Whitehead offers
about God should, for him, satisfy the demands of thought. In contrast,
the fact that the concept of God, which he has to construct, may, as pre
vious ones, be an essential element in religious feeling rather expresses
Science and the Modern World's trust in the religious vision recurring
" with an added richness and purity of content ." In such a purified vision,
however, this concept will be "one " essential element, but it will not be
"the " essential element. Whitehead 's attempt at secularization is not
meant to prescribe the new content of an eventual rel igious vision, even
if this vision may benefi t from consciousness' self-correction of its own
initial excess of subjectivity, which is the subject of philosophy.
    Was the attempt successful ? As I have said, for many of Whitehead's
readers the answer is no. They considered that Process and Reality should
ei ther be rewritten with no God , or else that it alluded to a book that
Whitehead could not or did not wish to write, i n which the concept of
4 5 2   COSMOLOGY




God would certainly have ga ined the coherence which, accord ing to
them, is missing.
   Yet it so happens that I think it possible to construct this coherence on
the basis of the text as it was written. And I can attempt, already at this
point, to convey the reason why the a bsence here of the " d i sclosure " usu
ally associated with a Whitehead ian construction may wel l be a coherent
consequence of that construction. For wha t is at stake in this case is " the
secularization of the concept of God 's functions in the world," and in
order to succeed in such an operation of secula riza tion, one must first
succeed in not thinking of Man in the i mage of God ; that is, reciprocally,
in not constructing a God who would be in the i mage of Man, a l l the
singul arities that enable mankind to be opposed to beasts or electrons,
passi ng to infinity to converge towa rd the inconceivable d ivine perfec
tion . Mankind, beasts, and electrons designate societies, and even thought
and its concepts refer to ad ventures cond itioned by societies . But God is
indi fferent to societies. In other words, not only did God not make Man
in his image, but above a l l , our image of ourselves as a living conti nui ty,
demand ing to be acknowledged and appreciated , finds no respondent
in God .
   And this is what makes d i vine experience, properly speaking, " un
imagina ble." Imagination cannot " lea p " in this case for it too is inti
mately linked to social ad ventures. It is only when something of our own
experience enters into resonance with what our words formulate that
imagination leaps. Our experience cannot enter into resonance with that
of God : such, it seems to me, is the first meaning of the statement that
" the concept of religious feeling is not an essentia l element in the concept
of God 's function in the universe."
   In any case, let us think of the term " function " that Whitehead used
to define what is to be understood . The point is not to set forth a " perfect
being " in concepts but to characterize a function or a role. How better to
prohi bit the mystical elan that the leap of imagination would constitute
here than by this characterization ? Yet we can go further. Whitehead was
a mathematician, and for a mathematician the term " function " typica lly
designates what belongs to the sol ution of a problem. If the following
pages do not inspire a flight of experience, it is precisely because the
question of the relation between God and the World is ra ised , for White
head, as a problem that demands a sol ution, that is, it a lso refers enti rely
to the responsibility of the person who has raised the problem. The point
is no longer to set out from what we in fact " know," from the common
sense that the multiple versions of the bifurcation of nature conspire to
silence. The point is to contri bute a keystone to the conceptual edifice,
                                                 G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 3




and every keystone is characterized by a rather special role as compared
with the building's other stones. In this case, the rather special character
designates precisely the need for taking up his conceptual categories in a
way that separates them from what elsewhere constitutes their truth, the
leap of imagination toward applications. They will not permit any " leap "
toward God , for the hope that God w i l l come t o meet u s is precisely
what secula riza tion must imperatively counter.
   Before defining the problem for which I believe the concept of the di
vine functioning is a solution, I must specify the challenge my hypothesis
wi l l have to answer and the interpretative choice to which it responds.
   The challenge consists in the fact that the fi fth part of Process and Re
ality, devoted to the question of God, is literally saturated by " familiar"
images. God " understands," " saves," " leads," is the "grea t companion,"
the " poet," and so on. I will have to show that the influx of these rel igious
images is part of the veri fication of the solution: in the case of a positive
verification, each will have to undergo a " speculative twisting" that coun
ters the type of rel igious emotion usually associated with it. To counter
does not mean to prohibit: nothing would give rise more effectively to
the flight of experience that is to be countered than the prohibition defin
ing it as an infraction . According to my hypothesis, it is thus by taking
up, deliberately and systematically, the images associated with Christian
theology and mysticism that Whitehead has chosen to put his solution to
the test, and it is the success of this test that wi l l have to be verified . This
cannot happen, however, until the end of our itinerary, when we will
have reached its solution .
   As far as the interpretative choice is concerned, it concerns the prob
lem, and must therefore be deployed a l ready at this point. The definition
of the problem which, accord ing to my hypothesis, Whitehead tries to
solve, presupposes a decision about the way we may understand the vari
ety of the characterizations of the d ivine functioning that figure in the
pages of Process and Reality. In this case, my decision subscribes to
Lewis Ford 's genetic interpretation, since I wi l l suppose that Wh i tehead,
here as elsewhere, did not take the trouble to rewrite his text, although,
at the end of his redaction, the subject he was envisaging was undergoing
a drastic mutation. The q uestion that must then be raised is that of the
mod i fications that he " should have" made.
   As we know, at the beginning of Process and Reality, God was endowed
exclusively with conceptual feelings, and conceived as " nontemporal pri
mord ial actuality." At the point of arrival, what was a pure, nontemporal
act of envisagement will have become God 's " pri mord ial nature," initiat
ing d ivine experience, and God, havi ng become a "creature of creativi ty,"
4 5 4   COSMOLOGY




wi l l have been endowed with a "consequent nature," an addition whose
consequences Whitehea d characterizes by a rather spectacular contrast.
   One side of God's nature is constituted by h is conceptual experience.
This experience is the primordial fact in the world, limited by no actual
ity which it presupposes. This side of his nature is free, complete, primor
dial, eternal, actually deficient, and unconscious. The other side origi
nates with physical experience derived from the temporal world, and
then acquires integration with the primordial side. It is determined, in
complete, consequent, "everlasting," fully actual, and conscious. His nec
essary goodness expresses the determination of his consequent nature
( PR, 345 ) .
   Whitehead i s not fooling around . I f what he describes i s faithful to his
solution, and i f the latter holds, one could even say that this solution
passes precisely where Christian theology has appropriated philosophical
concepts in a " d i sastrous " way. For God 's conceptual experience, as it is
characterized (except with regard to its " deficiency," that is, its thirst for
actual i ty, which is the only value ), correspond s quite wel l to the Greek
concept of " unmoved Prime Mover," who moves without being moved
and hence is not moved emotionally either, who orients without bei ng af
fected by the way that beings respond to his orientation. Whitehead him
sel f does not hesitate to emphasize this point ( PR, 344 ) . Yet this superb
concept, if it is adequate for a celebration of d ivine perfection, of its d i f
ference from a l l creatures, has nevertheless raised a terrible problem for
the Christian theologians who have appropriated it. It corresponds to a
divine figure incapable of that relation to history required by a providen
tial rel igion. God, the unmoved First Mover, may be He to whom the
prayers of mankind rise up, but not He to whom these prayers are ad
dressed if mankind requi res that their prayers be addressed to a being ca
pable of hearing them. But the physica l experience Whitehead attributes
to God seems to be the answer to this problem, and even affirms itself to
be capable of integrating the goodness demanded by the religious idea of
providence . If Whitehead's solution were to hold, one could say that he
would have " ta ken the problem by the horns," creating not a concept of
the divine in general but the finally coherent concept-the bad construc
tion of which, accord ing to him, was a disaster-{)f the God of the Chris
tians: a tinkered solution which, as the case may be, has been celebrated
as designating the unthinkable that must nevertheless be thought. In
short, he wil l have speculatively eliminated the central mystery of Chris
tian theology.
   At this point, however, a question of reading arises. What Whitehead
descri bes in this text as the two sides of God 's nature, he often defi nes
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 5




elsewhere as two " natures," primord ial and consequent. In fact, he even
spoke here of " two experiences," which has no meaning according to his
concepts: one or many, not two. The only genuine conceptual impl ication
of " two " is the duality of poles, physical and mental, of an experience
that is in itself undivided . Does " two " translate a specificity of God ? This
hypothesis seems to me all the less necessary in that Whitehead will also
come to speak, in these same pages, of " two experiences" for an actual
occasIOn .
   I a m therefore goi ng to run the risk of admitting that, in any case,
we have to do with a " manner of spea king." When Whitehead spea ks of
God's two natures, or of two divine experiences, he is simply prolongi ng
the l i ttle ruse that has a l l owed him to avoid ted ious rewritings. It was
enough for him to note-and even then not a l ways-i n the passages
where he had spoken of God as " nontemporal " that he was obviously
talking a bout God 's " primordial nature." By so doing, he unfortunately
set a trap for his readers, who were subjected to the temptation to attri
bute to this " primordial nature " as such the responsibility for the a spect
of functioning that Whitehead had initially attributed to nontemporal
actuality. This has very serious consequences, as we sha l l see on the basis
of a typica l exa mple.
   In what sense can unrealized abstract form be relevant? What is its
basis of relevance? "Relevance " must express some real fact of together
ness among forms. The ontological principle can be expressed as: All real
togetherness is togetherness in the formal constitution of an actuality.
So if there be a relevance of what in the temporal world is unrealized, the
relevance must express a fact of togetherness in the formal constitution
of a non-temporal actuality ( PR, 32 ) .
   From beginning to end o f Process and Reality, one invariant remains:
the fact that i f God 's intervention is necessary, it is in order to think of
relevance. In this passage, the subject is the ingression of eternal objects
that are not realized but " relevant." Yet to ensure that mental decisions
are " relevant" was already the function of God as the principle of limita
tion in Science and the Modern World, and i f this function is henceforth
attri buted to primordial nature alone, what is the function of consequent
nature ? It is that thanks to which God " feels" the world qua temporal, of
course, but what a re the consequences of this feeling for the world ? More
over, if relevance pertains to primordial nature a lone, that is, to the infi
nite envisagement of all eternal objects, how can this envisagement end up
in the definition of " what is best for that impasse," while itself remaining
"eternal," not affected by the temporal ity implied by this i mpasse qua as
sociated with a subjective sati sfaction, thus and not otherwise?
4 S 6   COSMOLOGY




  It is perhaps beca use the notion of " Unmoved Pri me Mover" consti
tutes an attractor too powerful for the conceptua l i magination that so
ma ny Whiteheadian philosophers have acted as though they could trea t
each of God 's " two na tures " sepa ra tely, instea d of attri buting to divine
experience two poles that can only be distinguished a bstractly. My read
ing choice will be the reverse: the point is to accentuate the insepa rable
character of the two " poles " of divine experience, the pole ca lled mental
and the pole ca lled physica l, and therefore to go right to the end of what
Whitehead proposed when he made God an actua l entity ( a l most) l i ke
the others.
  Every actual entity is "in time " so far as its physical pole is concerned,
and is "out of time " so far as its mental pole is concerned. It is the union
of two worlds, namely, the temporal world, and the world of autono
mous valuation ( PR, 248 ) .
   Consequently, I propose to rea d the statements in which Whitehead
spea ks of a " non-tempora l actua l ity " in a way that actively differentiates
between what mathematicians call " necessa ry " conditions and " necessary
and sufficient " conditions. When a statement refers to the nontemporal
actua lity, or to the primordial nature of God, as i f one could spea k of it
in isolation, this is a " necessa ry condition ": the envisagement of eternal
objects is necessary; otherwise, it would be i mpossi ble for nonrea l ized
eterna l objects to make ingression, si nce the notion of releva nce ca nnot
explain without being itself explained. But is this envisagement sufficient
to explain relevance passing into the worl d ? In the fifth part of Process
and Reality, by contrast, when Whitehead moves from divine conceptual
envisagement, defined as a necessary condition, to that envisagement in
the midst of the economy of divine experience, the question of necessary
and sufficient conditions is ra ised . It is then a ma tter of ta king fully into
account the undivided na ture of divine experience, the insepa rable char
acter of the two poles.
   However, a Whiteheadian scholar will proba bly come up with a very
serious objection to this reading choice. If the " d ivine endowment" con
stituted by the " i nitial a i m " of each nascent subject must be referred to
God as an actua l entity, and not to his eternal primordia l nature, it can
be assimilated to a "conclusion " of divine experience with rega rd to
" what is best for that impasse." But if God concl udes each time, he can
no longer be neither everlasting nor eterna l : his experience is "atomic."
What is given for the hybrid physical feeling from which an occasion will
derive its initial a i m is what has acceded to objective immortality, what
marks the perishing of the divine subject who therefore " never rea l ly ex
ists." Are we to imagine tha t a "divine occasion " could be reborn from
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 5 7




each worldly satisfaction, from each feeling of an impasse? This is not
Whitehead's solution, but it is the possibility accepted by Charles H arts
horne when he suggested making God a " society," a lineage of occasions
that inherit from themselves and from the world as it has decided itself
each time, according to the verdict of a n occasional new " worldly" satis
faction . H artshorne's suggestion has ra ised problems for those who insist
on agreement with physics, in this case relativistic: in this interpretation,
the d ivine feeling would correspond to a " true" definition of the world
qua simultaneous with itself. Yet the definition of a " divine society " gives
rise to many other difficulties, because turning God into a society means
placing him under the banner not only of a continuity but of a confor
mity. This risks making him topple immediately toward the side of reli
gion, for this conformity will enable him to be characterized, allowing
the definition of his " defin ing characteristic," and it will be hard to stop
once one gets going and not to deduce from him the d ivine proj ects for
the world . Such a characteristic is, moreover, ready-made, since White
head speaks of his " necessary goodness " as expressing " the determination
of his consequent nature." But if " God is good " through his own, cease
lessly confirmed continuity, why is he indifferent to our own continuities ?
Job's cry rings out.
   This is the defect of the idea of God as society: it has j ust given rise to
a misplaced " leap " of the imagination. God 's experience is social, " like
ours," therefore . . . My read ing hypothesis will thus go in the reverse d i
rection . The goal will be to accentua te what makes God an actua l entity
" unlike the others," and, on my hypothesis, this d ifference can, as we shall
see, justify a divine temporality that al lows us to escape from the threat of
the atomization of God .
   Whitehead is very clear on the subject of how God d iffers from actual
occasions. What d iffers is the fact that divine experience i mpl ies a " pole
reversa l " with regard to occasional experience. This, it seems to me, is the
genu ine problem to which d ivine functioning constitutes the solution, a
problem that can be avoided by those who describe the two natures as if
they could be separated . The solution Whitehead seeks is the character
ization of an experience that is l itera lly " unimaginable," because the ini
tial pole of this experience is characterized by the envisagement of eternal
obj ects that say nothing about themselves, nor about what their ingres
sion requires. They are not a ffected by the decisions that have conferred
upon them one or another role, nor by the multiple epochs that succeed
and become entangled with one another, punctuated by the appearance
of new contrasts and new propositions. Obviously, we cannot attri bute a
satisfaction of the occasional type to such an experience, since this type
4 5 8   COSMOLOGY




of satisfaction would i mply that everythi ng that was i ndeterminate i n
the i nitial pole h a s found i ts determi nation. A n d therefore, w e c a n sug
gest, a l ready at that point, that God is he who is unable to " conclude,"
to arrive at a determi nation that is " thus and not otherwise." Yet how
can we construct the positive definition of an experience that we cannot
i magi ne ?
   According to my hypothesis, Whitehead " thinks by the midd le." He
wi ll not try to conceive of God " i n hi msel f," but to affirm, by means of
the correlated twofold defini tion of God a nd the actual occasions, the
equal d ignity of both poles, the physica l pole that a ffirms that what has
occurred has occurred , and the conceptual pole, by which nothing of
what has occurred constitutes the last word . This is why the final chapter
of Process and Reality does not deal with God without at the same time
dea ling-rather implici tly, it must be admitted-with actual occasions,
that is, without submitting the coherence of the metaphysical scheme to
a new test.
   A n actual entity in the temporal world is to be conceived as originated
by physical experience with its process of completion motivated by con
sequent, conceptual experience initially derived from God. God is to be
conceived as originated by conceptual experience with his process of
completion motivated by consequent, physical experience, initially de
rived from the temporal world ( PR, 345 ) .
   Whitehead never formulated in s o technical a way as i n these few lines
the contrast which, accordi ng to my hypothesis, he wishes to construct,
and it is this programmatic statement ( i nvolving the imperative " is to
be " ) that will guide me from here on. This, accord i ng to my reading hy
pothesis, is the problem to which Whitehead m ust bring a sol ution.
   In fact, this problem presents itself in the manner of two d istinct " ma th
ematical formulas," a bout which it must be determined how the d ifferent
terms they connect a re to be defined in order to make the formula work.
And it is the contrast between the two formulas that obviously acts as a
constra int. Whitehead's statement prescribes that the pole reversal should
be thought in a mode that exhibits a partiality i n favor of symmetry: both
formulas propose an identical threefold articulation, " originated by,"
" with itslhis process of completion motivated by," and " consequent [ . . . 1
experience initially derived from ." These three identical articulations must
be understood as together forming a complex function, with the rest be
ing variable. How should we interpret the varia bles in a way that satisfies
and renders intel l igible their articulation, al lowing us to i magine that the
two formulas are in fact one and the same, endowed with d ifferent
varia bles ?
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   4 5 9




    Here, instead of the leap of the imagination, it is the la borious work of
mathematicians constructing their sol ution that i mposes itself. For we
sha ll have to proceed as one does in mathematics: starting out from what
may be considered " known," the functioning of actual occasions, to
explore the way i n which the first formula, supposed to define what is
known, in fact obliges us to make explicit, a nd even to mod ify what we
know, and use what has been acq uired as a starting point towa rd the
unknown. We sha l l therefore begin with the actual occasion, " conceived
as originated by physica l experience " and as endowed with " process of
completion motivated by consequent, conceptua l experience i nitia lly de
rived from God." I suggest that the reader who, having now understood
my a pproach, hesitates to engage in this hypothetical exploration, skip
directly to the next chapter, i n which the construction I sha ll attribute to
Whitehead will have to be eva luated on the basis of what it gives rise to:
new leaps of the imagination.
   As we reca ll, the question of the " physica l experience " i n which an
actua l occasion has its origin was ma rked by a major event: the aban
donment of the idea that " physica l feelings " a re the feeling of an a l ready
unified datum. The demand answered by this abandonment is clear: the
" initi a l phase," the physical feelings of the data but a lso the conceptual
feelings that derive from them ( according to the fourth categorica l obli
gation ) , must always be already those of a subject, always be already in
separa ble from the p·rocess of completion whose superject to be deter
mined constitutes a final cause.
   Since the point is to " get to the bottom of things," one could ask the
question " where does the subject 'come from' " ? Rather remarkably, the
" formula " does not say. Of course, the actual entity has its origin in physi
ca l experience, but this experience, once it has been referred to a nexus
i nstead of a datum, has conferred i ts full meaning upon the " m i racle of
creation." The many that wil l have to be felt a re, like d ried bones, on
vacation wi th rega rd to what wi ll give them life, what will constitute
them as multiple physica l feelings. And if Ezekiel spea ks as he was com
manded , the very fact that he spea ks implies that, one way or another, the
command requi res a proto-subject to l isten and enact. Or that there is a
relation of reciproca l presupposition between a germ of subjectivity a nd
what answers to it, a multiplicity henceforth correlated, the shudder of
the dispersed bones becoming data for physica l feelings aiming at their
subject. These would be two aspects of the same " origi n " of the actual
entity. And therefore, the " initial endowment," the hybrid physica l feel
ing of God from which, accord ing to the fourth obligation, the initial aim
derives, req uires a nd does not explain its subject.
4 6 0   COSMOLOGY




  In this regard, let us take up a fragment whose beginning has a l ready
been cited, and which describes how the initial aim is mod ified, becom
ing, accordi ng to the terms of the formula, the conceptua l experience that
motivates the process of completion. Its end, which I have not cited, gave
the reason why the hybrid feeling of God was introduced .
   Each temporal entity, in one sense, originates from its mental pole,
analogously to God himself. It derives from God its basic conceptual aim,
relevant to its actual world, yet with indeterminations awaiting its own
decisions. This subjective aim, in its successive modifications, remains the
unifying factor governing the successive phases of interplay between
physical and conceptual feelings. These decisions are impossible for the
nascent creature antecedently to the novelties in the phases of its concres
cence. But this statement in its turn requires amplification. With this
amplification the doctrine, that the primary phase of a temporal actual
entity is physical, is recovered [ . . . 1 the primary phase is a hybrid physi
cal feeling of G od, in respect to God 's conceptual feeling which is imme
diately relevant to the universe "given " for that concrescence. There is
then, according to the Category of Conceptual Valuation, i.e. Categoreal
Obligation I V, a derived conceptual feeling which reproduces for the
subject the data and valuation of God's conceptual feeling. This concep
tual feeling is the initial conceptual aim [ . . . 1 ( PR, 224-225 ) .
  When Whitehead notes that a statement requires amplification, it i s
usually because h e is making an insertion i nto a text written previously. I n
this case, the " a mplification" has enabled h i m to affirm that the origin of
an actual occasion is indeed a physical experience, answering to " Hume's
principle." God's hybrid physical feeling thus enables agreement with
both H ume's principle and the ontological principle, which demands a
reason for the ingression of unrealized eterna l objects. Yet as its name in
dicates, this feeling also presupposes its subject, albeit nascent.
  In other words, the expression " initially derived from God " a l l udes to
the derivation of a conceptual feel ing from a hybrid physical feeling, but
does not in the very least explain the " subject" that is presupposed in
both cases. And a supplementary problem arises with regard to the sec
ond formula, which concerns divine experience, for in its case, the origin of
the experience is defined as "conceptua l." Coherence, in this case, i mplies
that whatever may be its modalities that are still to be determined, divine
experience must be i nitially conceptual . As a result, what Whitehead i n
this case calls " derivation" ( God's process of completion as " motivated
by the consequent physical experience initially derived from the temporal
world " ) requires that the initium for God-what " activates " a di vine
experience-he the derivation of a physica l feeling from a conceptual
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   461




one, the latter involving moreover, one way or another, the temporal
worl d . But there is no category that defines this possibi lity.
   Here we face an initial difficulty of Whitehead's formula, and a deci
sion becomes necessary. Insofa r as the term " derivation" involved i n the
expression " initia lly derived " cannot be used in a strictly technica l sense
in the case of the divine, it is not necessary to think that it has the techni
cal meaning conferred upon it by the fourth obligation in the other case.
Thus, the formulas do not confer upon the term " derivation " that a ppears
in it the categoreal meaning of " derivation of a feeling from another feel
ing." This is coherent, for when i t comes to the delicate question of the
" ma tching cond itions " (as physicists call the operation of connection
between two d ifferent registers of descriptions ) between God and the
world, and between the world and God, the categories of obligation can
only remain silent, for they presuppose concrescence and concern the lat
ter's process of self-determination. In order to emphasize the importance
of this technica l poi nt, I wi l l a l low myself to use, i nstead of the hence
forth opaque expression " i nitia lly derived," a new " na me " that points
out the problem where we were l u red by a feeling of fam i l i a ri ty. This
name will be added to the series of Whitehead ian names, that is, of the
concepts that matter prima rily by their relevance to other concepts,
which is precisely what thei r name does not state.
   The goal is to name the " beginning" to which corresponds the ques
tion " Whence comes the subject? " but also the " end " ; the fact that, in a
way that is sti ll indeterminate, occasional experience can " make God
physica lly feel " in such a way that God's consequent experience may be
" relevant" for " that i mpasse." And we must choose a term that is i ndeter
minate enough to escape the demand for reasons associated with the
ontological principle. Not in order to i ntroduce something a rbitrary, but
because the " reasons" associated with the ontological principle a l ways
incl ude a mong those reasons the " final cause," the subject-superject: sub
jective feel i ngs qua aiming at the superject that will be the subject of thei r
unified feeling. Further, the reversal of poles ma kes the a pplication of the
ontological principle to God a problem. Should it be " no eternal object, no
reason " ? We must name what is demanded by creativity that is ultimate
when it comes to the twofold " making-feel," that is, to what is required
both by the hybrid physical feeling of God (which requires a subject to feel
it), and by the divine feeling " a bout" the actual occasion as an impasse
(which requi res that the occasion make God feel ) .
   "At the beginning o f beginnings, there i s induction." I have chosen the
term " induction " for two reasons. First, the term evokes an operation of
" passage " between two heterogeneous things: one thing induces something
4 6 2   COSMOLOGY




different. Then, when we have to deal with what is called hypnotic induc
tion, the term is laden with indeterminacy. Hypnotized subjects seem to
raise their arm against their will, "as they were ordered ." Yet hypnotizers
are wel l aware that they a re not the ones who have given the order. If they
have a role, it is rather that of indicating a path, or authorizing an experi
ence. Those who induce hypnosis a re thus quite unable to explain what
they are bringing about, but they know that they a re not its " reason."
   One of the ways to specify that hypnotizers are not rea lly in command
is to say that they give rise to what did not exist before the induction, a
new " you " to whom it is suggested " you must be able to raise your arm
aga inst your wil l ." The " you must be able" is not a n order, for an order
supposes the preexistence of the person to whom it is add ressed . It must
be understood more in the mode of a d iagnosis or of a hypothetica l ob
servation. In fact, th is is a path suggested to the new "you" made to
emerge by the addressing, by which the corresponding " I " will verify its
own existence . The order corresponds to a " ma ki ng fel t," whence the
subject of this feeling emerges, initiati ng, as the case may be, the ra ising
of the hand "as ordered ."
   To choose the term " i nd uction " is thus to give rise to the " leap of
imagination" in a case that does not correspond to a religious feeling but
has constrained scientists who seek reasons to acknowledge indetermi
nacy. I will take adva ntage of the flight of experience thus brought a bout
to take up the second part of Whitehead's formula concerning the actual
entity " with its process of completion motivated by consequent, concep
tual experience," and to try to make it a l ive with rega rd to the adventure
of human experience descri bed by the French phi losopher Etienne
Souriau under the name " work to be done."
   This is i ndeed a leap of the imagination, for the di fferences are just as
rema rkable as the common features. Thus, unlike occasional completion,
the trajectory of completion of both work and worker requires conscious
ness, and more precisely a properly " non-socia l " mode of consciousness,
since, as we shall see, none of the i ngredients to be " set to work" can
boast of a stabilized role, none can be felt independently of the contrast
proper to intellectua l feeling between " in fact" and " might be." More
over, unlike the accomplishment constituted by a work, the accomplish
ment constituted by every occasional satisfaction cannot, as such, be as
sociated with the contrast between success and failure. Every concrescence
prod uces its satisfaction, however trivial the way in which the many have
become one on this occasion may be.
   The common features, for their part, ind icate that those who have used
the expression " work to be done "-that is, E tienne Souriau, and a fter
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 6 3




him Gil les Deleuze-sought to depersonalize the experience of the work
as i t is carried out, that is, also to divest it of the reasons, whether psy
chological or social, that claim to account for it. The result has been a
characterization of that experience that could indeed be read as a testi
mony i n fa vor of the Whiteheadian genetic process, somewhat as i n phys
ics, the ( socia l ) properties of supercond ucting bodies testify in favor of
the relevance of q uantum mechanics. Perhaps, moreover, this character
ization converges with what Whitehead hi mself understood by " wholly
living nexus," for the " non-social " mode of consciousness of creators at
work situates them i n the interstices of the ha bits, slogans, and judg
ments proper to discursive consciousness, fashioning step by step a
thread of continuity that may be broken as soon as trust is stratified into
assurance, or dissolves into fatigue.
   The " work to be done" is, with the " task to be fulfilled " and the " prob
lem to be solved," one of the ways in which Gil les Deleuze ( DR, espe
cially pp. 253 and 274 ) characterizes the " reality " of the vi rtua l, distin
guishi ng it from the potential, which lacks only existence. This, in fact, is
how the correlated multiplicity of pri mary physical feelings can be de
scri bed, feelings which appea l, as to their final cause, to the " solution"
that will celebrate the correlative determination of the superj ect and i ts
actua l world : satisfaction. Yet the Deleuzian virtual does not state expl ic
itly that it requi res, in order to assu me i ts i mperative meaning, " to be
done," " to be fulfil led," " to be solved," someone who hears and accepts.
No problem can, of course, i nsist " in genera l," or demand its solution " i n
genera l," independently o f the person experiencing this insistence, who
wi ll be mobi lized by this demand. Thus, Fermat's conj ecture is, for the
non-mathematician, a proposition that is plausible but " dead," " the kind
of thing whose eventual demonstration may excite mathematicians." And
for most mathematicians, this conjecture was accompanied, before its
demonstration, by all the discouraging stories a bout the fai l ures that suc
ceeded each another for centuries: a problem to be solved, perhaps, but
those who attacked it had to thi n k they were capa ble of succeed ing
where so many others had failed. The conjecture only became " a live" for
those who, at thei r own risks and peri ls, felt themselves a ble to i nherit
not the repeated failures but the possible, the " it should be possible to
demonstrate it." For them, the conjecture ass umed the i m perative cha rac
ter of the question that would devour a life.
   In this "it should be possi ble," one will of course recognize the " mak
ing felt" that corresponds what I have called " induction." The i m perative
of the problem to be solved has made itsel f felt, which also means that
the subject of these feelings is born, for whom the correlated multipl icity
4 6 4   COSMOLOGY




of known mathematical theorems and relations is now what the solution
 " should come" from .
    Yet what happens next also illuminates the process of completion which,
for Whitehea d, has the character of a quantum in solido, that objective
analysis can only decompose in a way that abstracts from its undivided
character. A problem can only be divided when it is in fact solved, when
mathematicians have succeeded in giving it a formulation that constitutes
them as " ma sters " of their procedure, allowing them to proceed to the
verification of thei r solution. They can then ma ke the ordered stages suc
ceed one another, and proceed to the progressive determination of the
landscape, where, finally, the solution should swoop down like an eagle
on its prey: QED. Yet verification is preceded by rovings, zigzags, drea ms,
and nightmares, i n which the dissolved self of the mathematician a nd the
indeterminate fragments of what might be the solution affect one another
in an entanglement that is i mpossible to recount. For this entanglement,
on the one hand, creates ever more singular relations between the i nitial
data-a l l the mathematica l theorems that might be releva nt-and, on
the other, the enrichment of the "final cause" that motiva tes the mathe
matician: the a bstract " it should be possible" gradually becomes half
formulated hypotheses, hesi tant conjectures. As if the solution were i n
some way more a n d more "present," motivating an effort that is more a nd
more singular, but without it being possible for thi s presence to be, for all
that, the object of a n appropriation enabling a narration : "and then I said
to myself that . . . " It is not that creation is ineffa ble, but those who nar
rate it divide the i ndivisible, transformi ng what had put them to the test
i nto questions they would have asked themselves. Creation is a " private"
process, but " private" has nothing to do with a psychological form of in
timacy, the refusal to show something until it is finished . It is because,
strictly speaking, there is nothing to see, nothing to show, nothing to dis
cuss, nothi ng to share, except by allusion, and only with those who-and
the private can clearly be col lecti ve-a lso expose themselves to be inhab
ited by a question to enter i nto a process of creation.
    The " i nappropriable presence " that motivates the work, the idea that
flees i f one tries to make i t explicit, for its only clarification wi l l coi ncide
with the work produced, is called by Etienne Souriau the " spiritual form"
of the work to be done, or aga i n the "Angel of the work ."
   You realize, of course, that I only propose this word while accompany
ing it with all the appropriate philosophical "as it weres." No doubt, for
this comparison of spiritual form and the A ngel, I could take shelter be
hind the authority of William Blake. In fact, and to speak a more severe
and more technical language, I do indeed say that the work to be done
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   4 6 5




has a certain form. It is a form accompanied by a kind of halo of hope
and wonder, whose reflection is a kind of Orient for us. All these are
things than can obviously be commented upon by a comparison with
love. A nd in fact, if the poet did not already love the poem a bit before
writing it, if all those who think of a future world that is to be brought to
life did not find, in their dreams on this subject, some amazed premoni
tion of the presence called for, if, in a word, the waiting for the work was
amorphous, there would no doubt be no creation. Here, I am not letting
myself be swept along by a k ind of mysticism of the creative effort, but
I simply observe that the creator can scarcely escape this kind of mysti
cism, by which his effort is justified " ( M EO F, 1 4-1 5 ) .
   " Spiritual form " means neither " model " nor goa l . O n the contrary,
Souriau's Angel plays a role analogous to that of consequent conceptual
experience, " motivati ng" the process of accomplishment, for that of
which it is the omen or " l ure " is inseparable from the work in the mak
ing: not a fixed form to be achieved but an insistence, ceaselessly re
launched, whose enigma puts creators to the question, turning them into
the creatures of their question . The Angel neither suggests nor inspires an
answer, he demands it from creators, and the creators alone a re respon
sible for the way they respond : either a success or a fa ilure.
   If the question of the work to be done can traverse a l l the registers of a
life in Etienne Souriau (and in Deleuze ), from the poem to life itself, then
raised to the anonymous power of "a life," it is because it is irreducible to
the continuity instituted by any positive description: a creator endowed
with habits, projects, and ideas. And it is no doubt because Whitehead
was a man a t work that he insti tuted in metaphysica l terms, that is, i n the
very structure of the categoreal scheme, what the work to be done de
mands to see recognized: the radica l difference between obligation and
explanation. All explanation, because it is division, attri buting causes and
responsibilities, distributing reasons and circumstances, takes ad vantage
of a social stability that it confirms, or of an accompli shed work that it
verifies. An obliga tion cannot be explained but must be respected, and
there is nothing moral a bout the term " respect," either when Souriau's
Angel ma kes the worker hesitate or when it comes to an actual occasion.
It must be understood a s close as possible to the expression " respect of
specifications," which leaves open the question of how i t will be so.
   I can now return to my own specifications, that is, turn towa rd White
head's second formula, the one that cha racterizes the functioning of di
vine experience. The preceding al lows the problem of this formula to be
raised on the basis of the question of " matching condi tions," that is, of
the way in which the motivation of d i vine experience may be " i nitially
4 6 6   COSMOLOGY




derived from the tempora l world ." The first goa l will be to understand
the meaning, in this case, of the translation I have given of this initial
derivation : " there is ind uction." Not, of course, in order to explain induc
tion, but to ask in what way the " temporal worl d " may " i nduce" a divine
experIence.
   But God, as well as being primordial, is also consequent. He is the be
ginning and the end. He is not the beginning in the sense of being in the
past of all members. He is the presupposed actuality of conceptual opera
tion, in unison of becoming with every other creative act. Thus, by reason
of the relativity of all things, there is a reaction of the world on God. The
completion of God's nature into a fullness of physical feeling is derived
from the objectification of the world in God. He shares with every new
creation its actual world; and the concrescent creature is objectified in God
as a novel element in God's objectification of that actual world ( PR, 345 ) .
   Whereas occasions inherit " stubborn facts," God shares " his" world
with each new creation . We will thus have to play close to the vest, for the
term " share" seems to imply that God physically feels the actua l world
correlated with the entity, that is, j ust as much that he feels the entity it
self, since the entity and its world are i n fact the two sides of one coi n, as
I have previously tried to ill ustrate by bringing up the inseparability be
tween the operator, the actual world that has become well-determ ined,
and the "eigensubject" who is its feeling. But the hypothesis that God
feels the world " physically" is excluded by the first pa rt of the formula,
defining as the " origin" a mental pole that m ust be expressed in terms of
feelings that a re uniquely conceptua l . Here, the decision I have taken to
let myself be guided by " the formula " will impose a risky interpretation .
We will have to succeed in " placing at the origi n " everything that will
have to be mobil ized by the process of divine completion, a process that
will shed light on what Whitehead calls " sharing."
   In add ition, a supplementary question arises, inspi red by the term
" sharing." Can God share his process of completion with an occasion ? In
this case, God would transcend the distinction between the " private " and
the " publ ic." He would therefore become quite close to the God of Leib
niz, able to read in the sl ightest state of the least monad " what occurs
everywhere, and even what has occurred and wi l l occur." Whitehead has,
of course, rejected the idea of a " divine reading" that refers our experi
ence of choice, hesitation, decision, and novelty to the "as if." Yet the
opposition is perhaps not as irreparable as he thought. A Bergsonian
reader of Lei bniz like Gil les Deleuze was able to take up, in an al most
Whiteheadian way, the Leibnizian metaphor of God as reader, thereby
overcoming the " evil " always constituted by an irreparable opposition.
                                              G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 6 7




   Here, it seems that the present loses its privilege, and that determinism
is reintroduced as predestination. But in what sense? Is it because God
knows everything beforehand? Is it not, instead, rather because He is,
always and everywhere? [ . . . 1 Yet to say that God is always and every
where is to say, strictly, that he goes through all the states of the monad,
however small they may be, such that He coincides with it at the moment
of action "without any distance. " Reading does not consist in concluding
from the idea of a preceding state the idea of the following state, but in
grasping the effort or the tendency by which the following state itself
comes out of the preceding one "by a natural force." The divine reading
is a genuine passage of God into the monad (somewhat like Whitehead
speaks of a "passage of nature " locally). What is more, each monad is
nothing other than a passage of God: each monad has a viewpoint, but
this viewpoint is the "result " of a reading or a view of God, which passes
through it and coincides with it ( LP, 98-99) .
    God i s certainly " passed through " Deleuze reading Leibniz, and the
opposition overcome by a " grasp" of Lei bniz's effort trying to think of
God " reading the worl d " would no doubt have made both Leibniz and
Whitehead rejoice. In no case, therefore, will one say that " the ways of
God " are impenetra ble, for it is the very i dea that God could trace paths
that contrad icts what is to be affi rmed fi rst and foremost: for Lei bniz,
i f we follow Deleuze, the effort or tendency of each monad, which God
cannot foresee but only accompany, wi thout a ny d istance; for White
head, the creative independence of each concrete occasion, the a bsence of
any viewpoint from which the choice it prod uces by itself could be sa id
to be a function of something else.
    However, the opposition does not, it seems to me, disa ppear i n favor of
an agreement, but of a contrast. For the case proposed by Deleuze with
regard to Leibniz corresponds to the one I evoked when I noted that the
private may be collective. It must simply be restricted to those who a l low
themsel ves to be i nha bited by the q uestion, who share the question of
completion. Yet Whitehead speaks of the new creature " objectified in
God," qua " new element of God 's objecti fication of that actua l world."
The fact that he uses the term " objectification " is important, for, since
this distinction was available to him, he could have attributed to God the
possibility of knowing an entity formally, from the viewpoint of its own
enjoyment, which would correspond to the " passage " of God evoked by
Deleuze. And the expression " qua new element of that actual worl d "
confirms that Whitehead ian " sharing " respects the strictly private char
acter, causa sui, of concrescence: God's consequent experience is a bout
the actual world of the occasion, not a bout the privacy of the creature
4 6 8   C O S M O LO G Y




" in the making." Whitehead thus rejects a God who, prehend i ng " with
out any d ista nce " how the su bject determi nes itself, would then find
himself in a position somewhat com para ble to that of a hidden voyeur,
seeing without being seen, that is, without his seei ng having the slightest
effect on what he sees. Nothing is hidden in the world of Whitehead, a nd
if the occasion as causa sui were not to transcend God, the whole econ
omy of the system would have to be revised .
   In other words, it seems that a distance should vi brate where Lei bniz
enunciated a coincidence " without a ny d istance." This distance by no
means signifies nostalgia, the impossibility of plenitude, or exile. In front
of his students, Whitehead, searching for the situation that would make
them feel what he wa nted to make them understand by " reality," one day
invoked rugby : " to be in the middle of the pack ." Reality never situates
us as contemplative spectators, but a lways in the middle of the pack,
where there is pushing, shoving, and mutual constraint. Likewise, the a f
firmation that reading is never " to take cognizance," in the sense of coin
ciding with what is written, is not a cause for lamentations. " Read ing " is,
still and yet aga in, creating. And since the impossi bility of a knowledge
that "coincides " with its object is not a matter of mourni ng, it is valid for
God as for everybody else.
   If God, as Whitehead someti mes says, is " in unison of becoming " with
each creative act, this does not mean that such a unison signifies contem
porary community. If God is to " share," this sharing is part of the process
of completion initially derived from ( induced by) the temporal world . Yet
a new problem a rises, a lmost immediately. Since this is a n experience
that is, strictly spea king, unimaginable, we cannot get very far with what
induction means when it concerns the " beginni ng " of an actual occasion.
But Whitehead says a bit more when the i nduction i nvolves God as its
addressee. In any case, th is is what seems to be meant by the way he will
answer a question suddenly asked, j ust before the chapter devoted to
God : the question of " ultimate evil ."
   The ultimate evil in the temporal world is deeper than any specific evil.
It lies in the fact that the past fades, that time is a "perpetual perishing."
Objectification implies elimination. The present fact has not the past fact
with it in any full immediacy. The process of time veils the past below
distinctive feeling [ . . . J "He giveth his beloved-sleep " ( PR, 340-34 1 ) .
   The increasingly confused character, from objectification to objectifica
tion, of what was decided on the occasion of an individual completion, and
its gradual forgetting, would thus be the " ultimate evil ." This definition
comes as somewhat of a surprise in Process and Reality, since nothi ng
has prepa red the reader for it. Yet it prepares for one of the functions
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 6 9




which, thanks to the intervention of the consequent nature, Whitehead
wi l l associate wi th the d i vinity, " the tender ca re that nothing be lost."
   Confronted by this image, we must bea r i n mind that Whitehead
wished to succeed in " secularizing" God 's function. The point is thus to
take great care that our interpretation of the question of ultimate evil
does not communicate with a function of the religious type, in particular,
with God as associated with the " s urvival of the soul ." In fact, i f " thanks
to God " nothing is lost, nothing, even so, will " su rvive " as such. What " i s
not lost" w i l l not b e " sa ved " as such, but in the mode of the unimagina
ble d i vi ne experience . Moreover, neither the q uestion nor its answer gives
any particular importance to death in the usual sense, mine or yours. The
question of u ltimate evi l may be understood as a supplication, which it
raises to its cosmic power: " May what I have gone through not sink,
purely and simply, i nto insignificance, u nder the banner of an abstraction
that is ever poorer as it is taken into account successively and i n d iver
gent ways! " But what I experienced one day ago, one hour, or one minute
has already undergone this fate. This is why the question of ultimate evi l
is not the religious one of the survival a fter death of a " living person," but
it arises for each occasion, whose determination also means " perishing."
   God's conceptual realization is nonsense if thought of under the guise
of a barren, eternal hypothesis [ . . . I Again this discordant multiplicity
of actual things, requiring each other and neglecting each other, utilizing
and discarding, perishing and yet claiming life as obstinate matter of fact,
requires an enlargement of the understanding to the comprehension of
another phase in the nature of things. In this later phase, the many actu
alities are one actuality, and the one actuality is many actualities. Each
actuality has its present life and its immediate passage into novelty; but
its passage is not its death ( PR, 349 ) .
   " Its passage i s not its death " : unfortunately, n o more precise indica
tion is to be fou nd i n the text, but this one is precious. The unison of
becoming might well imply that the " perishing" of an occasion concerns
only the tempora l world . Of course, the subject-superject perishes, from
the viewpoi nt of its i nherita nce, and in a twofold sense. Fi rst, its process
of completion cannot, as such, be eva luated, even by God, in the sense
that evaluation wou ld imply the possi bility of " putting oneself in another's
place," and replaying what has occu rred, a possi bi l i ty excluded by the
fifth category of explanation, according to which " two actual entities
never derive thei r origin from an identical universe " ( PR, 22 ) . Second,
what has been decided, having acceded to "objective immortali ty," is cat
egorica lly incapable of appealing against the use other occasions will
make of its decision. Yet Whitehead does not tal k about " resurrection " in
470    C O S M O LO G Y




God, preferring to distinguish between " perishing " and " dying " as fa r as
actua lity itself is concerned . It is thus here, through this distinction, that
the question can fina lly be ra ised of induction, or the way in which a
satisfied occasion is able to " make God feel ."
   Wha tever " making feel " may mean, it is a vector. And in fact, the argu
ment according to which the vectorial dimension of feelings disappea rs
with satisfaction ma y be repeated with this new question: what if its dis
appea ra nce were not its death? For nothing dema nds that the multiplicity
of vectorial feelings that have attained what they a imed at, their concrete
unity for a subj ect that will answer for its world, be suppressed upon sat
isfaction. Their disa ppea ra nce means that all has been determined, that, as
far as the process of completion is concerned, there is nothing left to aim
at. Yet we must note that their elimina tion has no meaning in the physico
mathema tica l la nguage with which Whitehead tried to remai n in harmony:
in physics, vectors may counterba lance their effects and hence disappea r
qua " having an effect," but no conceivable physica l process can "elimi
na te " them in favor of a sca lar quantity. Only the act of measurement can
accomplish this exploit, but in an abstract way, beca use the mea su red
quantity is there for whoever mea sures it, for whoever, in other words, is
affected by it: a vector. If satisfaction coincides with the production of a
value, which every actua l occasion will henceforth have to take i nto ac
count, there is no rea son to bel ieve this is the end of the story.
   There is a bea uti ful theory in Leibniz, articulating the vectorial powers
of the soul with those studied by dyna mics: the theory of conatus. In
both cases, conatus mea ns tha t there is never any rest. Rest evokes a state
that is indifferent to time, which is an impossibility for Leibniz. That is
why every quiet soul and every immobile body are in fact " a nima ted " by
a "conatus," an effort towa rd the future to which no qua ntity may be
assigned, and which ca nnot in i tsel f have a ny effect. The conatus is
" effort towa rd," perpetua l d isquiet. In physics, i f a body is ma inta ined at
equilibrium, its conatus is the beginning, at each i nsta nt, of a movement
that a borts in that insta nt, to be reborn in the fol lowing one. If equilib
rium is broken, however, the conatus unfolds into motion. More gener
ally, conatus designa tes the vectorial power insofa r as it can never be
" elimina ted," but insofar as it does not have within itself the mea ns to
develop, since its development depends upon ci rcumstances .
   The contrast associated with the conatus, the deployment or absence of
any assigna ble effect, is appropriate for the question of the becoming of
the occasional subject, and its perishing. The vectorial dimension depends
"on circumstances." It is deployed when feelings aim at their unification
and disappears in the "circumstance " in which there is no longer anything
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 7 1




to aim at, in which all has been accompl ished. Yet the analogy with the
conatus allows us to say that its disappea rance is not its elimination: if the
subject/superject perishes, it is as "cause of itself," in the sense that it per
tained to it to start out from its own circumstances, in solido, to determine
in and for itself its own production. It is henceforth up to others, given
other circumstances, to decide on the meaning of the unit produced.
   Here, the ana logy enables somethi ng new. As Whitehead never ceases
to repeat, the subject/superject's determina tion with regard to itself is j ust
as much a position with regard to the future . The occasion's " peri shing"
then means that i n this perspective the position will have no assignable
consequence . Actual occasions will ta ke the " position" i nto accou nt, but
they will remain deaf to the vectorial d i mension of the position's " a ppeal
to the future," and, more precisely, deaf to the imperative dimension of that
call, which demands to be heard for itself. This deafness is crucial for
their own freedom of sel f-determination. "Am I my brother's keeper ? "
asks Cain, a nd rightly so i n this case, accord i ng to Whitehea d . I n this
sense, the superject does i ndeed have the features of a conatus, a vectorial
appea l to a future that it does not have within itself the means to make
hea rd by its successors. And it may be this a ppeal that finds its add ressee
in God, he whose experience will be i nd uced by the vectorial imperative.
Yet ind uction is not identical with sharing. God wou l d be what the
superjective conatus aims at, the a ppeal to the future that no occasion
will i nherit, but the deployment of the conatus a lways depends on the
circumstances: the definition of the way the appea l will be heard depends
on the "circumstances " of d ivine experience.
   What I have j ust proposed does not appear anywhere in Process and
Reality, but the proposition is technically accepta ble. And it allows us to
approach the question of the object of the " ind uced " conceptua l feeling,
a feeling which, on my read ing, belongs to the " mental origin " of d ivine
experience . The fact that the superjective appea l to the future may " make
itself felt" means, at the same time, that the d ivine process of completion
will give its answer to the plea that what the subject/superj ect has become
for itself may not sink into oblivion. That which, from the categoreal
viewpoint ( the ninth category of explanation: " how" an actual entity " be
comes" constitutes " what" that actual entity " is" ) implies that what will
be initia lly objectified is a " how," the "completed how." Yet it is precisely
this " how," a quite determinate articulation of a limited group of eternal
objects, that no actual occasion ca n i nherit as such, for the articulation
will become undone, d ismembered, a nd replayed by each new process of
determination. If the divine feeling that is induced is a conceptual feeling
of this " how," there is as yet no question of sharing, for the articulation of
4 7 2   C O S M O LO G Y




the eternal objects, quite obviously, does not tell any story about itself. It
nevertheless constitutes the full determination of its satisfaction, a com
plete but silent version of what has been accomplished.
   Thus, God would not " resuscitate what is dead," but " feel " a " how "
that may have no add ressee but him. What will become of what has been
felt, the mode of deployment of the conatus, does not depend on the ap
pel lant but depends on the "circumstances" of divine experience, and it is
God's answer that is to be defined as " sharing." In other words, " in the
beginning," God does not " share " the actua l world of the satisfied entity.
This actual world will be " objectified" in the sense that this term desig
nates the fact of " being felt" by something other than oneself, accordi ng
to a pragmatic value that belongs to the formal constitution of that other
thing. When it comes to God, this pragmatic value will a llow us to speak
of " sharing," since God is he for whom every occasion, even the most
tenuous, " matters," insofa r as it is new. In this sense, divine pragmatics
wi ll not be decisional, for every decision means ta king a partial position,
thus and not otherwise, instrumental izing what it ta kes into account for
its own ends. It will, however, be " inexorable," adding a new element to
what was initially felt. If there is sharing, it will not only be in the ful l
deployment o f what is the " propriu m " of the fu lly determined entity, in
the fu ll, singular coherence of its appeal : the a ppeal will finally be heard,
but in a way that plunges it into the eternal d ivine ordering. That is, as
we sha ll see, in a way that i nexora bly a rticulates this appeal with every
thing a bout which it has d rawn a blank.
   However, before we move on to the divine process of completion, we
must obviously pa use for a moment over what has become, on this
hypothesis, of the infinite envi sagement of all eternal objects, that is, the
primordial nature of God . According to my hypothesis, Whitehea d 's two
formulas must have an obligatory value. If divine induction is required
by the first, primary phase of occasional concrescence, we must concl ude,
in pa ra l lel, that a lthough the divine envisagement of eternal objects may
wel l be "eternal," " free," or " primordial," it nevertheless requi res, in or
der to be "this" envisagement, the induction produced by a superject's
appea l to the future. In other words, divine conceptua l realization , even
if it includes a l l the eterna l objects, and as such is therefore not a ffected
by any new fact, would not for that reason be static.
   This hypothesis does not a ppea r in the Whiteheadian text, and it might
seem to contrad ict the ceaselessly repeated theme of the unique, complete,
and eternal character of divine conceptual realization . In fact, however, it
obl iges us instead to specify this character: this theme is the correlate of
the way the multipl icity of eternal objects is characterized, indi fferent to
                                               G O D   A N D   T H E   WORLD   4 7 3




their ingressions, to the d ifference between real ized and unreal ized . God's
primordial nature is thus not constra ined by the selection of eternal ob
jects real ized, nor is it limited by the " world's creative progress " : it is
eterna lly complete, without excl usivity or exception, the realization of all
eternal objects. Yet this does not necessarily mean that it is the invariant
real ization of all possible relations between all eternal objects. Quite the
contrary, the hypothesis of such an invariance would imply that any ar
ticulation between eternal obj ects rea l ized by a n occasion could never be
anything other than a case in an eternally preexistent total ity, j ust as ev
ery particular combination is a mere case in the predefined set of a l l pos
sible combina tions. Yet if God is a creature of creativity, he must exem
plify, more than a nything else, the reason why Whitehead confers the
status of ultimate upon creativity: he is what will spell out a nd ill ustrate
all novelty qua irred ucible.
   If the divine conceptual real ization is, as I suppose, " induced " by the
superjective appeal, if it includes the conceptual feeling of the complex of
eternal objects correspondi ng to " how" an occasion has determined itself,
this real ization must be interpreted as ful ly deploying this " how," that is,
deploying it in a way that completely determines the differentiated rele
vance of each eternal object with regard to this particular complex. Such a
realization could be said to be one and eternal, because any " grouping" of
all eternal objects holds for all others. Once again, Whitehead never wrote
this, but it would shed light on the import of some of his utterances .
   The endeavour to understand eternal ohjects in complete abstraction
from the actual world results in reducing them to mere undifferentiated
nonentities. This is an exemplification of the categoreal principle, that the
general metaphysical character of being an entity is "to be a determinant
in the becoming of actualities." Accordingly the differentiated relevance
of eternal objects to each instance of the creative process requires their
conceptual realization in the primordial nature of God. He does not cre
ate eternal objects; for his nature requires them in the same degree that
they require him. This is an exemplification of the coherence of the cat
egoreal types of existence. The general relationships of eternal objects to
each other, relationships of diversity and of pattern, are their relation
ships in God's conceptual realization. Apart from this realization, there is
mere isolation indistinguishable from nonentity ( PR, 257).
  Whitehead seldom renounces a concept, b u t rather recycles it. Think
ing with Whitehead, I have j ust carried out such a recycl i ng, for i f pri
mordial conceptual experience is, as I propose, experience of all eternal
obj ects i n the kind of relation determined by the finite complex of eter
nal objects grouped in an " occasional " relationship, it corresponds to the
474    C O S M O LOGY




" idea l situation " proposed in Science and the Modern World, which a lso
impl ied all the eternal objects. And this correspondence may guide us in
the question that remains to be solved . I f God does not " physica l l y " feel
the satisfied occa sion and its world but only the complex idea l articula
tion that defines both the subject and its world, what about his conse
quent nature, that is, the process of completion that is " motivated " by a
consequent " physica l " experience ?
   In Science and Modern World, God was a principle of limitation, cate
gorica lly determined by the di fference between the implica tions, unlim
ited in principle, of all rea lization, qua rea lization of an ideal situa tion,
and the abruptly limited cha racter of the mea ning of a decision. If concep
tual d ivine rea l ization is free, unconstra ined by the di fferentiation be
tween rea lized eternal objects and those that have not been rea lized, a
physica l experience can indeed derive from it, in the sense that every physi
cal experience is the experience of something that has been determined
thus a nd not otherwise. God's initial " physica l " experience, since it " de
rives " from its menta l origin, is not a "direct prehension " of the occasion.
It is the feeling of the contrast between the unlimited cha racter of the
idea l situation and the limited cha racter of the occasional, finite complex
of eternal objects. And the divine process of completion will then be ini
tia lly motivated by the physica l experience of the determinate, selective,
pa rtial, and excl usive cha racter of occa siona l completion . Thus and not
otherwise.
   The wisdom of subjective aim prehends every actuality for what it can
be in such a perfected system-its sufferings, its sorrows, its failures, its
triumphs, its immediacies of joy-woven by rightness of feeling into the
harmony of the universal feeling, which is always immediate, always
many, always one, always with novel advance, moving onward and never
perishing. The revolts of destructive evil, purely self-regarding, are dimin
ished into their triviality of merely individual facts; and yet the good they
did achieve in individual joy, in individual sorrow, in the introduction of
needed contrast, is yet saved by its relation to the completed whole. The
image-and it is but an image-the image under which this operative
growth of God's nature is best conceived, is that of a tender care that
nothing be lost ( PR, 346 ) .
   Despite the images that populate it, this i s a technica l text. I t describes
the way in which divine experience is " motiva ted " by a physica l feeling
that is itsel f consequent. The initia lly abstract physica l feeling, " this"
limitation, or " this impasse," becomes the feeling of what the entity has
done with itself, " its sufferings, its sorrows, its fa i l ures, its triumphs, its
immed iacies of joy " ; but the process motivated by this physical experi-
                                                 G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 7 5




ence is not that of a partia l actua lity, closed to its incompatibil ities and
its refusals, a n obstinate appea l to the future that will verify it, whatever
the cost may be. The process is feel ing " with a rightness that weaves "
physica l experience " into a harmony," for the negative prehensions that
were the price of the decision are also felt positively. Just as much as
what the entity has decided, what it has rejected is a part of the decision.
And the i mage of the " tender care," God 's reaction to the superject's ap
peal to the future, d rives away the threatening one of condescension.
Divine experience is the experience of limita tion qua completion, not of
completion qua limited . Whitehead has not changed his mind since Sci
ence and the Modern World: actua l i ty, and therefore limitation, are the
sole val ue, even when it comes to God .
   It remains to define the " final ca use " of the process of divine com
pletion.
   This final phase of passage in God's nature is ever enlarging itself. In it
the complete adjustment of the immediacy of joy and suffering reaches the
final end of creation. This end is existence in the perfect unity of adjust
ment as means, and in the perfect multiplicity of the attainment of indi
vidual types of self-existence. The function of being a means is not dis
joined from the function of being an end. The sense of worth beyond itself
is immediately enjoyed as an overpowering element in the individual self
attainment. It is in this way that the immediacy of sorrow and pain is
transformed into an element of triumph. This is the notion of redemption
through suffering which haunts the world. It is the generalization of its
very minor exemplification as the aesthetic value of discords in art ( PR,
349-350 ) .
    If divine experience c a n b e said t o b e conscious, it i s precisely to the
extent that it can have the val ue of " i nd uction " for a new occasiona l sub
ject. Divine experience is, of course, accomplished by sha ring what the
subjectlsuperject has decided, but in a way that j ust as much transforms
this decision into a " means." The appeal of the occasional superj ect to an
addressee for whom it would be, as such, value will have been heard, but
according to the circumstances of conscious divine experience, which i n
tegrates the fact, the physical experience of a l l that has been a ffi rmed and
all that has had to be rej ected, in a n inexorable way that turns this fact
into an i mpasse, entering into a contrast with the feel ing of this impasse
envisaged as a means. I n this sense, divi ne experience is conscious, but
a lso incomplete. God is not the envisagement of what might be; his expe
rience neither precedes nor prefigures the decision to come. His envisage
ment is a thirst for a novelty that this thirst will ind uce, but which, by
definition, will transcend him.
476    COSMOLOGY




    Whitehead's two formulas can thus be placed in para llel, and this par
al lel has al lowed me to make expl icit a twofold deficiency : that of occa
sional completion, which appeals to the future, but in the mode of the
conatus, and that of divine completion, a thirst for actua lity that will give
 its consequences to envisagement. A twofold dehiscence thus corresponds
to what I have called " induction " : God and the occasion, each call ing for
what transcends it, for what wi l l answer the ca ll, but according to its
own circumstances. But there is a lso a major d ifference between God and
the occasion, which al lows us to understand the " reversa l of poles " : di
vine consciousness, unlike human consciousness, is not placed under the
banner of " blink ing," but is constantly growing (everlasti ng ) .
    The th irst for a new actual ity cannot be assimilated t o a superjective
vectorial dimension, insisting by means of a " concl usion " that would have
satisfied God 's "consequent nature," for no concl usion can transform
primord ial divine conceptual experience, the envisagement of all eternal
objects, into a wel l-determined unity. What we ca ll God cannot be sepa
rated from the mul tiple feelings that aim at him, any more than any other
occasional subject; but when it comes to him, the vectorial d imension of
these feelings will never be submerged by a ( sca lar) enjoyment, by the
"eigenval ue" corresponding to the ful l determination of what operates as
an " actua l world ." The divine feeling " never perishes " ; it is experience
" together," perpetually increasing, of contrasts, each of which impl ies the
feeling of an individual completion in its l iving immed iacy, that is, qua
appea l to the future, and the feeling of this completion qua means. Each
new contrast, as it is added, will be integrated into harmony in the form
of what it has made possible, the feeling of what was " best " for that i m
passe . An inexorable ordering.
    From the viewpoint of his consequent nature, God may thus be said to
be conscious because he is experience of the contrast between the " im
passe " that is and a possibil ity that turns this impasse into a " means " for
new realizations. He can be said to be ful ly actual, for the eval uation of
each particular experience, qua feeling of what it has accomplished and
what it has refused , corresponds to a complete determination of that ex
perience as it is woven into the "eternal ordering." But what emerges
from this weaving, the feeling of what would be best " for that impasse,"
does not correspond either to a transcendent knowledge or to a determi
nate anticipation. Instead, this feeling has the features of a question of
the " what i f? " type . That is, more techn ica lly, of a p roposition enter
ta ined in the mode of the thirst for an answer, which would have as its
logica l subjects the subject to be born and its situation in the extensive
continuum. The fact that divine experience has the features of a question
                                                G O D   A N D   T H E   W O R L D   4 7 7




brings us back, moreover, to the only invariant that ever defined God's
role for Wh itehea d : releva nce. Only questions-not adequacy, nor specu
lation about " what" might be, or prediction-make relevance thei r high
est value.
   It is as true to say that God is perpetua lly satisfied as to say that he is
perpetually unsatisfied, and in this respect he constitutes a unique con
crescence, wi thout a past, in perpetua l becoming, in unison with a world
that tra nscends him as much as he transcends it. And the series of "as
true" that inaugurated this chapter, i f the reader looks back to it, may
henceforth be read as a " verification " of the operation underta ken by
Whitehead. The " different categories of existence," whose neglect he de
plored, a re those that his twofold formula has articulated, although, it
must be admitted, in a rather condensed way.
   The operation of secula rization seems to me to have succeeded: the
" hybrid physica l feeling of God " is a nything but a religious feeling. It does
not make God the being to whom one may say "Thou," for he has no
other va lue than the di fference he will make in the occa sional experience
that will derive from him its initial aim. God, i nsofar as he is felt by the
budding occasion whose emergence is i nduced by his thi rst, is felt under
the aspect of " how " he might constitute a relevant resumption of an im
passe, but this " how" concea ls no secret. The ways of God a re thus not
inscruta ble, because the hybrid physical feeling is not the enigmatic sign
of a " way." They are not " trai l-blazing signs," or an indication offered by
God to the world in the hope that the world might take the path that he
himself envisages as the best. Divine induction has no other import than
the emergence of the respondent for whom it thirsts, of the occasion
which, i n one way or another, will confer an actual meaning upon what is
" proposed " as eventually relevant. And therefore, if God is i n unison with
the world, i t is because the enlargement of his consciousness depends
on the world, not as workers depend on thei r tools to carry out the work
they have planned but rather as what must tra nscend him in order to
" ma ke him feel ."
   In the course of these last pages, the fragments of Whitehead cited have
been populated by images of a religious type, as the reader will have noted.
I hope that my reading will have sa tisfied the announced test, that the
operation of secularization will have succeeded in stripping these images
of a l l religious connotations other than those celebrated by Whitehead
himself in Modes of Thought when he tried to make his reader feel the
" full solemnity of the world." Yet the test, when fully deployed-tha t is,
addressed not only to rel igious hopes but also to the hopes that haunt a l l
o u r appeals t o transcendence, whatever this transcendence mea ns-will
478   COSMOLOGY




resume i n the next chapter. To conclude this one, here is a fully developed
sample of what will put us to the test.
    The consequent nature of God is his judgment on the world. He saves
the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life. It is the judg
ment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved. It is also the
judgment of a wisdom which uses what in the temporal world is mere
wreckage.
   A nother image which is also required to understand his consequent
nature is that of his infinite patience. The universe includes a threefold
creative act composed of (i) the one infinite conceptual realization, (ii) the
multiple solidarity of free physical realizations in the temporal world,
(iii) the ultimate unity of the multiplicity of actual fact with the primor
dial conceptual fact. If we conceive the first term and the last term in their
unity over against the intermediate multiple freedom of physical realiza
tions in the temporal world, we conceive of the patience of God, tenderly
saving the turmoil of the intermediate world by the completion of his own
nature. The sheer force of things lies in the intermediate physical process:
this is the energy of physical production. God's role is not the combat of
productive force with productive force, of destructive force with destruc
tive force; it lies in the patient operation of the overpowering rationality
of his conceptual harmonization. He does not create the world, he saves
it: or, more accurately, he is the poet of the world, with tender patience
leading it by his vision of truth, beauty, and goodness ( PR, 346 ) .
  Sha l l w e accept t o b e " saved " ?
                                                   C H A P TER TWENT Y - F I V E




An Adventu re of Ideas




         RADUALLY, SLOWLY, STEADILY
     G
                                           the vision recurs in history un
          der nobler form and with clearer expression. It is the one ele
          ment in human experience which persistently shows an upward
trend. It fades and then recurs. But when it renews its force, it recurs with
an added richness and purity of content. The fact of the religious vision,
and its history of persistent expansion, is our one ground for optimism
(SMW, 1 92 ) .
   If the propositions bearing upon divine experience ca nnot, as such,
inspire a speculative flight of experience, the same does not hold true of
the contrasts that derive from it. These contrasts, when they concern the
" religious vision," even aim rather clearly at participating in what
Whitehead, in Science and the Modern World, called our " one ground
for opti mism."
   When he was writing the lines I have j ust cited, Whitehead no doubt
did not yet know that he was soon going to attempt the paradigmatic leap
of death: to construct a proposition capable of participating in the adven
ture of the rel igious life. He was, however, perfectly explicit about the
barbarous brutality of traditional rel igious statements, a nd particularly
outspoken on the subject of the despotic role attributed to the mono
theistic God . In fact, the God who closes the pages of Process and Reality
might be said to " save" the world, but he constitutes j ust as much a n at
tempt to save God hi mself from the role assigned to him by the theologi
cal propositions that make hi m the respondent to the religious vision.
   Here, it is not enough to have an intellectual a ppreciation of how
Whitehead succeeded in carving out the keystone concept that ensures
4 8 0   COSMOLOGY




the speculative edifice its conceptual coherence. This edifice and its key
stone are dry bones, unless they participate in what is for Whitehead the
" one ground for opti mism " : the return of the religious vision, endowed
with a nobler form, a clearer expression, and a renewed force . And we
might guess that the force that must return is that of worship, or feeling
the world in its " full solemnity." Yet the way that Whitehead undertook
to participate in the adventure of the rel igious vision, that is, in its expan
sion, confi rms the position adopted in Religion in the Making: the only
true id entity of the good is evil qua capa ble of being overcome. It is
therefore fi rst by putti ng to the test our ideas a bout what is "good," by
creating possibil ities of "overcoming" the destructive oppositions they
bear within them, that Whitehead participates in the adventure and un
derta kes to " save" it. The " good," the new eventual expansion of his vi
sion, will be nothing other than this vision, henceforth capable of being
entertai ned without entertaining at the same time all the propositions in
the name of which, today more than ever, crusades are being launched .
   The various modal ities of the Whitehead ian test wi l l all turn around the
term I have j ust used, "to save." The test is already under way at this point,
for the very fact that, to " save" the adventure of the religious vision,
Whitehead was able to undertake to " save God " qua liable to " save the
world," will be effective only if we can succeed in making two appa rently
incompatible meanings of the verb "to save " converge. Both meanings
belong to our history, one to the history of knowledge and the other to the
theology of salvation, and both are laden with an intensity that, in differ
ent ways, connects them with destructive oppositions.
   "The point is to save the phenomena " : we have inherited this utterance
from Greek astronomy, which devoted all its skill to translating observa
tiona l data into the language of circles, and affirmed, by this utterance,
that these data by no means dictated the undertaking but on the contrary
received their signification from it, then exhi biting themselves as belong
ing to the eternal perfection that alone is fitting for the heavens. Yet the
term assumed new, intense resonances with the " Copernican revol ution." It
then designated, in a pejorative mode, the "cautious, timid cowards " who
affirmed diplomatically that the hel iocentric system was never anything
other than a different way of " saving the astronomic phenomena ." This
was in opposition to those who, like Galileo, "dared to affirm" that the sun
really was that around which the earth rotated, without retreating before
the possibil ity that the " new science" might go to war with the religious
authorities. If this pejorative value is preserved, i f the courage of truth re
mains opposed to the compromises that blunt the verd ict of facts or deck
out its hard nudity in reassuring finery, Whitehead's God will obviously
appea r as a "pure i ntellectua l fa brication," just good enough to fudge the
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 1




difference between those who " believe" in God and those who do not
need this hypothesis.
   As far as the paths of salvation a re concerned , they lead quite obvi
ously to a multiplicity of utterances about which it is rather hard to af
firm that they have, historica l ly, contri buted to the creation of contrasts
that overcome destructive oppositions. Whether it is the sol i tary con
science's appeal to Him who will defend it against mediocre j udgments,
or the anguish of that consciousness when besieged by the world 's temp
tations, the question of salvation has not ceased to be the vector of an
appeal to tra nscend the va lues cal led m undane, and the reference ratify
ing the destructions carried out in the name of this radical transcendence.
" One does not fool with divine j udgment" : this formidable platitude
may lead not only Protestants but also atheists and even Catholics to
agree with Luther and Calvin against the " Roman whore " who a llowed
herself to sel l i ndulgences and guarantee tha t expensive masses would
ensure the salvation of the souls of the dead. What does the anguish of
the survivors matter ? As far as the " cosmologico-progressive" uttera nces
are concerned, in which God does not i nitially make the di fference be
tween the good and the bad, but pilots the world as a whole toward
some Omega point, they may be j ust as formida ble in their consequences,
and in fact they have not prevented thei r a uthor, Teilhard de Chardin,
from diagnosing the divine path, even when this path entailed the violent
conquest of Abyssinia. In any case, if salvation remains associated with
he who will separate the wheat and burn the chaff, the way that White
head's God saves the world without condemning anything, accepti ng
with i nfinite patience everything that occurs, will appear as an i nsult to
the victims, an outrage to the hope of the good .
   The way Whi tehead proposes to save a God about whom it can b e af
firmed that he saves the world may thus be subject to a double disquali fica
tion. For some, it will be a purely i ntellectual compromise position, suit
able only for those who are, in any event, indi fferent to the q uestion.
Scientists need to think that their constructions have a " true" respondent,
that they are addressing a reality that is " truly" able to make the di fference
between the questions that are addressed to it. Why wager that, when it
comes to God, this same need would not make itself felt? For others, it will
be a position that undermines what it pretends to satisfy, as is attested by
the deli berate duplicity of the images Whitehead mobi lizes.
  God is the great companion-the fellow-sufferer who understands
( PR, 3 5 1 ) .
   This could be Whitehead's answer to Job, but the biblical Job runs the
risk of rejecting whoever answers him in this way among the false friends
whose soothing discourses i nfuriate him. What Job demands is that He
4 8 2   COSMOLOGY




who understa nds understand him in a mode that makes Him his de
fender. Yet if Whitehead identifies God 's "consequent nature" with his
j udgment on the world, that j udgment would never end up in a verdict.
He wi l l never agree with Job against his false friends. God " suffers " and
"understands " in the sense that all sufferi ng, every refusa l, and all limita
tion are comprised, " taken together," with the sa me impartial tenderness,
into his experience, in the sense that all the ways of addressing him, deny
ing him, ignori ng him, or of blessing him and trusti ng him are evaluated
in the same inexorable way, without any other finality than the emergence
of new, intense contrasts. This may, moreover, suggest another image,
rather worrisome: the grea t compa nion, whom Whitehead also ca lls the
" poet of the world," may recall Nero, singing while Rome burns.
    If this worrisome i mage is out of place, it is so to the same extent that
it is j ust as misplaced to tra nsform all the words Whitehead uses concern
ing God i nto d i v i ne " vi rtues " : j u stice, tenderness, patience, good ness,
wisdom, rationality, and so on. To praise God's vi rtues is j ust as inappro
priate as to attri bute an " a ltruistic" cha racter to an ant that " sacrifices
itself" for the group. In this case, neither God nor the a nt can do a ny
thing other than what they do. God is patient, but he cannot be anything
other than patient. He does not refuse to use productive or destructive
force, but they are not at his disposa l . He does not leave up to what is free
the possi bil ity of making use of its freedom, whatever the risks may be:
neither risks nor freedom have any mea ning for the impasse, always that
impasse, that he saves. In short, what we call vi rtue, what we associate
with the passion of the " work to be done "-all that implies the possi bil
ity of a hesitation, a betrayal, a risk-a re alien to his own experience,
even if he " understa nds " them .
   A God whom it is impossible to praise, bless, or cu rse, in whose name
none can say, "Have faith, God knows best ": this is the result of the op
eration of secula rization carried out by Whi tehead . Must we therefore
conclude that he has a bandoned the definition of God he gave in Science
and the Modern World: God 's power is the worship he inspi res ? As such,
that is, in a bstraction from the world, his God may well no longer inspire
this leap of the imagination, that flight of rel igious experience that is
called " worship." Yet Whitehead's proposi tion cannot be reduced to what,
i n non-Whitehea d i a n terms, one might ca l l " pu rely i ntel l ectual ratio
nal ization," a rationa l ization that would purify the rel igious vision not
only of its barbarous el ements but a l so of a ny pa rticu lar efficacy. The
person who wrote the end of Process and R eality has been tra ns
formed by his writing. God may well no longer be that to which " wor
shi p " i s addressed, but he nevertheless intervenes i n it. This, moreover,
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 8 3




is why Whitehead gave the name God to what was initially an answer to
the need to think about the possibility of relevant novelties in the coher
ent way.
   The non-temporal act of all-inclusive unfettered valuation is at once a
creature of creativity and a condition for creativity. It shares this double
character with all creatures. By reason of its character as a creature, al
ways in concrescence and never in the past, it receives a reaction from the
world; this reaction is its consequent nature. It is here termed "God ";
because the contemplation of our natures, as en;oying real feelings de
rived from the timeless source of all order, acquires that "sub;ective form "
of refreshment and companionship at which religions aim ( PR, 3 1 -32 ) .
   However, the " contemplation o f our natures " should not be identified
with a finally universally accepta ble, purified definition of rel igion'S aim,
at least if we maintain the definition of religion as " what the individual
does with his own solitariness " ( RM, 1 6 ) . Like all the constructions of
Process and Reality, the concept of God 's function in the world is meant
for the "solitary consciousnesses," whose excess of subjectivity is expressed
by both phi losophy and religion. Here as elsewhere, therefore, Whitehead 's
proposition will have to be evaluated by its pragmatic effects, by the way it
puts to the test the j udgments of the " solitary consciousness," and, in this
case, the way it can " correct" the excess of subjectivity that leads this
consciousness to define itsel f " against" what it denounces as opinion,
trad ition, social belief. In short, aga inst the reasons set forth by the fa lse
friends of Job.
   In the Bible, God proved Job right: he condemned all the appeals to
acceptance and wisdom of those who tried distract Job from the non
negotiable alternative he had enuncia ted : either his Defender lives, and
wi ll silence those who construct socially accepta ble reasons for his mis
fortune, or else life is delivered over to what is arbitrary, to inj ustice, to
lies. The worship that defines God's power has thus legiti mized the con
demnation of what might be an obstacle to the experience of this power.
It has been a vector of evil, defining itself against what contradicts it. My
hypothesis is that the possibil ity of overcoming this evi l, of proposing to
the solitary consciousness a respondent that separates this consciousness
from its propensity to worship the sword, is what Whitehead experi
enced at the time he was writing the last part of Process and Reality.
   One of the definitions of the sol itary consciousness is its mistrust of
the world. The corresponding religious feeling, according to the descrip
tion Whi tehea d gi ves of it i n R eligion in the Mak ing, defi nes the a ppea l
to the " possible" as appea l i ng agai nst the " soci ally proba ble" or " herd
psychology." The intervention of " God " as a logica l subject, that is,
4 8 4   COSMOLOGY




" God's power," corresponds to the correlative need to think of some
thing beyond the blind, smothering facts, behind them and within them,
to think in terms of the possible and not only of the probable. God is
then the respondent to the ultimate ideal, and the quest without guaran
tees. Yet this purely factua l world, thema tized by the solitary conscious
ness, a world subject to routine, to the a rbitra ry, to relations of force, a
world that is deaf to its compla int, to its appea l, to its hope, is the work
of this consciousness. The religious feeling is thus an appea l to a tran
scendence capable of restori ng what was first denied to the world by the
solitary consciousness, an appeal to the interstices in which new possi
bilities of relevance lurk. And if the Whiteheadian God is not to be wor
shiped, and is thus separated from the power of worship that religious
Gods inspire, it may be because the point is to restore to the world what
it had been stripped of at the outset.
   What Whitehead calls " God " is thus baptized relative to the territories
covered by the j udgments of the solitary consciousness. Only solitary con
sciousnesses, experiencing themselves as " alone in the world," are liable to
celebrate the fact that "our natures " a re able to enjoy rea l feelings, that is,
feelings that are not reducible to rela tions of force or social habits. Only
they can feel the threat of this possible " sociologica l " answer to Job:
what you " felt" when you lived as a righteous man means nothing; your
notion of justice is only the result of what is defi ned as such in your so
cial envi ronment. It is thus qua an a uthor who has issued forth from a
determi nate social envi ronment, nourished on the words and contrad ic
tions proper to this envi ronment, that Whitehead first experienced the
worship that confers upon God his power. The mod ification he proposes
is confi ned to adding that this power does not belong to God but is
strictly relative to the difference that will be made, in the experience of
the person who entertains them, by the propositions that a rticulate God
and the World .
   Yet this addition cha nges everything. For the infinitive " to trust "
henceforth accepts obstinate facts no longer as crushing, but as precond i
tions for creativity. It is to this " to trust," moreover, that Whitehead 's
proposition testifies in itself. For j udged in terms of a socially defined
situation, a situation described in a way that would clai m the power of
defi ning it, Whitehead 's proposition would have no cha nce of mod ifying
the j udgment of soli ta ry consciousnesses. In pa rticular, it will disappoint
the expectations nourished by the Christi an religion, from which he de
liberately borrows his vocabulary. The God constructed by Whitehead
l urks in the interstices of the Christi an religious experience, and his even
tual efficacy will not testi fy to the power of the worship he inspi res, but
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 5




rather to the impossibility for a social environment to determine what that
environment nevertheless conditions: the disqualification of the world to
which " God's power " responds may be overcome.
   We do not have the slightest reason to think that the modes of exis
tence need transcendental values to compare them, select them, and de
clare that that one is "better " than the other. On the contrary, the only
criteria are immanent, and a possibility of life is evaluated through itself
by the movements it traces and the intensities it creates on a plane of im
manence: what does not trace or create is rejected. A mode of existence is
good or bad, noble or vulgar, complete or empty, independently of Good
or Evil, or any transcendent value: there are never any criteria other than
the tenor of existence, the intensification of life. Pascal and Kierkegaard,
who were familiar with infinite movements, and who extracted from the
Old Testament new conceptual personae able to stand up to Socrates,
were well aware of this [ . . . J
   The problem would change if it were another plane of immanence. It is
not that the person who does not believe God exists would gain the upper
hand, since he would still belong to the old plane as negative movement.
But, on the new plane, the problem may now concern the existence of the
person who believes in the world, not even in the existence of the world
but in its possibilities of movements and intensities, to give birth once
again to new modes of existence, closer to animals and rocks. It may be
that believing in this world, in this life, has become our most difficult task,
or the task of a mode of existence still to be discovered on our plane of
immanence today. This is the empiricist conversion (we have so many rea
sons not to believe in world of men; we have lost the world, worse than
a fiancee, a son or a god [ . . . J The problem has indeed changed ( QPh,
72-73 ) .
   To believe in the world, but not i n a world that would b e confi ned to
existing, at the same time backdrop, resource, and land of conquest, that
world in which Job and Socrates confront one another over the vocation
of huma n beings, and what it is permissible for them to hope. For Job
and Socrates are united in their common scorn for those who ignore what
d ivi des them, sa l va tion by fa ith or by reason. To believe in thi s world,
already existent in the passionate becomings where mathematicians be
come functions, affected by what they defi ne as variables, where the wol f
becomes a pack, a part, ceaselessly redefined, of a multiplicity without
fixed hierarchy, and where we ourselves know somethi ng about what it is
to run in a pack, or else to wa l k noiselessly, a sol itary hunter, where noth
ing is a slogan, for everything can become an sign . This world that White
head the educator, in Science and the Modern World, a l ready designated
4 8 6   COSMOLOGY




when he affirmed the necessity of art, that is, of the habit of enjoying
living val ues.
    Here we reencounter the question of that God whose function is to
" save" the world, and the test designated by the term " to save." If God
" saves " the world, it is precisely because he is the impartial feeling of all
val ues qua living, in their discords, their i ncompatibil ities, their partiali
ties. He is not the " domus " in which they find their unity, but the unison
in which each is the movement it has traced, the intensity it has created, in
which each affirms itself " for the world," as the condition and creature of
creativi ty. Nor is it in his power to save the world : this is his function,
and nothing but his function.
    Will Job be able to accept the test constituted by the " wisdom " of a
God who " saves " by relega ting to the triviality of individual facts the dif
ference he demands between the just and the unjust ? Will he be able to
accept that his cry be " purged " of what is, in this way, defined as destruc
tive, demanding the condemnation of the unj ust in order that the just may
tri umph ? Wil l he be able to accept divine impartia lity, that, is, also his
radical indifference to who recognizes him and who denies him? In short,
wil l he be able to accept seeing his cry " saved " as the religious images
mobi lized by Whitehead may be " saved " : in a way that strips the religious
address of any possibility of earning or of deserving in any particular way
a tenderness, an approval, a recognition that is, in any case, uncond ition
al ly, impartially, and inexorably the destiny of every occasion ?
    Yet the test is add ressed just as much to Socrates's descendants, who,
since Plato, have concl uded to the urgent need for " truths " capa ble of
silencing the pl ural ity of the partial and d iscordant opinions of the irra
tional populace. Will Socrates be able to accept that it is his own ques
tions about justice, the good, or love that have given rise to the discor
dant character of the answers ? Will he be able to accept that those who
have answered did not simply express " what they thought," but assumed
a stance with regard to the situation that was proposed to them ? Wi l l he
be able to accept that it is the situation he created that produces the con
tradictions on which he bases hi mself, whereas Pericles, the politician he
disqua lifies, might perhaps have given rise to other responses, add ressed
to him in order that he might create their unli kely agreement?
    And the scientists, who demand that what they deal with must be ca
pable of prov ing a view right or wrong, not of lend ing itself to the pos
sibil ity of being saved in multiple ways: will they accept that what they
call the "objective world " is what satisfies this demand ? Wi l l they accept,
not the utterance, despai ring but somewhat facile by the emi nent lucidity
it attri butes to its utterer, that " everything is relative," but the one-more
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 7




difficult, beca use addressed to them more specifically-that their "objec
tive" world is j ust as much fa bricated by the polemica l opposition be
tween truth and appea ra nce as the i rreconcilable opinions of Athens's
inha bita nts are " fabricated " by Socra tes ?
   And those, �eirs to the same story, who would turn this fa brication
into the confirmation of their denunciation of " science " as blind a nd cal
culati ng: will they accept to celebrate the multiple and releva nt technical
knots, neither objective nor subjective, that scientists sometimes succeed
in crea ting with what they deal with ? And will they be a ble to accept that
the authentic experience of which they wish to be the defenders also re
qui red an adventurous fa brication ?
   There is nothing universal about the test proposed by Whitehead, and
this is its primary qual ity. It requests no mourning, no renunciation that
is not addressed specifica lly to the " excess of subjectivity " attested by the
adventures of fa ith, and of the rationa lity in which speculative philosophy
itsel f takes its place. Nor does it demand either the renunciation of the
"thou" required by prayer, or of the respondents, molecules and neurons,
required by the scientists who underta ke to study the brain of people who
pray. It simply proceeds to add a divine experience, " incl uding everything
without restriction," not l imited by the a bstractions that doom neurons
and prayer to enter into conflict. Infinite divine experience " saves " what
has determi ned itsel f thus and not otherwise, but in the mode of concep
tual rea l ization that transforms every contra diction, every disjunctive
alternative " either . . . or" into so many consequences of " thus and not
otherwise." This does not mean that the incompatibilities are nullified, but
neither are they ratified . They acquire the problematic status that proposi
tions never lose, the " perhaps " with regard to which every enterta inment
is determination, true or fa lse, but whose exhibi tion perta ins to intellec
tual feeling.
   The fact that Whitehea d can identi fy the divine intervention that " saves
the world" with a " patient operation of the overpowering rationa lity of
his conceptua l harmonization," moreover, gives his intervention its signa
ture. Although Whitehea d's God is nei ther the God of the missionaries,
nor the God of the ma rtyrs, nor the God of the scientists, he might wel l
satisfy the appetite of those who ta ke pa rt in the adventure of mathemat
ics . Divine feeling, which " sa ves " i n d i vidual accomplishment in such a
way that its value incl udes what has been rejected, eliminated, or vaguely
felt so that the accomplishment may be what it is, will not shock mathe
maticians, for a theorem previously demonstrated has a l iving va l ue for
them, even if the theorem is now understood in terms of the restrictive
cond itions tha t had enabled its demonstration. The mathematicia ns'
4 8 8   COSMOLOGY




appetite may be aroused by the identification of these conditions, but
their appetite does not mean that they already know how one could " do
better" than this demonstration, that they are anticipating the path to fol
low in order to transcend the limitation that the conditions confer upon
the theorem. They sense the conditions insofa r as, conditioning a success,
they make this success exist as a problem, giving rise to the question of the
possibil ities of general ization.
   Of course, to describe the divine appetite on the basis of the ma themat
ical appetite for generalizations to be constructed is completely inadequate,
as is every imaginative proposition that deals with divine experience. A
mathematician envisages a new theorem, a new kind of solution, whereas
God makes a question emerge from every sol ution. Yet the interest of the
analogy with mathematics is to divest of all painful connotations the de
scription of divine experience as perpetual and incomplete, not liable to
be accomplished in a satisfaction that would make intellect, intell igence,
and the intelligible coincide. The analogy allows us to avoid the image of
a God who is perpetually d issatisfied , tragically sepa rated from himself,
that is, at the same time, to give imaginative flesh to creativity as the ulti
mate, that creativity exhi bited, more tha n any other, by the adventure of
mathematics.
   Correla tively, the analogy with mathematics may shed l ight on the
bruta l introduction, on the final page of Process and Reality, of a new
theme: " God's love for the world ."
   In the fourth phase, the creative action completes itself. For the per
fected actuality passes back into the temporal world, and qualifies this
world so that each temporal actuality includes it as an immediate fact of
relevant experience. For the kingdom of heaven is with us today. The ac
tion of the fourth phase is the love of God for the world. It is the partic
ular providence for particular occasions. What is done in the world is
transformed into a reality in heaven, and the reality in heaven passes back
into the world. By reason of this reciprocal relation, the love in the world
passes into the love in heaven, and floods back again into to the world
( PR, 35 1 ) .
   Here, love is certa inly not what is understood by the Christians, for
whom God 's love must be addressed to the human person. Rather, it
evokes the Eros of the Greeks, beca use of its impersonal character. It is
addressed to each pa rticular occasion, that is, impartial ly, to the slightest
electronic occasion, to the least of our immediate experiences. One might
say that it is addressed m uch more to the tissue our drea ms are made of,
which flee as soon as we try to transform them into rea sons, than to us,
who demand that love be addressed to us, qua living continuities . How-
                                             A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I DE A S   4 8 9




ever, i f the Greek Eros has heirs in the European tradition, i t is the math
ematicia ns, who " love the truth " with a love that owes nothi ng to the
polemical power attributed to truth. O nly the adventure of mathematics
admits, as a fully posi tive val ue, that the truth can bring a bout a conver
gence between saving, bringing to existence, and creating, a nd mathema
ticians would be l iable to understand that God 's love for the world can
designate the i ncessant relaunching of a question with no regard for the
security of persons, beliefs, or traditions. For their own love of mathe
matics depends on the fact that a q uestion cea selessly relaunched, such
for instance, as " what is a circle ? " or " how can we define the val ue of p ? "
was able to inspire s o many a nswers, so many creations, each one involv
ing a new problematic space, bringing new stakes into existence without
the new disqua l i fying the old. For mathematicians, every mathematical
creation has its perfection, which is to be a ppreciated a s such.
   As a mathematician, Whitehead was a ble to make all the words used
when it comes to God-j udgment, tender patience, inexorable fatality,
impartial ity, the aim at new, intense contrasts, and finally, " Iove"---co nverge
toward so many descriptions of the divine appetite for the world, without
fear of fal l i ng back into a Christian theology of a persona l God, because
he k new that the question that engages the hand-to-hand confrontation
with a problem finally rai sed i n a promising way is not addressed to a
person. Instead, it is what will transform a person into that through
which a problem will be defined. This is why Gilles Deleuze can, on this
subject, speak of " chance " i n the way James spoke about it, which comes
as a " free gift, or not at a l l ."
   This decisional power at the heart of problems, this creation, this
launching that makes us members of the race of the gods, is nevertheless
not ours. The gods themselves are subject to the laws of A nanke, that is,
to chance-heaven. The imperatives or the questions that traverse us do not
emanate from the 1, which is not even there to listen to them. The impera
tives are being, every question is ontological, and distributes " what is "
into problems ( DR, 2 5 7 ) .
   A n d love, therefore, becomes relevant t o all of creation, "on earth as it
is in heaven," without hierarchy, without any privilege conferred on what
endures, with no demand for reci procity, guarantee, or permanence. The
same love, particular every time for each particular occasion, the eternal
return of an imperative question respond ing to the cry of experience
agai nst ultima te evi l . The cal l is heard : what your experience has accom
pli shed wi ll not have only partial, dea f heirs as its addressees, those who,
occupied with their own business, wi l l dispose as they see fit of what you
propose to them. Who you have been is i nscri bed in another register, for
4 9 0   COSMOLOGY




another experience. But i f the call is hea rd, it is j ust as m uch " saved,"
saved from the demand for an addressee who not only " understands" but
j ustifies. For " God's j udgment" will not fol low up the complaint, will not
pursue the crime, will not share the refusals, and will not ra tify the elimi
nations. What will be saved is not the a uthentic prolonga tion of your
self, with the treasure-house of your sufferings, your refusa ls, you r pas
sions. I nstead, it is their humorous double. Divine experience saves by
neutralizing, ma k i ng what has been affirmed and wha t the a ffi rmation
has denied return a t the same time. Wha t will be saved a t the same time
as you, woven together with you, is what you have excluded to become
what you have become, and what will not be saved, will not be able to be
saved, is the conti nuity of the construction that links your identity with
the disqualifications you have ca rried out, the j udgments in terms of
which you have j ustified yoursel f, the legitimacies you have cla imed .
   This inexora ble divine functioning can take its place, rather obviously,
in a Stoic tradition, for if there is a love that can respond to this divine
love, it is amor fati, a love that is not addressed either to the world as we
can understa nd it, nor to a di vine person who understands us, but to a
cosmic desti ny indifferent to what Deleuze calls our " bi rth in the flesh " :
what attaches u s and leads u s to say " me," " my " story, " my " sufferi ngs,
" my projects," I who wa s born i n this world, of this world, who knows
she will die and who wonders whether l i fe is worth living.
  One can say noth ing more, and never has anything more been said:
to become worthy of what happens to us, therefore to wish for and
extract its event, to become the offspring of one's own events, and to be
thereby reborn, to get oneself a new birth, to break with one's fleshly
birth ( LdS, 1 75 ) .
   Whitehead, however, i s n o philosopher o f detachment and asceticism,
and Process and Reality was not written to point out the path of a Stoic
askesis, or, more generally, to provide a philosophical justification for the
spiritual disciplines i ntended to liberate experience from the illusions of
the sel f. The God of Process and Reality belongs to the adventure of rea
son, to the del iberate, constructed undertaking of saving "all experiences "
together, and it is important that this undertaking not privilege any one
experience, nor cla i m to appropriate those other adventures in which
what matters is the q uestion of the meaning and the obl igations of daily
life. Specula tive philosophy does, of course, allude to rel igion, as it a l l udes
to science, but it does so under the constra int of creativity, and wha t is at
stake here, still and aga in, is to revise our modes of a bstraction. What is
directly at sta ke here is thus not rel igious experience but the theological
modes of abstraction which, after blessi ng accusations of heresy and
                                          A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 1




wars of religion, have not been able to avoid that in the modern period
the Christian rel igion has degenerated into a decent formula, embell ish
ing a comfortable life ( SMW, 1 8 8 ) .
   However, it might be objected that Whitehead i s also the one who, in
Science and the Modern World, at a time when his God was sti l l to come,
descri bed religion as one of the fundamenta l experiences of humanity,
and God 's power as the worship he inspires. One might accept that, as
I have argued, the del iberately visionary and religious vocabulary White
head uses in the last part of Process and Reality constitutes, to be sure, a
test of the ability of speculative concepts to " save" the religious vision
from the solitary consciousness' excess of subjectivity. But it might per
haps a lso be, simultaneously and without contradiction, the very expres
sion of such a vision, " return ing with a content that is richer and more
pure." The philosopher, having done his job, would experience the way in
which the new modes of a bstraction he has constructed become ingred i
ents of his rel igious experience.
   The question " Is Whitehead a theistic philosopher ? "-ra ised in the
United States but not in Europe-is not to be too easily dismissed . White
head presents himself as the philosopher who comes after Wi lliam James.
It is thus permissible to wonder to what extent Whitehead is not a lso the
heir to James's God . However, this hypothesis entails an initial test. To
inherit James's God a lso means to inherit the struggle William James
fought against any confusion between the theistic viewpoint and what he
cal led the Gnostic siren song, the phi losophico-mystical temptation to
situate ma nkind's fate and vocation in the perspective of a final cosmic
reconci liation
   [ . . . 1 in which the reality to be known and the power of knowing shall
have become so mutually adequate that each exhaustively is absorbed
by the other and the twain shall become one flesh, and in which the light
shall somehow have soaked up all the outer darkness into its own ubiq
uitous beams ( RAT, 1 3 9 ) .
   The ideal sung b y the Gnostic sirens corresponds rather precisely to
the satisfaction of the Whitehead ian occasion, and it may also evoke the
moment in which a mathematician " understands," when a pro blem is
finally formulated in a way that exhi bits its solution. The Whiteheadian
God, however, has taken on meaning in a speculative construction that
may be seen as a humorous version of the Gnostic vision. His construc
tion does indeed accompl ish the Gnostic ideal of " reconciliation," but it
accomplishes it by rendering it " trivial " in the mathematical sense, for it
is an ideal real ized by every occasion, whatever it may be. One might say
that in so doing Whitehead aims at revising our modes of abstraction,
4 9 2   C O S M O LOGY




not a t reaching a truth that would be the vocation and the salvation of
the human experience.
   But the question is insistent: If the speculative God, derived from the
adventure of rationa lity, is not a ble to satisfy the vital need that James's
God a nswered, how does Whitehead inherit this need ?
   For Wil l iam James, thei stic faith was inseparable from a conception of
life not as reconcil iation but as a battle, a life woven together from con
trad ictions, rifts, and destructions. His fa ith was not intellectual but vital,
for it found its mea ning in what, for James, was the dra matic choice
i mposed by this l i fe: to consent to this worl d, to engage in the battle, or
to refuse. This choice is a test, and it forces us to turn our backs on any
perspective that adulterates this test. It must be carried out, on pa in of
obscenity, in the " presence " of all those who have been crushed by l i fe
and of the immense army of suicides evoked in " Is Life Worth Living ? "
One might certainly say that there is a common point between James's
cruel and deceptive life, and Whitehead's l iving order as robbery : both
need j usti fication. Wi lliam James needed God in order for the battle to be
worthwhile, and Whitehead needed Process and R eality to be an Essay in
Cosmology.
   Yet the difference matters: as human beings, we cannot commit our
selves to the Jamesian battle of life in the name of the Whitehea dian
cosmological perspective. Correlatively, James's God must lend hi mself
to the experience of encounter; he must hear the cry we utter as our cry,
and not in a mode that incl udes it within his own perfection.
   [ . . . 1 God's personality is to be regarded, like any other personality, as
something lying outside my own and other than me, and whose existence
I simply come upon and find. A power not ourselves, then, which not
only makes for righteousness, but means it, and which recognizes us,
such is the definition which I think nobody will be inclined to dispute.
Various are the attempts to shadow forth the other lineaments of so su
preme a personality to our human imagination [ . . . 1 But the essence
remains unchanged. In whatever other respects the divine personality
may differ from ours or may resemble it, the two are consanguineous at
least in this,-that both have purposes for which they care, and each can
hear the other's call ( RAT, 1 22 ) .
  For me, i t i s crucial that Whitehead did not speak o f his God a s a per
son or a personality, and that the reversal of the physical and mental poles
suppresses any possi ble relation of consanguinity between him and us.
Otherwise, his concepts would certa inly have " saved " james's God, and
James's need that his cry be heard, but in a way that would have silenced
what James wanted to make us feel, what he needed in order to consent to
                                             A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 3




this world: life as a (solitary ) battle to which we can consent only i f we
believe that it demands our commitment, that is, also, that God needs us
to fight it beca use the outcome is not already decided, " i n the hands of
God," because, a l beit in a minimal way, that outcome depends on us.
   This is not a matter of psychology. The question is not whether White
hea d felt the need that gives real ity to the God of William Ja mes but to
speci fy the link between the adventure of rationa lity, to which White
hea d 's speculative philosophy belongs, and the "adventure of the spirit "
(SMW, 1 92 ) , which he associated with the worship of God . The way
James defines his God, who is rea l beca use his effects a re rea l, beca use
without him the battle would not be worth fighti ng in a world that gives
us every reason to despa i r, is very l ikely, to the same extent as the fa ith of
the Q uakers, what Whitehead was thinking about when he spoke of the
religious vision which, when it returns, returns with content that is richer
and more pure, freed, in particular, from the belief i n a j ustice-dea l i ng,
all-powerful God . Yet the speculative God that Whitehead hi mself con
structed is not the respondent to such a vision. He belongs to a distinct
adventure, even i f both adventures aim at correcti ng the excess of subjec
tivity of the sol ita ry consciousness. If Whitehead 's God is required, it is by
the metaphysical scheme, and it is to a ffirm what, it seems to me, claims
Whitehead's own worship, the " full solemnity of the worl d " he mentioned
in Modes of Thought.
   Whitehead does not, of course, refute theism, nor the empirical impor
tance of the need to which it testifies. He simply asks, as the worthy heir
of Wi lliam James, that the theists a bsta in from addressi ng metaphysical
compliments to the God of fa ith, or from d rea ming of a fusion between
the demands of reason and those of faith. The power of this last dream
may rather explain why Whitehea d 's most a udacious conceptua l inven
tion, the reversa l of the poles that shatters any relation of resemblance
between divine experience and ours, has often been neglected by theistic
interpreters. As James emphasized, i n order to a nswer the cry of the reli
gious soul, " is life worth living ? " a theist m ust require that God be expe
rienced as " present," that he be the object of a possi ble encounter, which
req u i res a n analogy between his experience and ours. But i n Modes
of Thought, where God is no longer named, we may hear the cry of a
distinct soul, the Whiteheadian soul, with other requirements.
   We require to understand how the unity of the universe requires its
multiplicity. We require to understand how infinitude requires the finite.
We require to understand how each immediately present existence requires
its past, antecedent to itself; and requires its future, an essential factor in
its own existence ( MT, 8 3 ) .
4 9 4   COSMOLOGY




   I would conclude that the God of Process and Reality differs from the
theist God of Wi lliam James because they communicate with distinct
experiences of " sheer disclosure." Whitehead 's God a l l udes to a rel igious
vision, but, no more tha n the other Whiteheadian all usions, it does not
give a particular meaning to a truth that woul d be the horizon of human
life, or would testi fy to a vocation of human consciousness as such. The
experience of disclosure does not concern human privilege, rather the
requisites without which h uman adventures could be reduced to forms of
illusion. The efficacy of the Whiteheadian a l l usion would then be: you
who a re engaged in a n adventure, whatever i t may be, do not forget what
this adventure requires, in the name of the reasons that justify it; do not
give to these reasons the power to make the fu ll solemnity of the world,
to which your commitment testifies, be forgotten; do not rob the universe
of the importance that you demand be accorded to your reasons.
   It is because they are situated at the level of requisites, not of passion
ate reasons that commit us, that when it comes to human destines White
hea d i a n descriptions a lways feature a certai n platitude, someti mes hu
morous. Platitude is necessary to succeed i n what the j udgment of the
sol ita ry consciousness ca nnot help but miss: not only to put everyth ing
on the same plane, but to avoid that this plane be oriented by the impas
sioned q uestion of what is demanded by the accomplish ment, or the au
thenticity, of human experience. The plane must a ffirm adventure, not
progressive elucidation.
   For i nstance, i n many a phi losophy since Kant, the starting poi nt
would be an eloquent d ra ma tization of human responsibility, or even of
the drama of Man, who is born free and " responsi ble for everything be
fore everyone," as the Existential ist tradition would have it. Yet from a
Whitehead ian viewpoint, we must limit ourselves to recognizing that the
questi on of responsibil ity is pa rt of human adventures, whatever the an
swers to this question may be . What matters, from the point of view of
the adventures of ideas that take shape around what we ca ll responsibil
ity, is that the question not be ill usory, for i rresponsibility, as an ultimate
metaphysical generality, would be, as Whitehead reproached Lei bniz,
inadequate.
   The feelings are what they are in order that their subject may be what
it is. Then transcendently, since the subject is what it is in virtue of its
feelings, it is only by means of its feelings that the subject objectively con
ditions the creativity transcendent beyond itself. In our own relatively
high grade of human existence, this doctrine of feelings and their subject
is best illustrated by our notion of moral responsibility. The subject is re
sponsible for being what it is in virtue of its feelings. It is also derivatively
                                            A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 5




responsible for the consequences of its existence because they flow from
its feelings ( PR, 222 ) .
   The notion o f moral responsibility i s thus a testi mony t o a generic,
neutral fact. A partial testimony, to be sure, since this notion i ntroduces a
" person who is responsi ble," who should be a ble to detach herself from
her own feelings in order to be a ble to j u dge them. This transfo rms
responsibil ity i nto an " ultima te," on the basis of which it is possi ble to
formulate, in a ded uctive way, everything the sol itary consciousness may
see fit to demand: freedom, a utonomy, reflexivity, and so on. The meta
physica l interpretation ma kes this partia l ity stammer, but what this inter
pretation alludes to is not a truth that would ena ble us to escape partial
ity. The stammering is that of humor, the mode of intellectual feel i ng that
exhibits the possibility of a ffirming what matters, without, for a l l that,
having to a ffirm that it must matter.
   Whitehead ian humor thus thwarts the temptation of making a big deal
of the cosmological perspective. There a re enough dramatic scenes in hu
man lives; there's no need to add more. And i n the process, it points out,
in a rather sa lutary way, that no Idea will defend the person who is pos
sessed by it from the i nsensitivity and rigid ity that can degrade good
people, and great creators, i nto pigs . The fact that what lurks in the i nter
stices may come to be translated in terms of a hostile or contemptuous
stance against the societies that condition these interstices, and that so
cial norms may lead a battle aga inst the creatures of creativity to whom
it gives shelter, are the risks of the adventure. Whitehea d 's singularity, the
very meaning of the circular workings of his thought, may be attention to
that risk. " Nothi ng in excess ! " Such attention forbids nothing, but con
stra ins us to consider at the same time the a rrow that leaves the ground
of our habits and that ground that will confer its meaning, without ap
peal, upon what escapes it.
   Unseasonable art is analogous to an unseasonable joke, namely, good
in its place, but out of place a positive evil. It is a curious fact that lovers
of art who are most insistent on the doctrine of "art for art " are apt to be
indignant at the banning of art for the sake of other interests. The charge
of immorality is not refuted by pointing to the perfection of art. Of
course it is true that the defence of morals is the battle-cry wh ich best
rallies stupidity against change. Perhaps countless ages ago respectable
amoebae refused to migrate from the ocean to dry land-refusing in de
fence of morality. One incidental service of art to society is in its adven
turousness (AI, 26 8 ) .
   Adventure: this i s the term Whitehead proposes, where a pocalyptic
visions haunt our imaginations, where " a rt for art" or " the defense of
4 9 6   C O S M O LOGY




society " clash in titanic combats that make the foundations of the earth
tremble as their imprecations rise towa rd heaven . To combat pious, con
formist, or hateful opinion is part of the risks of philosophy, but the test
Whitehead proposes for philosophy is to fight it by "saving " it, by ad
dressing it as if it were capable of partici pating in the adventure. Chris
tians, Stoics, Nietzschea ns, Kantians are all accepted together, with the
co-presence of the others bei ng part of the test for each . The irresponsi
bility of Ca in, the creature of creativity, when he refuses to be his broth
er's keeper, and the responsi bi l ity that makes Q ua kers tremble when they
live each of their acts as what cond itions cosmic becoming: the point is not
to oppose them, but to situate them in a mode such that their coexistence
may be not a contrad iction to be resolved but a fact to be celebrated .
   There is a greatness in the lives of those who build up religious systems,
a greatness in action, in idea and in self-subordination, embodied in in
stance after instance through centuries of growth. There is greatness in the
rebels who destroy such systems: they are the Titans who storm heaven,
armed with passionate sincerity. It may be that the revolt is the mere as
sertion by youth of its right to its proper brilliance, to that final good of
immediate joy. Philosophy may not neglect the multifariousness of the
world-the fairies dance, and Christ is nailed to the cross ( PR, 337-3 3 8 ) .
    Heaven da nces with the fa iries, and rips open when Christ dies. And i f
philosophy needs God , it is precisely to resist the passion o f ta king sides
in this rega rd . The neutra l ity of metaphysics is not an imitation of d ivine
impartiality, for it has no relation of resemblance with the latter. It is an
audaciously concocted antid ote, not a functional definition. And l ike a ny
antidote, it designates how it matters. In fact, the way in which the rever
sa l of poles, which is Whitehead's great invention in theology, defines
God and the World, completes the circuit begun by the link between
metaphysics and neutrality. The fact that Whitehead spea ks of function,
not of freedom, with rega rd to God , of i nexora ble eva l ua tion and not of
enjoyment, of patience and not of decision, " simply " brings about a pas
sage to the limit of the imperative of nonconfusion of categories between
our " l iving val ues," what we care about, and importance as a generic
category. Dance is importa nt to fa iries, and the salvation of ma nkind to
Christ, but God does not let himsel f be described in terms of importa nce,
only of appetite, which is perpetual and ever-renewed . The experience
entertaining this last proposition would have to be characterized by the
most determined lack of appetite for relating ad ventures and apoca lyptic
va lues. And, correlatively, it should signify the importa nce of learning,
and of saying, which living val ues each adventure embod ies. Whitehead
meets up with Leibniz: dic cur hic.
                                           A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 7




    I am suggesting that Protestant theology should develop as its founda
tion an interpretation of the Universe which grasps its unity amid its
many diversities. The interpretation to be achieved is a reconciliation of
seeming incompatibilities. But these incompatibilities are not hypotheti
cal. They are there on the stage of history, undoubted and claiming inter
pretation r . . . I The last book in the Bible illustrates the barbaric ele
ments which have been retained to the undoing of Christian intuition
[ . . . I Finally, the book only states, more pointedly and more vividly,
ideas spread throughout the Old Testament and the New Testament,
even in the Gospels themselves. Yet it is shocking to think that this book
has been retained for the formation of religious sentiment, while the
speech of Pericles, descriptive of the A thenian ideal of civilization, has
remained neglected in this connection. What I am advocating can be
symbolized by this shift in the final book of the authoritative collection
of religious literature, namely, the replacement of the book of the Revela
tion of St. John the Divine by the imaginative account given by Thucydides
of the Speech of Pericles to the Athenians. Neither of them is history: St.
John never received just that revelation, nor did Pericles ever make just
that speech (AI, 1 70-1 7 1 ) .
   We can always count o n Whiteheadian humor for a formula that inter
rupts prophetic momentu m. We had started out from the i nterpreta tion
of the Universe, and we wind up with Pericles. Yet no Whitehead i a n for
mula can be attributed to mere occasional humor or to wit. Understand
ing the Whiteheadian adventure also means accepting that Whitehead
was i ndeed much less interested in the Stoic fatum as a test aga i nst our
attachments than in the promises i ncl uded i n the success--concrete and
important to him-attributed to Pericles.
   According to Thucydides, Pericles addressed the Athenians as free citi
zens, that is, animated by d ivergent priorities, values, goals, all this with
out asking them to strip themselves of these attachments in the name of
what transcends them. At the same time, however, he add ressed them as
Athenians, on whose action the life of the city depends. Athens will only
be saved by its citizens, all together. And beca use he believed in the Athe
nians in their diversity, a nd not in Athens insofar as it transcends the
freedom of its i nha bitants, Pericles enabled them to rise to the height of
the occasion. He interpreted them as attached but not defined by, or sub
ject to, what attaches them, and therefore susceptible of a new type of
unity that would be Athens. And i ndeed, they became what they were
from the cosmic viewpoint: incompatibil ities demandi ng an interpreta
tion to reconcile them, not in general, but here and now, for the Athens
they henceforth brought into existence in a new mode.
4 9 8   COSMOLOGY




  The Periclean ideal is action weaving itself into a texture of persuasive
beauty analogous to the delicate splendor of nature (AI, 5 1 ) .
   If Pericles, a pol itician who succeeded in persuad ing the crowd of un
disciplined Athenians to act together without being constrained by vio
lence or legal coercion, should have the last word in the formation of the
rel igious spirit aimed at by biblical l i terature, it is beca use his success
is the paradigmatic example of what is meant, for Whitehead, by evil as
what may be overcome. Lack of discipline is not an evil in itself but des
ignates the multipl icity of individual enjoyments that constitute the pri
mordial truth of the world . Pericles does not deny this when he addresses
the crowd of Athenians, but he trusts in what " his" world is capable of,
that is in " hi s " fellow citizens qua able to feel, each in their own way, the
need for common action.
   For Whitehead, Plato, who despised democracy, is nevertheless an heir
of Pericles, whose trust he turned into a phi losophica l genera l ization.
This is why there is not the slightest contrad iction in the fact that this
philosopher whose a ffi nities with the Stoics, Nietzsche, or Deleuze I have
emphasized had, for his part, defined the European philosophica l trad i
tion as " footnotes " to Plato's text ( PR, 39). What " saves " Plato, for White
head, making him the fi rst philosopher, is the affirmation that the divine
element i n the world must be concei ved in terms of action that is persua
sive or erotic ( l ure), not coercive. This i mplies, correlatively, that human
beings a re defined by their susceptibil ity to the attraction of the true, the
beautiful, and the good .
   The fact that the power of the true, the bea utiful, and the good over
human souls is that of Eros thus constitutes, in the cavalier perspective
typical of Whitehead, a properly philosophical general ization of what
was fi rst attested by Pericles, persuading the Athenians to unite without
threats or reference to transcendent val ues to force them to it. Conse
quently, whatever may be the restrictive conditions, normative j udgments,
and unnecessary oppositions produced by the Platonic statement, Plato is,
for Whitehead, the first philosopher, because he defined the human being
as "capable of the Idea."
   Philosophy as footnotes . . . and i ndeed, the most misanthropic or the
most subversive philosophers, because they a re philosophers, may well
denounce the pettiness of humans, the stupi dity of opinion, the nastiness
and cowardice of conformism: they will sti l l inherit, a l beit in a critical
form, an ideal based on the intrinsic possibilities of the human. And all
this for the simple reason that what makes them live and think is called
"an idea," and that it belongs to the very concept of an idea to affirm that
humans are capable of accepting what ideas demand, without being con-
                                           A N   A D V E N T U R E   O F   I D E A S   4 9 9




strained by any force other than that of the idea itself. You who denounce
voluntary servitude, people refusing to come out of their cave, dic cur hic.
   Plato conceived the notion of the ideal relations between men based
upon a conception of the intrinsic possibilities of human character. We
see this idea enter human consciousness in every variety of specializa
tion. It forms alliances with allied notions generated by religion. It
differentiates its specializations according to the differentiations of the
diverse religions and diverse scepticisms associated with it. A t times it
dies down. But it ever recurs. It is criticized, and it is also a critic. Force
is always against it. Its victory is the victory of persuasion over force.
The force is the sheer fact of what the antecedent volume of the world
in fact contains. The idea is a prophecy which procures its own fulfill
ment ( AI, 42 ) .
   While fai ries dance, and fetishists have commerce with their divinities,
and mystics underta ke to die to the world, Whitehead, for whom what
matters is above all the Adventure of Ideas, fabricates a " self realizing
prophecy" to " sa ve" that adventure. Like Pericles' speech, this prophecy
is addressed to the " solitary consciousnesses " who define themselves as
humans and testi fy to the powers of ideas through the divergent and con
flicting adventures of religion, phi losophy, and science, but a lso of the
arts and of poli tics. And the common feature made manifest in this way,
turning the discordant multiplici ty of adventures into a singular, problem
atic one, is also a transformation of this common feature. The definition
associating the adventure of ideas with " solita ry consciousnesses " may
also correct the exaggeration inherent in this experience of solitariness.
Sol itude is not the last word .
   What is the last word, the one that closes the circle, and i ncludes
Whitehead in the ad venture ? God i s obviously not the ultimate, but nei
ther is creativity in this case, for i t i s only the ultimate of Whitehead's
philosophical construction, referring to his responsi bility as a thinker,
not to what ma kes him think. The ultima te of adventure, the only thing
that really matters, i s the question that inhabits this adventure of ideas:
the question of what those who define themselves as " capable of ideas "
are capable of. This is the question that always returns. It unites Job,
whose solitary cry rises up to God; Protagoras, who turns the gods into
fabricati ons of which man is the measure; Pericles, who knows that a l l
that matters is the greatness t o which the undisciplined crowd m a y rise;
Jesus, who announces the victory of love over death, but also those mer
chants who Jesus d rove from the Temple, insofa r as their practice
wagered on mutual persuasion and not on force; and finally Nietzsche,
whose hammer-thought undertook to destroy that Temple.
5 0 0   COSMOLOGY




    Whitehead's God is thus an idea, derived from the adventure of Ideas,
and its non-power, its functiona l cha racter that excludes all coercion,
designates the way Whitehead tries to save this adventure, addressing it
l ike Pericles addressed the crowd of Athenians. Pericles supposed this
crowd to be capable of actua lly becoming what they were abstractly: all
inhabitants of Athens . He supposed his auditors to be capable of accept
ing the proposition " we a re Athenia ns," in an experience henceforth
likely to contribute to saving Athens. Whitehead supposes that we a re
capable of tra nsforming the proposition that we have all set forth on the
same adventure into a feeling likely to transform it. And to transform, by
so doing, our own experience as sol itary consciousness . This transforma
tion has a Whitehea dian name, and the final pages of Adventures of Ideas
are devoted to " Peace."
    The Peace that is here meant is not the negative conception of anaesthe
sia. It is a positive feeling which crowns the "life and motion " of the soul.
It is hard to define and difficult to speak of. It is not a hope for the future,
nor is it an interest in present details. It is a broadening of feeling due to
the emergence of some deep metaphysical intuition, unverbalized and yet
momentous in its coordination of values [ . . . 1 The experience of Peace is
largely beyond the control of purpose. It comes as a gift. The deliberate
aim at Peace very easily passes into its bastard substitute, Anaesthesia. In
other words, in the place of a quality of "life and motion," there is substi
tuted their destruction. Thus Peace is the removal of inhibition and not its
introduction. It results in a wider sweep of conscious interest. It enlarges
the field of attention [ . . . 1 Amid the passing of so much beauty, so much
heroism, so much daring, Peace is then the intuition of permanence. It
keeps vivid the sensitiveness to the tragedy; and it sees the tragedy as a liv
ing agent persuading the world to aim at fineness beyond the faded level
of surrounding fact. Each tragedy is the disclosure of an ideal:- What
might have been, and was not: What can be. The tragedy was not in vain
[ . . . 1 The inner feeling belonging to the grasp of the service of tragedy is
Peace-the purification of the emotions ( AI, 2 8 5-2 8 6 ) .
  What Whitehead is describing may be what Spinoza called "knowledge
of the third kind," and this is a mode of experience that does not belong to
any particular human tradition, and which all no doubt celebrate in their
own language. Among "our" words, which the imperative question, or the
Idea, has launched into divergent adventures, haunted by the question of
the " intrinsic-possibilities-of-the-human," it is perhaps, purifying an overly
emotive relation to the truth, Leibniz's " Calculemus " that best expresses
the kind of habits in whose interstices Whiteheadian peace lurks.
                                            AN   A DVENTU R E   O F   I D E A S   5 0 1




   The commitment to the risk of calculation does not spell the end of
disputes, or reconcil iation in the na me of a higher truth-and especially
not the truth of "calcula bility." It is the deliberate a ffirmation of what,
for " us," is not an object of del i beration, si nce it is what has launched us
into ad venture, a trust we attest even in our denunciations and our an
gers. " That which may be," the possibility of saving our tragic and singu
lar ad venture, is not a matter of transcendence, but it belongs to the
" non-power of God," to the worship whose possibility is saved by the
God constructed by Whitehea d, but which is not add ressed to him, of
transforming each of the i ngredients of this adventure into an unk nown,
cal l i ng for add itions and condensations. To transform the i nterstitial
laughter of Nietzsche, the prophesy of Jesus, a nd the submission of Regu
lus to the social institution of the promise into so many explorations
testi fying to the same adventure.
   There is an iteration in calculus, just as there is a repetition in prob
lems which reproduces that of the questions or the imperatives from
which it proceeds. Here again, however, it is not an ordinary repetition.
Ordinary repetition is prolongation, continuation, of that length of time
which is stretched into duration: bare repetition [ . . . J However, who is
prolonged in this way? A singularity, as far as the vicinity of another sin
gularity? On the contrary, what defines the extraordinary power of that
clothed repetition, more profound than bare repetition, is the resumption
of singularities in one another, the condensation of singularities one into
another, as much in the same problem or Idea, as between one problem
and another or between one Idea and another ( D R, 259 ) .
  Speculative phi losophy as clothed, adequate repetition, perhaps a s a
vector of peace, of the discordant adventures of the Idea .
                                                                 CONC L U S I ON




Word of a D ragon, Word of Tranee


Philosophy begins in wonder. And, at the end, when philosophic
thought has done its best, the wonder remains. (MT, 1 6 8 )




      T
            HE FACT T H AT wonder rema i ns at the end, not as a residue, as
           that which resists reasons, but "once and for all," i n the very
            place where our reasons a re constructed , becomi ng enriched by
every reason, is the properly Whitehead ian fa l l i nto the classica l defini
tion accordi ng to which philosophy has its starti ng poi nt i n wonder. And
this, a s it were, is Whitehead 's last word, the one that appears at the end
of Modes of Thought, the book in which John Gard ner, the a uthor of
Grendel, discovered what could be a " d ragon word," a n ageless word
uttered by a bei ng for whom the succession of epochs boi ls down to the
gloomy repetition of naivetes, a rroga nces, and blind pretenses to ill usory
meanings.
   The young G rendel ca nnot understand the d ragon's words, a s the
latter well knows. Yet what does that matter to him ? There would have
been no story to tell i f Grendel had not produced himself as a creature of
resentment, hating the humans who live off the illusions suggested to
them by the Shaper and to which he hi mself cannot adhere. He has only
found enjoyment, bitter and repetitive, in terrorizing them, kill ing them,
humi liati ng thei r heroes and demonstrating the i mpotence of their gods.
Unti l he once aga i n comes across Whitehead's words, this time uttered by
a blind priest, a word of trance that speaks of God and routs him. The
critica l spirit, denouncer of all idols, interested in verification a lone, ex
citing but trivial in the sense of the mathema ticians, of the possi bil ity of
destroyi ng, has fled, in ful l disarray.
   A homage of fiction to the philosopher who conceived of philosophical
thought as the Shaper himself conceives of history-as fa bulation-a nd
5 0 4   C O N C L U S I O N




who has succeeded in making converge what should have diverged . For
the blind prophesy does not contrad ict the dragon 's cynical knowledge: it
does not add to it any hope, any guarantee, any transcendence that
would inevita bly have given Grendel a rea son to kil l . The blind man
merely sepa ra ted this knowledge from the consequences, futi lity and des
tiny, with whose i mplacable truth Grendel, for his part, identified him
self. Yet the d ragon does not draw any consequence from this: he counts
his gold and jewels. Perhaps, eventua lly, he will go so far as to sort them
into piles. The prophesy would not have affected him precisely beca use,
from what he knows, there does not follow any of the " and therefores"
that the blind priest's word of tra nce transmutes in the mode of fabula
tion. Whitehead's cosmology has nothing to add to the dragon's words,
for the latter has retreated from the order of conseq uences, which a re all
that matters cosmologica lly. It addresses those who, in one way or an
other, a re struggling with the "adventu re of hope " and therefore, when
hope is transformed into disappointment, anger, and suffering, with the
passion of despai r. This is why what it repeats a re the " and therefores" in
a way that exhibits that outside of logic: nothing fol lows logically. Every
consequence is a creation of consequence .
   Dragon's word or word of trance, it is indeed a strange language which,
perhaps, the reader who has followed me this far, in the course of the pre
ceding pages, may have learned to understand . A language whose efficacy
does not derive from its power to denounce, to criticize, to vanquish ob
jections, and to constrain us to agree but, quite the contrary, from its radi
cal absence of power in this sense. For no utterance in this language has
the power to construct an argument, and every a rgument repeated in this
language loses its power, for it loses what such power presupposes. The
argument that demands to be taken into account presupposes that the
words used may be defined independently of the account in the process of
formation, in order to be i nstruments for the confrontation of viewpoints
or their mutual measurement. And it is precisely this possibil ity of defini
tion that is dissolved by speculative repetition.
   In this sense, each speculative utterance functions somewhat like the
proverbs that endlessly punctuate discussions under the African palaver
tree: words that do not belong to their spea kers, do not express their
point of view, but, on the contra ry, turn the speaker i nto the expressum
of what they express. Then, and for no transcendent reason referring the
utterance to an intention ( I meant to say . . . ) whose means it would be.
And yet, these utterances matter. The Africans know what they are doing.
Their efficacy does not derive from any kind of " presenti fication " of that
which, because it is subli me, transcends the divergences a bout which the
                                                           C O N C L U S I O N   5 0 5




discussion is being hel d . Neither G rendel nor any reader of Grendel has
bowed down before the blind man's profession of fa ith, as before the
expression of what transcends rational argument. If Grendel had felt the
subl i me, he would have kil led or would have converted, but he would
not have felt distress.
   When a l l is sa id and done, the sublime goes rather wel l with rational
calculation. Critical thinkers have long si nce admitted i nto the hea rt of
the city the i nterstitial presence of poets, and of all those who renounce
critical discussion and the constra ints of communication, to bring into
existence, in one form or another, that which reasons cannot board and
inspect. The most " materialist" doctors will grow proud in those mo
ments when they feel a soul within them, in communion with the music
that elevates them or with the suffering that recalls them to common
humility. The most a rdent supporter of a " purely technical " rationality
may cite Heidegger, if only to a ffi rm that indeed " we assassinate to dis
sect," and to concl ude to the i mpossi bil ity of a rational knowledge that is
not reductive . . . and therefore to the vanity of all criticism of knowl edge
qua reductive. And the most " reductionist" physicists will affirm that they
are sensitive to the splendor of the sunset. Even neurophysiologists, who
occupy the very site where reduction should be carried out, can ca ll
themselves lovers of a rt . . .
   Yet the marriage of the sublime and the rational has as its strictest prin
ciple the separation of assets. Woe to whomever is suspected of confusing
them! Thus, those who plead for the objectivity of physical laws have the
very curious habit of proposing to whomever seems to them not to have
enough respect for these laws to j ump out a wi ndow, some from the sixth
floor, some, if they are really angry, from the fifteenth : the miscreant wi ll
thus be able to veri fy that the " law of gravity " is indeed universa l . In gen
eral, the miscreant declines this kind i nvitation, and, we may remark in
passing, quite rightly. For what her fa ll would verify is nothing other than
a "consensual " fact, suitable to be accepted by all sufficiently heavy ter
restrial animals, all of whom, except birds and bats, would tend to resist if
one wished to push them through one of these infamous windows. The
importance of not falling is part of the animal's mode of existence . In con
trast, as Paul Valery has written, it is rather the a udacious hypothesis that
the Moon never ceases falling toward the earth, like a vulga r apple, that
singularizes the passion of modern physicists since Newton.
   In any case, it is precisely the principle of this couple, placed under the
regime of the separation of assets, that Whitehead comes to confuse. There
is nothing sublime in his texts, for the poetic moments that a bound in
them are most often interrupted by a technical specification, a comic
5 0 6   CONCL U S I O N




comparison, or a term inological reflection. The text exhibits an omni
presence of reasoni ng, of demonstration, of critica l questioni ng of the
meaning and range of phraseology, in short, an ostenta tious will to sub
mit himself to the norms of rational communication. Yet never does rea
son ing, or critica l questioning, wind up in a judgment ratifying a separa
tion. Grendel, who transformed critical thought into a devastating weapon,
who wanted to be the scourge of human shapers, flees .
   If critical thought, which had assigned itself the task of ensuring the
sepa ration of assets, is put to flight, it is because its most certain hold
becomes redundant here . As Bruno Latour has so well diagnosed, this
hold works by the identification of other people's beliefs, the denuncia
tion of the fetishism that ma kes them bow in the face of what they or
their fel low-humans have fa bricated, a veritable sin of thought. Thought
will be iconoclastic or enslaved, it will smash the images that captivate it
or wi ll forget itself in the barbarism of all fanaticisms. Yet Whitehead
fabrica tes, composes, constructs-deliberately, technica lly, a rtificially-a
universe whose facticity and fictional character cannot be denounced,
because they a re obvious. And it is this factitious construction, exhi biting
the traces of the hand-to-hand fight with the problems raised for him by
his own construction, that he proposes qua partici pant in the adventure
of reason, as lia ble not to smash but to save the daring a bstractions in
which critical thought places its faith.
   Citing Kant's fa mous statement, in the name of which the critical Tri
bunal has passed so many of its judgments, " thoughts without content
are empty, intuitions without concepts a re blind," Whitehead confines
himself to adding the premise which, according to him, Kant has sup
pressed: " Intuitions are never blind " ( PR, 1 3 9 ) . Intuition is never " with
out concepts," because it is always decision, the unification of the many,
thus and not otherwise. Every intuition is "consequent," and the concepts
invoked by Kant are nothing other than the mode of unification that has
preva iled, which, moreover, constitutes as such what is at stake in every
flight of speculative experience . Kant, making himself the vector of the
somewhat excessive pretenses of conscious, discursive experience, de
manded of concepts that they designate the object of possible knowledge
that is communicable, capable of being abstracted from the fact consti
tuted by a concrete experience. Whitehead, in contrast, for whom intu
itions are never blind, addresses his demand not to experience but to
critical consciousness itsel f. It pertains to consciousness not to veri fy ti
tles of legitimacy but to accept a creation of concepts that exposes it to
adventure, making it capable of providing a thought content to what is
felt. It then becomes " verification " in Ja mes's sense, experiencing what
                                                         C O N C L U S I O N   5 0 7




is imposed by its a bandonment of its position as judge. If " the concept of
'God' is the way in which we understand this incred ible fact-that which
cannot be, yet is" ( PR, 350), this concept must not be d issolved in a mise
en abyme or a paradox, but modify the conscious distribution of the be
lievable and the unbelievable.
   Not to j udge, to criticize, perhaps, but to transform critique into an in
strument of modification . To abstain even from telling anyone what would
be " better," as Leibniz did, for instance, when he confronted the claim that
Socrates's gesture of raising the poisoned cup to his lips could be explained
by a cha in of mechanical actions: Leibniz noted that although this move
ment may doubtless be explained from a muscular viewpoint like any
other, nevertheless, to describe it and expla in it, it is better to listen to
Socrates's reasons than to address his muscles. The Lei bnizian " better"
inspires the impatience of specialists, who ask " in the name of what" one
underta kes to limit their questions, who demand that one define that
which, in Socrates's gesture, could i ndeed have the power to present an
obstacle to a mode of explanation conceived so as to have none. And the
Leibnizian argument will disappoint just as much the partisans of human
freedom, who do not find in this " better" the guarantee of a radical free
dom, without which Socrates's moral ity would be an empty word .
   In this case, the weakness of the Leibnizian " better " is that what it tries
to limit is a practice that is also oriented, in its way, toward the formula
tion of the best description-according to the problem that matters for this
practice. And this problem does not, as such, admit of a l imitation in the
name of questions to which it can give no formulation. One might as well
ask a tiger on the prowl to spare that young gazelle, who is so charming,
rema rking that the situation here is even more serious. For the tiger will
remain indifferent and will simply kill the gazelle, whereas the history of
our modern disputes testifies to the solidarity between the intensity of an
appetite and what undertakes to limit it. Scientists and those who wish to
"domesticate " them, restricting them to thei r " domus," are inseparable, the
appetite of the ones being exci ted by the scandal they know how to stir
up among the others. On another level, moreover, this is what the dragon
warned Grendel, who did not understand: by wanting to be the scourge of
men, he would in fact be the one who would instigate them to " shape " the
blind brutality of his own predations, that is, to create all that he himself
abhors, science, poetry, religion. Grendel and the men he persecutes are "as
inseparable as the mountain-climber and the mountain " ( Gr, 62).
   This is why it is importa nt to emphasize that Whitehead 's speculative
intervention does not by any means intend to propose " better" descrip
tions, instead of those that actually succeed . Here, one may return to the
5 0 8   C O N C L U S I O N




regret formulated by some of Whitehea d 's heirs with regard to the fact
that societies have not received the status of "existent," of " res vera," that
no principle of emergence or act of unification has a place in the ca tego
rea l scheme . How ca n we satisfy a mi nimum of rea l ism, they ask, if we
cannot confer its own ontologica l unity upon a composite entity, an ir
reducible unity upon the way individual bei ngs enter into the composi
tion of other individual bei ngs ? How ca n we do without the categories
that a uthorize us to spea k of a being that end ures as of a subject " to
whom " things ha ppen, as a verita ble actua lity endowed with the power
of unifying its component parts ? After all, why should an a uthor who, as
we have seen, does not hesitate to have recourse to the doctrine of sacra
ments to do j ustice to the multiplicity of our modes of thought deprive
himself of the sacra ment that would give consciousness what it dema nds,
when it affirms the unity of its experience, its legiti macy to claim its past
and its future as its own ?
    If Whitehead had sought plausibility, or the possibility of proving his
description to be " better," the " i ncura bly atomic " cha racter of his meta 
physica l definition of what is rea l would indeed have been a wea kness,
j usti fying the reexa mination of the edifice. Yet according to what con
stra ints should one proceed to this reexamination ? How can we a void
ending up with a kind of " rational psychology," authenticating certa in
claims and rejecting others ? How ca n we affirm, on the same level, the
adventures of Kant and those of a shaman, the passion of the mathema ti
cian Cantor, feeling the ca tegories of his thought dismembered by the
question of the continuous infinity of numbers, and the decision of the
mathema tician H i l bert, postula ting the axioms that domesticate the Can
torian infinite ? In short, how can we avoid a normative sociology, pre
scribing the right way to fra me the problem, what d ictates its sol ution,
what sorts out beings according to whether they do or do not have the on
tologica l right to exist ? How, also, can we avoid a confrontation between
rival endurances: is time the number of motion, designating the great regu
larities of nature, or is it the subjective condition of our human intuition,
with the grea t natural regularities then becoming relative to the end ur
ance of the subject of knowledge ? To rule in favor of the claims of conti
nuity also mea ns being obliged to institute a court capa ble of j udging and
sorti ng out these claims.
   For Whitehea d, it goes without saying that the " bests " as defined by
these social adventures that we ca ll knowledge a re doomed to diver
gence. For they are insepa ra ble from those adventures, themselves diver
gent, adventures in which modes of end ura nce and specific definitions
of importa nce-which, for Whitehea d, a re so many living va lues-have
                                                          C O N C L U S I O N   5 0 9




invented themselves, each time on their own account. Speculative phi
losophy is not a bout giving a plausible account of what exists but a bout
approaching each society with the question of what it might be capable
of, and this capacity designates not its j udgments but the interstices to
which it provides shelter. The question is then no longer how to " stop "
physicists, rather how to modify their dreams, that is, as well, how to infect
them. This is the meaning of what I would call " speculative presence."
   The heavy, ancient presence of the mountains, already evoked by White
head in Science and the Modern World. Those who feel it can always
sha ke themselves, come back to earth, and laugh at what they have expe
rienced . We have ready-made words-imagination or daydreaming-to
cancel the interstitial experience rejected by our impatient certitudes, our
specialized criteria, correlates of the a bstractions that matter socially for
us. Nevertheless, for a time, before the interstice closed, the mountain,
ancient and heavy, was no longer " there " for the subjects perceiving it
" here," a colorless, motionless form which they could approach if they
chose. Engl ish humor was required to give a technical definition of what
others celebrate as ineffable, and define it as " infection." And to com
ment on i nfection itself i n terms of " ca usal efficacy," that is, to associate
with the notion of cause not a transparent relation with a well-defined
effect, but the hol d over us of what we perceive.
   To the efficacy of speculative presence as infection corresponds a con
ception of the " sociality " that separates it from the moral features of the
cooperation of the parts toward the maintaining of the whole, and a con
ception of the commitment that separates it from the power of the cause
that commits. What " belongs " to a society and what it excludes never cor
respond to a general ity, for instance, to the generality that would attribute
to the whole the power to define its own parts, or to the parts, conceived
separately, the power to explain the whole. Belonging is always factual,
mutual incl usion rather than participation, a field of emergence, no doubt,
but whose differentiated expressions make society exist as the exprima
tum of the emergent correlation or inter-reference. For Whitehead , the
dynam ics of possession, obsession, and capture must not be expla i ned in
a specific way, as would be the case i f a utonomy were the norm . They
exhibit, in a somewhat exacerbated mode, a generality that refers both to
the order of nature and to the regimes of production of conscious experi
ence. No experience can be separated from the play of partial, selective
repercussions that it unifies on its own account.
   This, of course, does not entail any apocalyptic consequences with regard
to the ill usory nature of our experiences, but it broadens the spectrum in
such a way that speculative infection may slip in without demanding any
5 1 0   C O N C L U S I O N




rift or exceptiona l status. Everyone can remember those moments, testi fy
ing to an obstinate, almost obsessive insistence of the " others in oneself,"
in which we catch ourselves having smiled, accepted a role, adopted a
position, almost despite ourselves. Yet this is no terrible truth, a lthough at
times it may have terrible consequences. In fact, even when we feel our
selves, quite justifia bly, to be more or less the authors of our choices, the
causes we might invoke to justify them will be a mere translation, often
redundant, of what has a " hold " on us. And speculation itsel f would re
main a dead letter if it did not succeed in "getting a hold," were not liable
to infect, in its specific way, those whom it add resses.
   The efficacy associated with speculative philosophy is thus not based
in the least on a principle that transcends what it has the ambition of in
fecting. Nor will it have any character of general ity, as would be the case
if the point were to make divergent social adventures converge. What is
ai med at can, of course, be defined in a genera l way: it wi l l be a transfor
mation of the way these ad ventures diverge. Yet the transformation itself
cannot, of course, be ded uced from what provokes it. The singularity of
speculative efficacy is, moreover, from this viewpoint, to exhi bit this
i ndetermi nacy, that is, not to propose any norm, any rule, or any impera
tive identifying what a " right " thought would be.
   One may nevertheless define the efficacy associated with speculative
thought as a Whitehead ian version of the therapeutic vocation which phi
losophers often assign to their work. In this case, however, it is a rather
original version of this vocation, for " healing thought"-Plato and his
myth of the cave is the prototype of this, Wittgenstein a good example,
and perhaps even Bergson may be one-has usual ly designated the idea of
a " return to health." Whether philosophers diagnose error, illusion or stu
pidity, or a deforming screen, parasitical questions, or misplaced confi
dence in words and reasons, the operation of diagnosis then has the con
sequence that philosophers become " masters of thought," possessing a
knowledge that enables them to define what health is and to ded uce
therefrom a prognosis with regard to the possi bility of its return, even i f
it means deploring the " volunta ry slavery " that constitutes an obstacle to
that return.
   This is the position Whitehead escapes as early as the diagnosis of the
harmful a bsurdity of the " bifurcation of nature " when he did not lay
claim to any particular conception of the relations between mind and
nature, but embarked upon the adventu re of a construction that " saves "
by adding new obligations, new artifices, new stakes. Whitehead neither
denounced nor pursued the power of a bstractions, but tried to metamor
phose their efficacy. But this is precisely what non-modern therapists do,
                                                           C O N C L U S I O N   5 1 1




as Tobie Nathan proposes that we interpret them. They give a name to
what is persecuting a patient, a name by which the persecutor can be con
voked so that one can negotiate with it the conditions of its inscription
within a context where the victim may connect with what was persecuting
her. One might therefore say that Whitehead, l ike those therapists, has
fashioned statements capable of convoking to conscious experience
powers with which one may enter i nto viable relations. These powers are
not gods, ancestors, or genies, but those of our own rationalist trad ition.
   In a sense, then, Whitehead meets up with the " non-modern " art of
therapy, an art that does not sepa rate d iagnosis, prognosis, a nd healing
process, but includes them in a becoming whose secrets therapists do not
possess, because there is no secret. The therapist is an operator, but the
objects with which she operates are neither a response to an independent
diagnosis (as medications claim to be ), nor symbols of something else.
They neither expla i n, nor a re they explica ble in any sense other than
that which constitutes becoming, or metamorphosis, as a touchstone. In
Whitehead i an terms, evil, its cause, and the becoming to which it obl iges
are explai ned in the very process by which evil may be actually " over
come." This is why healing is never a " return to health," but rather a
" socia l transformation," implying the event of an articulation of experi
ence with beings that the person "in good health" can do without.
   If we fol low this para llel, the theme of the bifurcation of nature be
comes a diagnosis. It holds true for all the divergences that dismember
modern thought, because these divergences present themselves i n the
mode of the "either/or" which, whatever the choice may be, imposes the
need for a mourning that can only be ca rried out by mutilating thought
itsel f. This is why " true professionals," be they scientists, technicians, phi
losophers, or others, a re both the prod ucts a nd the vectors of bifurcation,
those for whom it wil l pose no problem whatsoever, and those who will
propagate its infection, i n the name of a thought that is finally serious.
Yet no prognosis responds to this diagnosis, affirming the need for a return
to the kind of unity that has been destroyed by modern times, for such a
unity, already placed under the banner of the monotheist-rationalist ad
venture, may have imagi ned Christ on the cross but not the dance of the
fai ries ( PR, 338 ) . To have the ambition of a return to the type of unity that
has been destroyed would mean, j ust as much, to ratify what that unity
had a l ready destroyed .
   What the prognosis proposes is a " social transformation" of the ratio
nalist adventure itself, that is, the prod uction of a separation between the
divergent adventures it never ceases to i nspire and their respective j ustifi
cations . Whitehead 's prognosis therefore does not derive its authority
5 1 2   C O N C L U S I O N




from the truth of the diagnosis, but is, identical ly, a commitment to the
future. I f the specu lative infection is to be efficacious, this will depend on
the leap of imagination enabling both a departure, without mourning or
drama, from any claim to a legitimacy that tra nscends the facts and a ful l
appraisal of each fact as never t o be pa rted from the living value it dis
closes . There are no sheer facts. Speculative presence does not carry out
any convergence, but suspends the retranslation of the divergent terms
into a contradiction such that it seems possible to affirm the one only i f
the other is denied .
   However, the healing process Whitehead proposes to thought does not
oblige us to renou nce any kind of demand whatsoever. Freedom for Gali
leo, for his adversaries . . . and a lso for the earth. Nor is this a matter of
relativism. The hi storicist or positivist underta ki ngs that speak i n the
name of " facts," to identi fy what is " merely" relative to human i nvention,
have much to learn from biologists: the latter wou ld be very surprised to
see the extraord inary co-invention of living bei ngs and their world re
duced to a critical discourse involving the way in which animals a llow
themsel ves to be del uded, lured, sed uced, or manipulated by their own
i nvention ( fetishism ! ) . The fact that aerobic living beings invented oxy
gen as a resource, whereas it was poison for their predecessors, does not
inspire any judgment concerning the relativity of biochemistry but rather
the celebration of an event that resounds throughout the hi story of Gaia.
   Whi tehead does not deconstruct anything. Quite the contrary, he
takes every construction to its cosmological power. And therefore, there
can be no question of excl uding a s i l l usory the references to what tran
scends hi story-the true, the beautiful, the good-or to what exceeds
the observa ble-quarks, the unconscious, the ancestors. Neither the in
sistence of truth nor the obligations due to the ancestors, including the
latter's power to ensure that such obligations a re respected, neither the
dance of the fai ries nor Christ nai led to his cross may be judged, that is,
disqualified , as relative to "our" historically variable ideas. They may be
destroyed , no doubt, but not criticized "in the name of the facts," for they
are constitutive of them, as a ffirmed by a l l those who, consciously or not,
in the mode of habit, perplexity, fea r, incred ulousness, wonder, or de
mand, take up a position with regard to them.
   Thus, speculative thought does not deny the possi bility that a society
may explain the reasons why it endures a given way and not otherwise, or
that it demands that others recognize the well-founded ness of these rea
sons. Yet it turns such a possibility into an aspect of the endurance in ques
tion . This is why speculative thought is presence rather than argument, a
presence whose efficacy is to infect every justificatory argument with the
                                                          C O N C L U S I O N   S 1 3




adventurous questions of what is demanded by the position whose legiti
macy it expresses, of what it recruits to endure or propagate, and of the
way it is liable to be affected by the encounter with another position.
   These kinds of questions, and the humorous effects they produce,
may, of cou rse, i nspire the rage of those who wish, in one way or an
other, to demonstrate that they d i ffer in a d i fferent way, capable of rel
egating all the other differences to the same indistinctness. Yet this is the
risk of every therapeutic process, pha rmacological in the sense that the
" remedy " does not contai n within itself the means to guarantee that it
may not have, in certa in circumstances, the effect of a poison . And this
is the risk that also defi nes " the good " in the sense of Religion in the
Making, that is, the possi bil ity of overcomi ng the excl usive disj unction,
" either . . . or," when the rea lization of one thing demands the destruc
tion of something else. This possibi l i ty, if it presents itsel f at the wrong
time, can be the trick of evi l . As I have emphasized, hea l ing, the possibil
ity of a ffirming a position without multiplying fact by right, is not a
" return to health" or to normal ity, which is why it is, by definition, a
risky process.
   At a time when every position is infected by the summons, applied to
everyone, that it must justify itself according to a "logical " type of argu
ment, or admit that it is merely " taste and color," with the accusation of
" intolerant dogmatism " coming, i f need be, to intensify the infection, it is
as well to specify that the operation of " healing" with which speculative
philosophy can be associated has nothing to do with that general, genteel
virtue called "tolerance." The vi rtue of tolerance, exhi bited by the thought
that presents itself as postmodern, if it is not simple hypocrisy, in fact
translates rather well what Whitehead described when he spoke of the
instability of evi l . Evil may disappear with the disappearance of what
makes one suffer. The transformation of the modern conflict for legiti
macy into a civi lized conversation, to speak with Richard Rorty, may be
said to " turn into pigs " those who happily converse, for they agree on
avoiding any serious conflict. They ind ulge in well-bred-that is, without
consequence-language games, for they have renounced everything that
might compromise their belonging to the same world. If the " cure " is to
take place, i f the contradiction can be metamorphosed i nto a contrast, it
will not be by the path of ironic renunciation . On the contrary, this con
trast will have to be celebrated in the manner of a new existent, adding a
new dimension to the cosmos. In other words, evil, eventua l ly overcome,
is a cosmic event, excluding all skepticism that is well-bred because it is
cynical . To affirm the i rreducibility of this event, to propose that we think
in its presence, and not to use it as an argument, it was necessary to shake
5 1 4   C O N C L U S I O N




the heaven and earth of our certainties: this is what Whitehead attempted
when he came to propose the double dehiscence of the world and of God .
    The point is thus, above all, not to renounce the rationalist adventure
but to free it from what hides its originality, from what allows it to ap
pear as neutral, a common destiny for all humans. For it is this neutral ity
which, generalizing the power of logical argumentation, confers upon
this adventure the destructive character that Whitehead associates with
evi l . What is generalized is the power to define a situation in a way that
makes agreement rhyme with submission. Those who cla im to have logic
( and the facts) on their side claim to be able to put themselves in the
place of the person they are addressing- "But don 't you see that . . . ",
 "Everyone will admit that . . . "-that is, they lay claim to a legitimacy
with regard to which they themselves are mere spokespersons, and which,
i n principle, defines speaker and auditor as i nterchangeable. D ivergence
is thus red uced to a misunderstand ing, or what cou ld be d ispersed by a
l ittle goodwill. Or to ignorance, which a bit of knowledge would suffice
to repair. Or to a lack of tolerance, which cou ld be reasoned with thanks
to a bit of relativism . All are negations of the li ving val ues of divergence.
D ivergence is never a misunderstandi ng, but has the actual ity and neces
sity of every position, "thus and not otherwise."
    Obviously, the point is not to deny that an argument is logical or com
pelling, but simply to restrain its power to the homogeneous spaces in
which the presumed i nterchangeability is affirmed by all concerned pro
tagonists. To that extent, it is similar to interaction in the physical sense.
Interaction implies terms that make a difference for one another, but a
d ifference that does not modi fy their identity. Two masses that i nteract
are stil l masses: what varies is their speed and rel ative positions. Like
wise, i f your arguments convince me, I am supposed, unless I admit I have
undergone an " irrationa l " influence, an undue suggestion, to be able to
define what my position had not taken i nto account, which explains why,
a lthough preserving my autonomous identity, I have been led to change
my mind.
    Argumentation, interaction, and rational conversation bet everythi ng
on homogeneity, that is, the possibility of putting onesel f in the other's
place. Roles are ideally interchangeable: "let there be two charged bod
ies," but also "you should realize that . . " or "if I were you, I would . . . "
                                        .



And a bove all, "and therefore . . ," to the import of which nothing must
                                  .



present an obstacle: from my viewpoint, what i nterests you is i l lusory,
and the progress of knowledge will be sure to demonstrate that. Con
versely, speculative p resence, and the eventual efficacy associated with it,
constitutes the wager of the interstice, or, as Deleuze would say, of what
                                                           C O N C L U S I O N   5 1 5




"grows out from the middle." What it aims at is above a l l not homogene
ity and hence conversion, but only a slight modification, about which,
what is more, it cannot foresee how it will come about, what causes, re
sources, and what consequences it will i nvent for itself. The vector of an
infection never explains its efficacy; viruses tell about the animals they
will kill only by indirect all usions, which biologists decipher laboriously,
while the morbid process propagates virulently. The infection is " without
reason," i n the sense that its reasons depend on the fact of its success.
   Perhaps we may take the risk of call ing what designates the field of
speculative ambition "ethics." Every time we use the term " ethics," we
must obviously distinguish it from the term " morality," for this d istinc
tion does not exist prior to its respective users . Wil liam James's " moral
philosophy," for instance, refers to what I call here ethics . Etymologically,
in fact, the two terms are rela ted . Si nce moral ity refers to the Latin " mos "
(custom), and ethics to the Greek " ethos," both can be used to designate
"good " behavior, " good " conduct; they can even be general ized to cus
toms i n general, both animal and human, which is what " ethology " does.
It so happens that Whitehead often used the term " morality," with vari
ous mean ings, but seldom the word " ethics," which therefore remai ns
available in the context of his vocabulary. I take advantage of this, with
all the more pleasure i n that by so doing I concur with the rea d i ng
Deleuze has suggested of ethics in Spinoza 's sense, a read ing which , refer
ring the question of good and evil to that of what is good or bad, is of a
hygienic rather than a normative type.
   If the speculative ambition can be expressed in ethical terms, then,
it will be in the sense in which " ethical " is l inked to " ethos," and is there
fore connected with the great theme of habit, in a way I have al ready
mentioned with regard to Whitehead 's educational project. The habits
Whitehead calls " aesthetic " have as thei r correl ate the question of pres
ence, i n the generic sense. In contrast, one may call "ethica l " the ha bits
that concern a social i dentity such that it accepts, or does not accept, the
test constituted by the encounter with other, d ivergent identities .
   Physicists may be imbued by the beauty of a sunset, yet relegate a po
et's work to subj ectivity, whereas their work, by contrast, is objective.
This j udgment, which makes nature bifurcate, is a very bad habit from
an ethical viewpoint. The social identification of physics with objectivity
may seem acceptable to poets who have acquired the ( ba d ) habit of ac
cepting this distribution of honors, but it communicates d i rectly with the
denunciation of a l l that cannot be subjected to this distribution. What is
aimed at by an " ethical modification," in this case, is not " modified " physi
cists, having become a ble to reconcile what has bifurcated . It is simply
5 1 6   CONCL U S I O N




physicists capable of celebrating the adventure they inherit in its singu
larity, without turning the " physical reality " of the electromagnetic waves
emitted by the sun into " the" objective version, in opposition to which all
the other versions must be defined . Such physicists may, in the trajectory
that gave them this capacity, have been the funda mentally anonymous
site of experiences that testify to evi l, qua liable to be overcome. And they
may, of course, by the example they provide, be accused by thei r peers of
" demoralizing" the community. This happened, for instance, to Henri Poin
care and Pierre Duhem . Yet their "ethics " remain indeed those of physicists,
as do their dreams, their doubts, their hopes, and their fears. They have
" simply" acquired the good habit of dreams that do not turn them into the
thinking head of humanity, taking charge of the questions that " men " have
allegedly asked themselves forever, and which physics would recently
have lea rned to answer.
   Unl i ke reflexive or critica l practices, which seek to persuade everyone
to recognize the limits of their knowledge and adj ust their claims to what
these limits authorize, the ethical question, as I define it here, has a s its
stake not the passage from dogmatic slumber to critica l wakefulness, but
the di fference between dream and nightmare. It does not aim at bringing
forth heroic beings who have stripped themselves of the habits that en
slave others. It does not prod uce a new version of the myth of the cave,
with the invariant i n all versions bei ng the need to leave behind one's
neighbors, the variable i ngredient being what is waiting " outside the
cave." There is no speculative figure of the cave i n Whitehead, no overall
j udgment emi tted against the partial and divergent interpretations that
are supposed to predominate in it: if you wish to have an experience free
of all interpretation, ask a stone for its biography . . .
   The Whiteheadian adventure does not aim at awakening, leaving the
cave. It is itsel f a dream, a storytel ling: to learn " i nside" the Platonic cave,
together with those who live and argue within it. Not in the hope that the
false appearances will gradually yield their secrets, but in the hope that
these " a ppearances," if they are appreciated in their affirmative impor
ta nce, might be articulated into fabulous contrasts.
   The singularity of the Whiteheadian dream of learning inside the cave
is that the person infected by it, who is l ured by Whiteheadian proposi
tions, is not mandated to become a missionary and propagate the infec
tion. To be sure, this book tries to do so, but in a way to which only a
very benign and limited infection may correspond, not a galloping pro
cess. Instead, this dream obl iges the person it infects to address the dreams
of others, for only d reamers can accept the modification of their dream.
Only dreams and stories, because they a re the enjoyment of l iving values,
                                                           C O N C L U S I O N   5 1 7




can receive the i nterstices without the panic effect of people who bel ieve
themselves to be i n danger of losing hold.
    Every philosophy endeavoring to lead people " out of the cave " has a
di rect connection to the universal, in which respect it is akin to therapeu
tics in the modern sense: the first refers to a use of thought that is finally
adequate, or moral; the second to a return to health, to the morality of
parts reconnecting with the possibility of a hea lthy cooperation in the ser
vice of the whole. This is why the paths they both propose are by right
open to a l l . In contrast, speculative efficacy-the word of a dragon or of a
trance, not of a counselor-is addressed to dreams, to doubts, to fears and
ambitions, not to perplexity, confusion, to qualms in sea rch of landmarks.
No doubt the young Grendel suffered too much for the dragon's words to
infect him in a speculative mode. Thus, as the trick of evil , it had the effect
of transforming its feeling of loneliness into contempt and hatred .
    Speculative philosophy is thus not add ressed to everyone, but to others,
insofa r as they a re " in their element," i nsofar as thei r habits constitute a
world for them, into which they admit no free trespassing. To others, then,
insofa r as one cannot claim to " put oneself in thei r place." Tha t these
habits may be inflected, for instance, that laughter may resound testifying
to the entertainment of a proposition that transforms what was accepted
as an unavoidable alternative i nto a badly posed problem, such is the suc
cess that is dreamt of.
    I will take the risk of giving a name to the " mod ification of others'
dreams" that is the aim of speculative philosophy. That name is " polite
ness." In the first instance, such a name expresses the restriction of the
address. The trick of evil will ta ke adva ntage if the possibility of polite
ness is suggested to someone who has no choice left other than despai r or
anger. And this name also expresses the specific character of the a ntidote
concocted by Whitehead . It does not concern those populations for whom
pol iteness is already a synonym for civilization. It is add ressed to the
" moderns," who will confirm the relevance of this address by denouncing
such politeness as artificial, even hypocritical, i n any case far removed from
any authenticity. O r, at the least, they will answer that it is only a secondary
character. Thus, one may be a very good physicist and completely impolite,
and the naive arrogance of the physicists' disqualifications is often even
celebrated as thei r mark of genius, of the power of the dream that makes
them " sleepwal kers." The Whiteheadian antidote is thus coherent with the
absurdity that turned him into a philosopher. The ones it addresses, that
is, also the ones who would snigger, are those who have made themselves
the vectors of modern passions, adhering to one or another conflicti ng
version of the bifurcation of nature.
5 1 8   C O N C L U S I O N




    To turn the Whitehead ian " scheme " into a matrix, whose applications
would be thinkers who may be somewha t eccentric but are vectors of a
disarming pol iteness, wi l l surprise more than one reader. In genera l, phi
losophers are no more polite than physicists or sociologists, and much
less so than some ethologists, who lea rn from what they observe how to
address it. The critical interpellation " remember the cond itions that set
l i mits to your k nowledge," a descendant of " remember that you a re
going to d ie," is not pol ite. It shocks those it add resses, as it to be ex
pected, since the point is to wake them up. The need for awakening pre
supposes the legitimacy of " making someone lose hold," of sha king up
routines and shattering certa inties. Speculative i nterest, in contrast, re
spects the i mportance of the hold. The critical interpel lation "remem
ber . . . " is then replaced by the questions "what is required by your
hold? " "from what wager does your success pro ceed? "-polite questions
that one creature may address to another creature. And i f the excha nge is
possible, i f someti mes-a n essentially anonymous event-one d ream
may ind uce the modi fication of another or evoke another, it is insofar as
their poi nt of junction is always a tangent point: neither a frontal clash
between rival powers nor bei ng swa llowed up in the other's dream, not
confusion in a banal d ream of power but a loca l resonance, designa ting
past tenses of divergent accomplishments and future tenses responding to
distinct tests.
     " What is required by your hold? ": such a question affirms and presup
poses that the others' dreams, like yours, are created according to the
means of their own adventure, and to this extent this question constitutes
a test: it is a question that beings of power will have difficulty tolerating,
proceeding as they do in the name of an intangible right that must be
satisfied everywhere, which recognizes no d ifference between here and
there, other than that of the pa rasites to be eliminated so that they them
selves may be confirmed . Yet it is a question that one dreamer ca n ad
dress to another d rea mer, for dreams do not abstract from the means, but
ra ther dissolve the dreamer's identity in adventures that restore to the
" means " their mode of actua l existence : that of propositions that possess
individuals fa r more than individuals possess them . This is why, when
philosophy has succeeded doing what it can do, not only is wonder sti ll
there, but it henceforth infects all the statements whose vocation was to
explain the world, that is, to disenchant it.
    The Whiteheadian scheme is a work of pol iteness beca use it seeks to be
"a dequate," refra ining from insulting any living va l ue. Yet if it is effective,
it owes th is to its fa brication, to the a rticulation of constraints that oblige
thought, an "asignificant" matrix whose truth is the events of " disclosure "
                                                       C O N C L U S I O N   5 1 9




it may induce, modifying a being's relations to its environment, and, in
this case, the relations of a statement to its consequences. Whitehead
made coherence the vector of this efficacy, and it is coherence that de
manded the twofold production of Whitehead as speculative thinker and
of that strange object, the speculative scheme. Whitehead fabricated this
scheme in order that the scheme might fabricate him, that it might obl ige
him to undergo the becomings of thought demanded by coherence.
   As a thinker, Whitehead is thus not so much the author of the scheme
and the concepts he articulates as he was obliged by them, in a process of
empirical experimentation-verification that is akin to trance, because in it
thought is taken, captured , by a becoming that separates it from its own
intentionality. A " mechanical " becoming in the sense of Deleuze and Guat
tari, in the sense that thinkers can produce this thought only because they
have themselves become a piece, or gear, of what has captured them, much
more than they have created it. Thought is then no longer the exercise of a
right but becomes an " art of consequences," consequences that leap from
one domain to another, or, more precisely, that make interstices zigzag
where a homogeneous right had seemed to reign, and make connections
proliferate where "this has nothing to do with that" had prevailed .
   That is why I had to " think with Whitehead," that is, accept the cap
ture and become a gea r.
I ndex




Note: T h e a u t hor's comments a bo u t the index ( pp. 25-27) refer to t h e origina l French edi
tion. This i n dex h a s been prepared with the needs and expecta tions o f America n readers
in m i n d .


A b e l , Niels Henrik, 1 20                           Animals: awareness d isplayed by, 3 1 ;
Abram, David, The Spell of the Sensuous,                 behav ior of, 434-439; ha bits of, 26;
   352-354                                               humans versus, 44 1 -442; territo r i a l ,
Abstraction: critica l a ttitude towa rd,                434-4 3 5 , 440
   1 30- 1 3 1 ; da ngers of, 1 36-1 3 8 ; fa l lacy   Anti-Dreyfusards, 2 8 1 , 320
   of m ispl aced concreteness and, 1 27;              Ants, 432, 433
   i ntel lectu a l , as exaggerated, 89; knowl       Applica bil ity, 246
   edge and, 48; language and, 32-3 3; in              Arbitra riness, 1 8
   modern thought, 1 36; a n d o bjects, 76; in        Argument from the a bsurd, 240-24 1
   perception, 99-1 00; recognition and, 77;           Aristotle, 78, 255, 26 1 , 295
   spatio-tem pora l , 5 2-54                          Art and aesthetics, 1 40- 1 4 1 , 2 1 8-2 1 9,
Abs u r d i ty, 3 8-39. See a/so Argument from           340-342, 4 95-496
   the a bsurd                                         Arta u d , Antonin, 29 1 , 324
Active conditions, 95-97                               Atomization, 283, 300, 3 7 1 , 3 73-374,
Actua l entities, 53, 262-266, 296, 300,                 457
   3 0 1 , 305-30 8 , 3 8 2 , 3 84-3 8 5               Atoms, 1 65- 1 66, 246-24 8 , 3 70
Act u a l ity, 1 93, 205                               Attention, d ue, 3 6 , 44, 46, 4 8-49, 5 5 , 60,
Adeq uacy, 246                                           62, 67, 69, 7 1 , 84, 8 7, 9 8 , 1 05 , 1 0 6 , 1 5 8 ,
Adj u nction, 1 20-1 2 1 , 1 9 1- 1 92                   20 1 , 2 1 8, 223, 225, 254, 272, 347, 349,
Adventu re: cha ra cteristics of, 1 4 , 1 8- 1 9;        3 77, 379, 400, 435
   p h i l osophy as, 6-7, 1 0, 4 95-496, 5 1 6; of    Attention to truth, 349
   reason, 1 1 4-1 1 5 ; science as, 1 3               Attractors, systems with, 1 09- 1 1 0
Adventures o f Ideas ( Wh i tehea d ) , 1 1 5,         Augustine, Sa int, 2 8 6
   1 1 6 , 1 1 8, 1 60, 1 62, 243, 29 1 , 322,         Awa reness, 3 1-32
   349-350, 495, 497-500
The A ims of Education (Wh i tehea d ) , 1 1 6,        Bacon, Francis, 249
   141                                                 Baptism, 4 3 6
5 2 2     I N D E X




Becoming, 1 97                                         Cava l ier perspective, 279-2 8 1 , 2 8 5 , 2 8 8 ,
Bel ief. See Trust                                        292, 498
Bellarmin, Robert, 2 9 1                               Chance, 423, 489
Bergson, Hen ri, 1 1 2, 3 2 9 , 5 1 0; Creative        Chaos, 1 95, 3 8 6
   Em/utioll, 432; Essay Oil the Immediate             Chem ical forces, 1 0 1
   Data of Consciouslless, 343; Evolution              Chem istry, 94-95, 1 6 9- 1 70, 43 1
   creatrice, 25; on ha bit, 1 3 9- 1 40; and          Christian, W i l l i a m A . , 5
   history, 1 1 5 ; on instinct and intell igence,     Christian ethics, 1 6 0
   432, 4 3 3 , 4 3 6-4 3 7 ; and intuition, 2 6 1 ;   Christi a n i ty, 396, 484; and conversion,
  o n invention, 25 8 ; a n d memory, 3 1 6;              2 8 2; criticisms of, 290, 292, 45 1 , 454,
   and novelty, 3 2 8 ; on rational knowledge,            49 1 ; ethics of, 1 60; the Eucha rist in,
   1 2 , 25 8 ; on senses, 342-343; and time,             402; and good and evi l , 283, 2 8 6 ; idea l
   55-57, 62-63, 1 97, 3 72; on the vi rtu a l ,          of, 1 1 6; a n d l ove, 4 8 8 ; theo logy o f, 5 ,
   214                                                    220, 363, 393, 45 1 , 4 8 9; Whitehead and,
Berkeley, George, 79, 1 1 7- 1 1 8 , 1 45- 1 47,          1 3 3, 220, 4 5 1
   204, 3 6 7                                          C i rc u l a r t h i n k i n g, 2 3 3 , 2 3 6 , 23 8-2 3 9 ,
Best of worlds, 28 9-290, 3 1 1 , 3 1 7, 3 9 0            25 1
Bichat, Ma rie Fra n"ois Xavier, 1 65                  Civil ization, 1 1 4-1 1 5
Bifu rcation of nature: da ngers of, x i i ,           Cla rke, Andy, 1 08 , 1 1 0
   99, 1 1 1 ; m ind and, 3 8 , 5 6 , 64, 75;          Clash, 1 59- 1 6 0
   modern ist philosophy and, xii, x i i i ,           Cleopatra 's Need le, 4 1 , 75-76
   395; refusa l of, 4 1 , 4 8 , 77, 78-79, 94;        Cogn i tive occa sions, 208-209
   science and, 98                                     Cogn itive psychology, 1 08
Biochemistry, 3 7 8 , 4 30-4 32                        Cogred ience, 6 7-6 9, 70, 1 09, 297
Biology, 1 72- 1 78 , 425-426, 5 1 2. See a/so         Coherence, 23 8-239, 250, 265
   Evol ution a ry biology                             Color, 8 6 , 1 54- 1 55 , 1 8 8 , 209, 350-352,
Biosphere, 3 3 0-3 3 1                                    355-3 5 9
Bod i l y events, 1 4 9- 1 5 1 , 1 8 6                 Common sense, 1 06- 1 07, 250, 294
Bod� 80-8 1 , 1 4 3 , 1 75 , 4 3 6                     Comm u n ication, l i mi ts on, 234-235
Boh r, Niels, 1 29, 3 70                               Commu n ity, 4 3 7
Boredom, Wh i tehea d 's refusal of, 24, 1 1 9,        COllatus, 4 70-472
   243-244, 267                                        The Concept of Nature ( Wh i tehea d ) , 2 3 ,
Born, Max, 1 3 0                                          3 1 - 1 1 3, 1 30, 1 4 3 , 1 4 6 , 1 5 1 , 1 5 3- 1 56 ,
Brahe, Tycho, 1 2 7                                       1 66, 1 78 , 1 82, 1 93, 209, 2 1 2, 2 1 6, 22 1 ,
Bra in, a s part of nature, 1 08-1 1 0                    234, 237, 240-24 1 , 248, 253, 254, 2 5 6 ,
British philosophy, 2 6-27                                295-296, 302, 3 3 5 , 3 3 7, 3 3 8 , 346,
Butler, Samuel, 2 8 3                                     3 5 1 -352, 364, 3 6 6 , 3 72, 400, 407,
Butterfl ies, 9 7 , 344, 3 4 6 , 352, 400, 403,           4 1 0, 4 1 1 , 4 3 6 , 439; events in, 44-52;
   433                                                    foothold of the mind in, 5 8-72; objects
                                                          in, 77-93 ; pa ssage of nature in, 52-5 7;
Cain, 229, 3 3 3 , 471                                    scientific objects in, 94- 1 04
Calvin, John, 4 8 1                                    Concepts: function of, 1 7; pragmatics of,
Camels, fa ble of, 1 6- 1 7                               1 05- 1 1 3
Cantor, Georg, 273                                     Concept u a l feel ings, 345-346, 362-3 6 3 ,
Carroll, Lewis, 330                                       4 1 4, 460
Cash val ue, of truth, 1 1 2, 1 5 1                    Conceptual reversion, 360-362
Categories o f obligation, 307, 3 1 0-3 1 1 ,          Concrescence, 2 5 7, 298, 3 08-309,
   34 1 , 345, 3 60-362, 4 6 1                            3 8 3- 3 8 6 , 3 8 9
Cathol icism, 427, 44 1 -442, 4 8 1                    Concrete fact, 4 8 , 77-78
Causa l i ty, xiin, 1 26- 1 27, 332, 3 3 7,            Condensation, 1 2 1 - 1 22
  400-402                                              Cond itions, 4 8-50
Causa sui ( self-ca usation ) , 264, 3 0 6 , 3 1 4 ,   Confidence, 1 5 , 1 7
   366, 3 8 4                                          Connectionism, 1 08-1 09
                                                                                                  I N D E X   5 2 3




Consciousness: contra st a n d , 405; experi           Descri ptive statements, 407
   ence without, 3 1 ; as a function, 1 4 9- 1 50,      Detection, 97-98 , 1 00, 1 08 , 1 95 , 3 4 1-347,
   1 8 9, 202-203; James's critique of, xiin.              3 7 1 , 3 7 8 , 3 8 0, 4 00, 403, 4 1 4
   1 4 9; l i m i tations of concept of, x i i n,       Dirac, Pa u l , 1 3 0
   26; as negation, 3 4 8 ; a n d perception,           Discernment, 44-4 5 , 5 0
   347-3 4 8 ; and propositions, 40 8-409;              Disclosure, 1 7, 46
   reflexive, xi in. 26, 3 1 ; sensation and,           Discovery, 249
   3 3 6 ; solitary, 4 8 3-4 84; specula tive p h i    Disqu iet (inquietude). 1 82- 1 8 3 , 1 9 1 , 203,
   l osophy a nd, 35 1 , 395. S e e also Mind;             445, 470
   Solitary consciousness                               Dissipa tive structu res, 3 1 3
Constructivism, 1 8-2 1 , 1 34- 1 3 5                   Divine ordering. See God: and order
Contingency, 1 8                                        Domestica tion, 4 3 7-4 3 8
Conti n u i ty, 1 92, 1 97, 230, 326                    Dou bt, 1 4 6 , 259, 397
Convergence, 299-300, 305                               Dreyfusards, 2 8 1 . See also Anti-
Conveya nce of sense-objects, 8 7-89                       Dreyfusards
Coord inate ana lysis, 3 72-3 73                        Dualism, 245
Copern icus, Nicolaus, 1 27, 4 8 0                      Duhem, Pierre, 5 1 6
Copu la tion, 90, 43 8-4 3 9                            Duns Scotus, John, 79-8 0
Correlati ons, 3 8 6-3 8 7                              Duration, 5 1 -5 3 , 55-5 6 , 5 9-6 0, 6 7-6 8
Cosmologica l viewpoint, 3 0 9 , 3 1 2-3 1 3 ,          Dynam ics, 3 6 8 , 370
  334, 3 5 8 , 424-426 , 492, 495
Cosmos, 255, 3 1 1 , 3 1 3                              Ecology, 1 36- 1 37, 1 64 . See also Ga ia
Cra ving, for importance i n o u r actions,             Ed ucation, 1 3 9-1 4 1 , 1 99, 3 3 3
  236-2 3 7                                             Efficacy, spec u l a tive, 509-5 1 0, 5 1 4-5 1 5 ,
Crea tion, m i racle of. See M i racle of crea tion        517
Crea tivity, 254-276; as cond itioned,                  Eigenfunctions, 3 8 0- 3 8 2
  2 5 5-256, 25 8-259; crea tors a n d ,                Eigenva l ues, 3 8 0, 3 8 2
  272-274; defined, 255-256; G o d a n d ,              Einstein, A l bert, 4, 5 0 , 5 1 , 5 3 , 1 6 7- 1 6 8 ,
  394, 450; n o t su bjective, 2 6 3 ; as u lti           224, 295
  m a te, 254-256, 258, 264-265                         El bow room, 1 9 1 , 229, 2 9 1
Cries, 42                                               Electromagnetic forces, 1 0 1 - 1 02
Cromwel l , O l i ver, 4 1 9                            Electrons, 1 02- 1 03 , 1 6 6- 1 67, 1 7 8-1 79
Culture o f interstices, 3 2 8 , 332, 429               Em piricism, xi-x i i , 32, 3 7, 4 1 , 46, 245,
                                                           249, 3 3 7-338
Da Icq, A l bert, 1 77                                  End u rance, 1 53 , 1 5 6-1 5 7, 1 6 3, 1 99
Da lton, John, 1 6 5                                    End uring objects, 3 2 1
Dance, 1 6 1 - 1 62                                     Energy, 205, 3 6 8
Dancers' circle, 2 3 3 , 2 3 9                          A n Enquiry Concerning the Principles of
Darwinism, 1 1 2, 1 26 , 1 29, 1 76-1 77. See              Natural Knowledge ( Wh i tehea d ) , 53
  also Evo l ution                                      Envisagement, 205-20 8 , 2 1 3-2 1 7, 394,
Dawkins, Richard, 1 1 3                                    447, 472. See also Triple envisagement
Decisions, 230, 26 1 -263                               Epi men ides, the Creta n, 235, 270
De La guna, T. , 53, 54                                 Eq u i l i br i u m struct u res, 3 1 3
Deleuze, Gil les, xi, xv , xxi, 6 , 1 0, 24, 27,        Eros, 4 8 8-4 8 9 , 498
   1 20- 1 22, 1 5 5, 1 70, 1 92, 2 1 4-2 1 6 , 242,    Etern a l activity, 1 84, 205-206 , 2 0 8 , 2 1 2,
  249, 266-272, 2 8 1 , 323, 34 1 , 367, 428,              2 1 4-2 1 5, 256, 294, 296
  434-4 3 5 , 43 8-439, 463, 466-467, 4 8 9,            Eterna l ity, 1 5 3, 154
  490, 5 1 9                                            Eterna l objects, 1 54- 1 56 , 1 8 7-1 8 9,
Democritus, 1 6 5                                          206-2 1 5, 3 02-305, 3 1 9, 36 1 -362, 4 1 2,
Demonstra tive statements, 407                             4 1 5, 422, 473
Dennett, Daniel, 1 1 3                                  Eterna l retu rn, 293
Descartes, Rene, xii, 14, 70, 72, 78, 125, 1 49,        Ethics, 5 1 5
  245, 259, 3 0 1 , 3 06-307, 3 4 8 , 3 6 8 , 397       Eth o-ecol ogy, 1 64
5 2 4         I N D E X




Ethology, 434-440, 444                               Foothold, of m ind in nature, 66-67, 75,
Eucharist, 44 1 -442                                    8 7-92, 94, 98-1 00, 1 06 , 1 1 2
" Event here," 64                                    Ford, Lewis, 25, 1 1 8- 1 20, 1 8 3 , 1 8 4, 205,
Events: bodily, 1 4 9-1 5 1 , 1 8 6; interconnec       24 1 , 242, 243, 363, 422, 453; The
   tion of, 47, 1 9 1 ; o bjects and, 77, 8 1-82,       Emergence of Whitehead's Metaphysics,
   92-93; perception and, 44-45; percipi               1 925- 1 929, 1 1 9
   ent, 64-6 5 , 70-7 1 ; space-time in, 50; as      Formal rea l i ty, 306, 3 1 9
   starting po i nts, 80; that which end u res       Fouca u lt, M ichel, 1 60- 1 6 1 , 324, 444
   versus, 1 86 ; from their own sta ndpoint,        Freedom, 1 6 2
   1 85-200                                          Free imagination, 3 5 0
Ev i l , 2 8 3-2 8 5 , 286-2 8 7, 290-29 1 ,         Function, 1 4 9-1 5 0, 1 8 9, 1 95, 202-203 ,
   3 3 3-334, 3 8 9, 392, 420, 46 8-4 6 9 , 480,        300-30 1 , 452, 469
   4 8 3 , 498 . See also Trick of evil
Evoca tion, 3 1 6-3 1 7                              Ga ia, 1 6 3- 1 64, 1 76 . See also Ecology
Evolution: causal ity and, 1 26-127; ma             Ga l i leo Ga l i lei, 1 3, 5 1 , 1 23 , 1 32, 1 3 7, 1 42,
   teria l istic theory on, 1 2 8- 1 29; percep        260, 290, 29 1 , 4 4 1 -442, 4 8 0
   tion and, 65-66; philosophy and, 1 1 2;           Ga lois, Eva r iste, 1 20
   pragm a t ism and, 1 1 2-1 1 3; shortcom ings     Ga'rdner, John, xiv, 5; Grendel. 1-3, 7, 503,
   of, as theory, 1 26- 1 27, 1 29. See also            505, 507, 5 1 7
   Darwinism; Surviva l, perception and              Genera l ities, 1 9, 40-4 1 , 1 0 7
Evolutionary biology, 3 1 3                          Geometrica l forms, 1 5 5
Exa ption, 330                                       Gnosticism, 4 9 1
Excess of su bjectivity, 277, 278, 2 8 0 , 2 8 1 ,   God : as accident of crea tivity, 265, 274;
   2 8 6 , 292, 45 1 , 4 8 3 , 4 8 7, 49 1 , 493        a s actu a l , 265; Christian conception of,
Exh i bition, 4 8                                       363, 393, 45 1 , 454, 4 8 9; conceptual
Existentia lism, 494                                    a spect of, 454-460; conceptual feel ings
Experience: a wareness and, 3 1 -32; char              of, 362-36 3 ; and concrescence, 3 8 3 ;
   acteristics of, 22; h a b its and, 26-27; " I "      conseq uent nature of, 4 5 5-456, 4 6 6 ,
   a n d , 70; i m poverishment of, 2 6 ; James         476, 4 7 8 , 4 8 2-4 8 3 ; in contemporary
   and, xi in; of newborns, 8 9; no hierarchy           phi losophy, 8 ; and creativity, 394, 450;
   in, 76; point of view for, 64; pure, 70;             as crea tu re, 266, 4 8 3 ; and envisagement,
   schemes for, 1 7                                     447, 472; and eternal objects, 2 1 5; and
Experiment, 20-22, 95-96 , 1 06- 1 07,                  final cause, 475; function o f, 286, 452,
   260-26 1                                             469; a nd good/evi l , 284-2 86; impl ica
Explanation, 34-35, 77-7 8 , 26 1 , 262                 tion of, i n the world, x i i i-xiv; indiffer
Expl icit, the, 22 1 -224                               ence of, 3 1 6-3 1 8 ; j udgment of, 396; and
Expression, 423-430                                     j u stifica tion of l i fe, 3 1 4-3 1 8 ; lim itation
Extensive a bstraction, 53-54                           of, 282; love exhi bited by, 4 8 8-490;
Extensive contin u u m , 1 6 9, 373-376                 meta physica l necessity of, 1 7, 1 33 , 2 1 7,
Ezek iel, 298, 3 8 5 , 459                              225, 227, 25 1 , 424, 493; monotheistic,
                                                       479; na mes of, 394; nature of, 225-227;
Faces, 8 1                                              not a creator, 264; not a j u dge, 394; not
Faith, 1 1 6-1 1 7, 2 3 3 , 244. See also Trust         a person, 492; and novelty, xiv; onto
Fallacy of m isplaced concreteness, 1 1 3 , 127         logica l principle and, 264; and order,
Faraday, M ichael, 1 0 1                                255-256, 264, 3 1 1 , 3 1 4-3 1 5, 359, 3 6 9,
Fee l i ng, 294, 309-3 1 0, 3 8 4                       3 74, 3 8 9-390; patience of, 478; physica l
Fermat, Pierre d e , 4 6 3                              aspect of, 454-460, 474-475; power of,
F i e l d theoty, 1 02-1 03                             1 3 3- 1 34; primordi a l nature of, 455-
Final causes, 1 26                                     456, 472-4 73; and relevance, 42 1 -422,
Fina l theory, 1 25                                    455, 477; rel igious images of, 453, 477;
Fl ies, 6 6                                            and salvation, 478, 4 8 0-4 8 1 , 4 8 6-4 8 7,
Flights of experience, 249-250, 25 2-25 3 ,            490; sec u l a rization a nd, 45 1-452,
   2 5 5 , 26 1 , 294, 296                             469, 477, 4 8 2 ; and sharing, 4 6 6-46 8 ,
                                                                                               I N D E X         5 2 5




   4 7 1 -472; as society, 4 5 7; spec u l ative         Imagina tive h i story, 406
   construction of, 1 7; " tender care" of,              Imagina tive rationa l ization, 24 8-249, 350
   469, 474-4 75, 478; virtues not appl ica             Immorta l i ty. See O bjective i m m orta lity
   ble to, 482; Whi tehea d 's conception of,            Impa sse, 3 8 9-390, 3 92, 394, 4 2 1 , 447,
   x i i i-xiv, 5, 8 , 1 7, 27, 2 1 7, 220-22 1 , 225,      455-457, 46 1 , 474-4 77, 4 8 2
   227-228, 264-266, 274, 2 8 5 , 2 8 6 , 3 1 1 ,        Impl icit, the, 2 2 1 -224
   363, 378, 3 8 9-39 1 , 393, 447-448,                  Importa nce, 1 9, 20 1 -202, 23 6-237, 25 1 ,
   45 3-500; and the world, 449-478                         423-424, 430
Godel, K u rt, 3                                         Imposition, 3 1 9, 434
Good, 2 8 3-28 7, 3 8 9, 4 8 0                           Indeterm inacy, 59, 62
" Good " q uestions, 3 8 0-3 84, 440                     Indeterm ination, 1 6
Gou l d , Stephen, 1 77, 330                             Individ u a l ization, 1 52, 1 5 5
Gra m m a r, 360                                         Ind uction, 249, 4 6 1 -462, 470-473,
Gra vitational forces, 1 0 1                                475-477
" Grea t refusal," 2 1 8-222, 224                        Ind ustria l revol ution, 3 3 3
Guatta ri, Felix, xxi, 27, 1 70, 249, 267-272,           Infection, 1 5 7- 1 6 3 , 1 7 1 , 1 74, 3 1 9, 509,
   34 1 , 434-435, 43 8-4 3 9, 5 1 9                        5 1 5, 5 1 6
                                                         Ingression, 8 1 -83, 94, 1 0 1 - 1 04, 1 08- 1 1 0,
Ha bits: ethics a n d , 5 1 5; and experience,              1 5 1 - 1 52, 1 55, 1 8 9, 302-304, 3 3 8-3 39,
   26-27; menta l, 3 3 3 ; and nature, 8 8 ; of             36 1 -3 6 2
   perception, 8 8 , 4 0 1 -402; o f profession         Initial d a tum, 3 7 0 , 3 7 8 , 3 8 3-3 8 5 , 3 8 8
   a ls, 2 70, 274; o f thought, 1 3 7, 270-272;         Innate behavior, 4 3 8
   transformation of, 1 43 ; Wh i tehead on,             Insta n ta neousness, 5 0-53
   1 3 9- 1 40                                           Instinctive a ttitude/knowledge, 3 6-37, 43,
Hartshorne, Charles, 5, 457                                 45, 4 8 , 49, 6 5 , 1 1 2
Ha rva rd University, 4-5                                Intellectua l feelings, 443-445
Hegel, G. W. E, xiv, 1 90, 2 8 7, 434                    Interactions, 3 8 6-3 8 7
Heidegger, Martin, 8 , 1 2, 2 1 , 46, 2 5 8 , 434,       Interstices, 26, 274-275, 323-324,
   505                                                      327-335, 420-42 1 , 429, 430, 4 3 2-433,
Heisen berg, Werner, 1 30, 426                              435, 4 3 7, 443, 445, 446, 4 6 3 , 4 8 4 - 4 8 5 ,
Heraclitus, 270                                             495, 500, 509, 5 1 4, 5 1 7, 5 1 9
" He re," 6 7-6 9                                        Intuition, 26 1 , 506
History of p h i losophy, 78, 1 1 5, 1 50, 273,
  279-2 8 0, 285                                         Ja mes, Wi l l i a m : and belief, 396; on the
Hocking, Wil l iam Ernest, 1 90                             body, 80; on chance, 423, 4 8 9; and con
Hold ing together, 1 55, 1 5 8- 1 59, 1 6 3, 1 6 6,         sciousness, 1 4 9- 1 5 1 , 3 5 1 ; on con t i n u i ty,
   1 70, 1 8 3                                              1 93; on decisions, 230; " Does 'Con
"How" versus "why," 1 3- 1 4                                sciousness' Exist? " 1 4 9; and evol u tion,
H u m a n being: a n i m a l versus, 44 1 -442;             66; and experience, xii, 70-72, 1 99-200;
  essence of, 355; and novelty, 440-44 1 ;                  and God, 4 9 1 -494; and h a b i t, 1 3 9;
   poss i b i l ities of, 49 8-499; solitari ness of,       infl u ence o f, 1 1 2, 1 4 9- 1 50, 1 90; "Is L i fe
  2 8 7-28 8                                                Worth Living ? " 492; and mora l i ty, 5 1 5;
Hume, David, 79, 1 24, 3 3 7, 355-357,                      The Moral Philosopher and Moral Life,
   3 6 1 -3 6 3 , 4 0 1 -402, 460                           334; a nd pragmatism, 1 1 2; psychologi
Humor, 9, 1 1 3 , 1 1 8 , 227, 2 5 8 , 27 1 ,               zation avoided by, xiin; and psychology,
  274-275, 2 8 1 , 495, 497                                 1 8 1 , 1 90, 202; and the specious present,
Husserl, Ed mund, 8 , 4 3                                   5 9-6 2, 1 8 2-1 84, 326, 3 7 1 ; and time,
Hybrid physica l feel i ngs, 3 5 7 , 362-363, 4 6 0         1 99; and trust/belief/fa ith, 15, 59, 233;
                                                            on truth, 4 1 3, 438
" I," 7 0                                                Japan, 6
Idea l situations, 2 1 1 -2 1 3                          Jesus, 1 1 5 , 1 60, 329, 499
Image o f thought, 1 20, 267                             Job, 2 8 8-29 1 , 3 1 6, 3 90, 4 8 1 -4 8 3 , 4 8 5 ,
Imagina tion. See Free i magina tion                        4 8 6 , 499
5 2 6     I N D E X




Job speci fications, 1 4 3                              Liar paradox, 235, 270
John the Ba ptist, 3 9 2 , 396, 4 1 8 , 420             Life, 1, 1 5 , 22, 55, 57, 62, 6 3 , 65, 66, 6 7,
Judgment, 404-406; philosophy as the pass-                 6 8-69, 75-76, 8 0, 97, 1 04, 1 1 0, 1 1 4,
   ing of, 9, 35, 40; science as the passing               1 1 � 1 29, 1 3 1 , 1 32, 1 34, 1 35, 1 3 8 , 1 3 �
  of, 3 7; social envi ronment for, 25 9-260;              1 46, 1 5 6 , 1 60, 1 6 8 , 1 75, 1 8 7, 220,
  thought, experience, and, 43; Whitehead                266, 269, 2 8 4 , 290, 3 1 2-3 1 3, 3 1 4, 3 1 5,
  ian philosophy's refusal to pass, 1 24                   3 1 6, 3 1 7, 3 1 9, 320, 3 22-323, 324, 325,
Justification of l i fe, 3 1 2-335                         326-327, 3 2 8 , 329, 330, 332, 334, 3 3 7,
                                                          347, 394, 3 9 8 , 400, 403, 405, 4 1 2, 4 1 4 ,
Kant, Immanuel, x i i , 8-9, 56, 1 24, 204,               424, 426, 429, 43 1 , 432, 434, 4 3 5 , 436,
  260, 279, 298, 40 1 , 440, 506; Critique                437- 43 8 , 44 1 , 444, 459, 463, 465, 469,
  of Pure Reason, 296                                     478, 479, 4 8 3 , 4 8 5 , 490- 49 1 , 492- 493,
K a u ffman, Stua rt, 1 7 8 , 3 3 0-33 1 , 3 34           494, 497, 500
Kepler, Johannes, 1 2 7- 1 2 8                          Limitation, principle of, 225
Kierkegaard, Seren, 4 8 5                               Living persons, 326
Knowledge: h u m a n versus d ivine, 2 1 9-220;         Living societies, 3 1 2, 323-324, 329- 3 3 3 ,
  instinctive, 43, 45, 4 8 , 49, 65; of nature,           425-426
   1 06; pragmatism and, 1 06; science and,             Loca l ization, 8 3 , 1 02
   1 2- 1 3 ; tra d i tiona l a pproach to, 47          Locke, John, x i i , 296-297, 405
Koestler, Arth u r, The Sleepwalkers, 128               Logic, 2 3 8 , 250-25 1 , 4 1 3
Korea , 6                                               Love, 8-9, 1 3 3, 4 8 8-4 90
Kuhn, Thomas, 246                                       Lowe, Victor, 3-4
                                                        Lucretius, 1 65
La nguage: ambiguity o f, 4 1 6-4 1 7; as com          Luther, Martin, 4 8 1
  m u n ication, 403; gra m m a r versus, 360;
  l i m itations imposed by, 32; mathemati             Mad ness, 272
  cal, 4 1 6, 4 1 7; metaphysics and, 243,              "Ma ny," 256-257
  395; and perception, 354-3 5 5 , 402-403;             Marriage, 4 3 1 -434
  phi losophy and, 2 4 8 ; propositions in,             Marxism, 1 3 6- 1 3 7
  4 1 6; a n d rea l potentia l i ty, 3 8 8-3 89;       Materi a l ism. See Scientific materialism
  red unda ncy of, 3 9 8 ; as soc i a l , 430; so uls   Mathematics: a bsurdity in, 39; amoral ity
  and, 396, 3 9 8 , 405, 4 1 7; speculative,              of, 322; and God, 4 8 7-4 8 8 ; language
  504-505; witho u t power, 504; Wittgen                 of, 4 1 6, 4 1 7; and love, 4 8 9; and the
  stein on, 349-350                                       past, 273; philosophy compared to, 6, 9,
Lato u r, Bruno, 506; "What Is Given i n                   1 5- 1 6 , 39, 280; physics and, 1 94- 1 96;
  Experience ? " i x-xv                                   problems in, 1 5, 3 3 , 93, 1 20-1 2 1 , 464;
" Leap o f the imagina tion," 22                          thought pa tterns of, 6 , 1 5 , 32, 1 45 ,
Leclerc, Ivor, 5                                          298-300, 3 5 7; Wh itehea d as student and
Leibniz, Gottfried Wi lhelm, 1 3 7, 1 4 7 ,               teacher of, 4 ; Wh itehea d 's philosophy
  429, 4 4 7, 4 6 6-46 8 ; "calculemus " pro             l i kened to, 6 , 1 5 , 32-33, 35, 4 8 , 1 1 9, 4 8 9
  posa l of, 300, 500; and ca u sa l i ty, 4 1 1 ;      Ma tter, 255
  cosmological v i ewpo i n t of, 309; on               McClintock, Barbara, 1 77
  deci sions, 444-4 4 5 ; and d isqu iet, 1 8 2;        Meaning, 47-4 8
  a n d experience, 2 0 7-20 8 , 2 1 2-2 1 3 ,          Medieva l phil osophy, 78-79, 1 26
  220-222, 226; a n d function, 1 95; and               Menta l ha bits, 3 3 3
  God, 2 8 2, 3 1 4, 3 1 7, 3 90; metaphysics           Menta l i ty, 222-223
  o f, 226-227, 229, 2 79, 2 8 2 , 2 8 9-290,           Meta physics: d i fficu l ties o f, 243; first
  296, 305, 3 1 4-3 1 5 , 470, 494, 507; and              principles o f, 249; goa l of, 229; language
  perception, 2 7 7, 345, 34 8 ; and perspec             and, 395; neu tra l i ty of, 496; ph i losophy
  tive, 1 4 8 , 1 8 0; Philosopher 's Confes             of nature and, 54; physics and, 365-3 9 1 ;
  sion, 207; and rea son, 263; and soul,                  ration a l ism and, 244; science versus,
  204, 4 2 8 ; on subjects, 423; on whole                 36; Whitehead and, 1 1 1 , 1 8 4, 1 8 9- 1 90,
  and pa rts, 1 74                                        20 1 -2 1 7
                                                                                              I N D E X        5 2 7




Meyerson, Em i le, 3 0 1                                   Nexus ( set), 300, 3 0 1 , 305, 3 1 8 , 32 1 -32 7,
M i n d : Berkeley a n d , 1 46; nature in relation           343-345 , 3 73-374, 3 86, 3 8 8
   to, xii, 35, 3 8 , 54, 57, 66-67, 75; as                Nietzsche, Friedrich, 7 , 2 9 1 , 292-293, 3 1 5,
   problem, 3 5 . See a/so Consciousness                      3 1 6, 324, 447, 499
M i n d - body problem, 1 43                               Nobo, Jorge Luis, 243
Minkowski, Hermann, 2 9 1                                  Nomina l ism, 79
" M i racle o f crea tion," 2 9 8 , 300-3 0 1 , 346,       Novelty, 257-2 5 8 , 328, 440-442
   3 8 3 , 3 8 5, 4 5 9                                    " Now," 67-6 8
Models, 432-43 5
Modern epoch, 1 3 7- 1 3 9                                 Objective immortal ity, 296-297, 3 1 7-3 1 8 ,
Modern phi losophy, 395-399                                   429
Modern thought: a bstraction in, 1 36 ;                    Objective rea l ity, 306
   a l ternative t o , x i v ; anti - rational ism i n ,   Objectivity, 4 3 9-440
   7 8 ; and bifu rcation of nature, x i i , x i i i ;     Objects: cha racteristics of, 79-80; and
   causa l i ty in, 1 26-1 27; cha racteristics               events, 77, 8 1 -82, 92-93; hiera rchy
   of, 1 23 ; " facts" in, 1 25 ; and God, 1 3 4;             of, 83-84, 1 07; as i l l usory, 8 6-8 7; per
   revo l u tionary nature o f, 1 25 , 1 42; sci             m anence of, 75-77, 93; in p h i losophy,
   ence and phi losophy in, 1 24- 1 25; White                9 1 ; recognition of, 75; in science, 9 1 ;
   hea d 's reaction to, 1 23- 1 2 7                          subjects and, 296, 2 9 8 ; types o f, 8 3-84.
Modes o( Thought (Whitehea d ) , 2, 46, 1 75 ,               See a/so Etern a l objects; Perceptual ob
   1 79- 1 8 0, 20 1 , 2 3 6 , 279, 325, 3 3 6 , 3 3 7,       jects; Physica l objects; Scientific objects;
   34 1 , 347, 3 5 5 , 3 77-3 7 8 , 420, 422-425,             Sense-objects
   430-43 1 , 440-44 1 , 445, 477, 493                     O b l igation. See Categories of obl igation
Mora l idea l , 3 34-3 3 5                                 " One," 256-25 7
Mora l order, 2 8 3 , 2 8 5-2 8 6 , 3 1 3                  Ontologica l princi ple, 26 1-264, 3 6 3 , 3 8 9,
M ii l ler, Johan nes, 1 65                                   455, 460
                                                           Operators, 3 79-3 8 3
Nagel, Thomas, 352                                         Optica l i l l u sions, 6 1
Names, 44. See a/so Proper na mes                          Orga n ism, 1 2 8-1 30, 1 3 9, 1 42- 1 44,
Nata l, the, 4 3 8                                            1 72- 1 78 , 26 8-270, 296, 3 1 7-3 1 8 , 3 2 1
Nathan, To bie, 5 1 0                                      Origina l i ty, 267, 3 23-324, 4 1 4
Natura lists, 1 05                                         Ou t-of-body experiences, 66
Natural philosophy, 54
Natural selection, 1 1 3 , 1 26 , 1 76- 1 77, 4 3 3 ,      Pan psychism , 202
   439                                                     Particu l a rs, 303
Na t u re: ana lysis of awa reness of, 44-5 7;             Part-whole rel ationshi p, 1 74- 1 76
  concept of, 3 3 , 3 5-3 8 , 4 1 , 54; defined,           Pasca l , Bla ise, 3 8 4, 4 8 5
   3 1 -33, 3 8 ; fa ith in an order of, 1 1 6- 1 1 7;     Passages, 5 2 , 2 5 6 . See a/so Na t u re:
   ha bits and, 8 8 ; knowledge of, 1 06; m i n d             passage of
   in relation t o , x i i , 35, 3 8 , 54, 57, 6 6-6 7,    Paste u r, Louis, 1 6 5
   75; order of, 1 42-1 64; pa ssage of, 52,               Peace, 500
   55-56, 5 9 , 6 3 , 80, 256; paying a ttention           Peguy, Charles, 1 92; Clio, 1 22
   to, 6 9 ; presence of, 1 52- 1 5 3 ; Romantic           Pei rce, Charles Sanders, 80
   poets on, 1 5 2- 1 5 3; scienti fic a pproach           Perception, 3 3 6-3 6 3 ; and consciousness,
   to, 3 3-37; thinking and, 270-2 7 1 . See                  347-3 4 8 ; defined, 1 4 7; ha bits o f, 8 8 ,
  a/so Bifu rcation of nature                                 40 1 -402; i l l usion in, 86-87; la nguage
" Necessary con d i ti ons," 4 5 6                            a n d , 3 5 4-3 55, 402-403; and presenta
Necessity, 6, 2 5 0                                           tiona l i m mediacy, 399; transmuta tion
Nero, 4 8 2                                                   and, 346
Neu r a l mechanisms, 1 05 , 1 08                          Perceptu a l objects, 8 3-84, 8 9
Neu roscience, 1 08                                        Percipient events, 64-65, 70-7 1
Newborns, 8 9, 92                                          Perfection, God as, 5
Newton, Isaac, 5 0 , 5 1 , 5 3 , 1 0 1 , 1 3 7             Pericles, 4 9 7-5 00
5 2 8      I N D E X




Perishing, of an occa sion, 469-4 7 1                   Principia Mathematica ( Russel l a n d Whi te
Perspective, 1 4 8 , 1 79- 1 8 0                           hea d ) , 3
Persuasion, 1 62- 1 6 3                                 Problems: form u la t i on of, 1 6- 1 8, 34-3 5 ;
Phenomenology, 1 05-1 06                                   m a thema tica l a pproach t o , 1 5 , 33, 93,
Philosophy: a bsurdity in, 3 8-39; Brit-                   1 20- 1 2 1 , 464; as motivation for phi
   ish, 26-27; cha racteristics of great, 7;               losophy, 9- 1 0; questions i n rela tion to,
   concept of God in, 8 ; cri tica l function of,          1 0; req u i s i tes for, 49
   1 3 0- 1 3 1 ; evol ution's implications for,        Process al1d Reality (Whitehea d ) , 3, 5, 8-9,
   1 1 2; explanation in, 77-78; founda tions              1 8 , 23, 36, 5 3 , 77-78, 1 1 6 , 1 1 8 , 1 22,
   in, 1 6 ; goa l and pu rpose of, 1 7, 245;              1 5 1 , 1 5 6, 1 8 9, 1 96-1 9 7, 1 99, 206, 207,
   hi story of, 78, 1 1 5 , 1 5 0, 273, 2 79-280,          208, 2 1 5 , 230, 23 3-4 79, 4 8 1 -4 8 3 ,
   285; as j udgmenta l, 9, 3 5 , 40, 4 3 ; and           4 8 8 , 490-4 9 1 , 4 94-496; crea tivity i n ,
   language, 24 8; ma thema tics compared                 254-276; and feeling one's world,
   to, 6 , 9, 1 5- 1 6, 39, 280; objects in, 9 1 ;        294-3 1 1 ; God in, 4 5 3-4 78; and justi
   opera tion of, 252; post-Ka ntian, 8-9;                fication o f l i fe, 3 1 2-3 3 5 ; physics and
   problems of, 9- 1 0, 1 6- 1 8, 33; schools             meta physics in, 364-3 9 1 ; and specula tive
   of, 1 5 0; science compa red to, 1 0- 1 4, 34,          interpretation, 277-293; as specu lative
   79, 1 24-1 25; systems of, 2 3 7-2 3 8 ; a s           philosophy, 234-25 3
   thera py, 5 1 0-5 1 3, 5 1 7; thought pa tterns      Professiona l ization: cha racteristics of,
   a ppropriate to, 6 ; tra d i tion of, 273; writ        1 8 0-1 8 1 ; da ngers of, 1 40; ha bits and,
   ing a pproach a ppropri a te to, 23-27. See            270, 274 ; i n m odern epoch, 1 3 8- 1 3 9; of
   also Specu lative phi losophy; Whi tehea d 's          science, 1 3 8
   phi losophy                                          Progress, 1 2- 1 3 , 1 32, 1 36
Philosophy of natu re, 54                               Propaga nda, 20, 2 1
Philosophy of the natural sciences, 53, 54              Proper na mes, 1 54
Physica l feeli ngs, 35 6-35 7, 366, 4 1 4, 444,        Properties, 85-86
   459, 4 74-4 75                                       Proposition a l efficacy, 409-4 1 0, 4 1 7-42 1
Physica l laws, 3 74-3 76                               Propositiona l feeli ngs, 4 1 0, 4 1 3-4 1 5 , 420,
Physical objects, 90, 9 8                                 42 1
Physics, 94-95, 1 65-1 72, 1 94- 1 96 , 303,            Propositions, 396-399, 406-409, 4 1 1 -4 1 6,
   365-39 1 , 425. See also Quantum theory                4 2 1 -422, 4 3 4 . See a/so Specu lative
   and mechanics                                          propositi ons
Pigeons, 26 1 , 4 1 3                                   Protagora s, 4 9 9
Plane o f immanence, xxi, 268-2 7 1 , 448 ,             Protestantism, 4 8 1 , 4 9 7
   485                                                  Proust, Marcel, 340
Plato, 1 0, 78, 206, 2 0 8 , 2 7 3 , 2 9 7 , 302-       Psychic add itions, x i i , 38, 1 45
   305, 4 1 1 , 4 9 8 , 499, 5 1 0; Meno, 3 1 4;        Psychologica l field, 1 49, 1 5 1 , 1 84- 1 8 6 , 1 90
   Timaeus, 2 9 7                                       Psychologiza tion, refu s a l of: im portance
Plotinus, 3 8 2                                           a n d , 1 9; James and, xiin, 202; and
Poinca re, Hen ri, 5 1 6                                  meta physics, 202; perspectivism a n d ,
Points, i n space, 5 3                                     1 8 0- 1 8 1 ; presence and, 92; specious
Popper, K a r l , 405                                     present a n d , 5 9-6 1 ; value and, 1 5 7
Possi b i l i ty, 205                                   Psychology, metaphysics and, 202-203
Potentia l i ty, 1 90, 1 9 3
Power, 1 60- 1 63                                       Quakers, 445-446
Pragmatism, 1 06- 1 07, 1 1 2- 1 1 3, 1 1 6 , 1 5 1 ,   Quantum form a l i sm, 365, 3 79-3 8 0
   25 1 -252                                            Q u a n t u m theory and mechanics, 1 29-1 30,
Prehension, 1 4 6- 1 4 8 , 1 5 1 , 1 8 9, 299              1 6 7, 1 95 , 1 9 8 , 3 70-3 7 1 , 3 8 3
Presence, 9 1 -92, 1 5 2- 1 5 3 , 1 5 7- 1 5 8          Qua rrel of u n iversa ls, 78-79
Presentationa l immediacy, 3 99-400, 402                Questions. See " Good " q uestions
Price, Lucien, 42, 450-45 1
Prigogine, lIya, x, xn, 3 1 3                           Rabbits, 3 1 , 1 1 2, 346-349, 403, 4 1 0
Primary q u a l ities, x i i i , 37, 3 8                Rationa lism, 244-245, 24 8-249, 26 3-264
                                                                                              I N D E X    5 2 9




Rationa l ist schemes, 2 3 9-240                          260-26 1 ; explanation i n , 34-35; a s
Rationa l i ty. See Reason                                j udgmenta l, 3 7; and knowledge, 1 2- 1 3 ;
Rea l ism, 79                                             learning i n , 4 3 9-440; meta physics
Rea l ization, 1 4 6 , 1 52, 1 92- 1 93, 1 98, 340        versus, 36; in modern epoch, 1 27; and
Rea l m of etern a l objects, 205-206,                    nature, 3 3-37; objects in, 9 1 ; origin of
  208-2 1 2                                               knowledge in, 96; phi losophy compa red
Rea l potential ities, 369, 3 73, 3 8 8-3 8 9             to, 1 0- 1 4, 34, 79, 1 24- 1 25 ; profes
Rea son: and decision, 2 6 1 -263; in history,            siona l ization o f, 1 3 8 ; and progress, 1 2 ;
   1 1 4- 1 1 5, 1 2 3 ; impact of, 1 1 4, 1 27; in       revol utions i n fo undations of twentieth
   modern epoch, 1 3 7; the s u b l ime a n d ,           centu ry, 1 1 ; and simplicity, 1 04; trust as
   505; and subm ission, 263                              fo undation of, 3 7, 1 25
Recogn ition, 75, 77                                   Science and the Modern World (Wh ite
Reg u l us, 322-323                                       head ), 3, 36, 37, 39, 72, 78, 8 3 , 93,
Relations of situations, 82-83                            1 1 3-232, 2 3 9 , 24 1 , 243, 2 5 3 , 254, 255,
Relativism, 26 1 , 334, 5 1 2                             2 74, 2 8 2-2 8 5 , 2 8 7, 300, 307, 3 1 4,
Relativity princ iple, 295                                3 1 7-3 1 8 , 32 1 , 3 3 3 , 354, 3 6 6 , 3 6 7, 369,
Relevance, 3 8 3-3 84, 386, 4 2 1 -422, 455 ,             3 90, 4 1 0-4 1 1 , 4 1 5, 4 1 8 , 4 1 9, 422, 447,
   477                                                    455, 4 74, 475, 479, 4 8 5 , 4 9 1 , 509; a n d
Religion: constructivism a n d , 1 34- 1 35 ;             events from their o w n sta nd point,
   dec l ine in a u thority of, 1 32- 1 3 3; essence      1 8 5-200; and meta physics, 2 0 1 -2 1 7;
   of, 1 35 , 2 8 7; meta physics and, 244; in            order of nature in, 1 4 2- 1 64
   modern epoch, 1 32- 1 3 6; privatiza tion           Scientific materia l ism, 1 2 8- 1 3 0
   of, 1 32; rel igious vision a s fo unda tion        Scientific objects, 8 3-84, 93-1 04
   of, 1 33- 1 35 ; as socia l a d ven ture, 3 94;     Seconda ry q u a l i ties, x i i i , 3 7-3 8
   spec u lative interpreta tion of, 2 8 2-29 3 ;      Sec u l a rization, 4 5 1 -452, 469, 477, 4 8 2
   a n d tra nscendence, 4 8 3-4 8 4                   Sel f-ca usation. See Causa sui
R eligion i n the Making (Whitehea d ) ,               Sel f-consciousness, 7 1
   2 8 2-290, 3 3 3 , 3 6 1 , 3 6 3 , 3 90, 426-430,   Sensa, 209, 3 3 8-340
   4 8 0, 4 8 3 , 5 1 3                                Sense-objects, 8 3-90, 1 00
Religious vision, 1 3 3- 1 35 , 2 8 7, 480, 493        Sense-perception, 344-345
Req u i sites, 48-50                                   Sense-reception, 342-344
Responsibil ity, 4 94-4 95                             Set. See Nexus
Robbery, l ife as, 3 1 2                               Sex ua l d isplay, 4 3 8-4 3 9
Roles, 1 5 8- 1 5 9                                    Sex u a l selection, 1 26- 1 27
Romantic poetry, 1 52- 1 5 3                           Shari ng, 466-4 6 8 , 4 7 1 -4 72
Rorty, Richard, 5 1 3                                  Shel ley, Percy Bysshe, 1 5 3 , 3 4 1
R u bicon, crossing the, 4 1 6-4 1 8 , 44 1 -442       Sherbu rne, Dona ld , 24 1
R u ssel l, Bertrand, 4, 32, 1 1 3 , 2 3 5 ; Prin-     Signs, 8 0
   cipia Mathematica (with Whitehea d ), 3             Simu ltaneity, 50
Ruyer, Raymond, 4 3 8-4 3 9                            Socia l envi ronment, as ground for j u dg
                                                          ment, 25 9-260
Sacra ments, 427-4 2 8 , 430-4 34, 436-4 37,           Soc i a l p rogress, 1 3 9- 1 4 0
   4 4 1 -442                                          Society: a s agency, 3 1 2-3 1 3 ; defined,
Sa lvation, 4 7 8 , 4 8 0-4 8 1 , 4 8 6-4 8 7, 490        3 1 8-32 1 ; God as, 4 5 7; interstices of,
Santayana, George, 36                                     327-3 2 8 , 332-334, 429; language in,
Sarra ute, Nathal ie, 4 3 3                               430; and origi n a l ity, 327-3 2 8 . See also
Sca la r form, 3 6 7 , 3 6 9-3 7 1 , 3 7 9                Living societies
" Sca rs," 309-3 1 0, 3 5 7, 3 6 3 , 4 1 9             Sociology, 320-32 1 , 325, 33 1-332
Schleiden, Matthias Ja kob, 1 65                       Socrates, 224, 278, 3 1 4 , 4 1 1 , 4 8 5 , 4 8 6 , 507
Schwa nn, Theodor, 1 65                                Solitary consciousness, 3 5 3-354, 499
Science: as adventure, 1 3; and bifu rcation           Solutions: a lleged ly defin itive, 1 0 ; com -
   o f nature, 98; constructivism in, 1 9-2 1 ;           prom ise, 1 5 ; constra ints accom panying,
  experimenta l, 20-22, 95-9 6 , 1 06- 1 07,              1 6- 1 8 , 3 3 ; predeterm i ned, 33
5 3 0     I N D E X




Sophi sts, 322                                             6, 1 5 , 32, 1 45 , 29 8-300, 3 5 7; and na
Sou l : concern of, 446; langu age a n d , 396,            ture, 270-2 7 1 ; Whitehea d i a n p h i l osophy
   3 9 8 , 405, 4 1 7; mea n ing of, 203; and the          and, 6, 1 5-22, 27
  order o f nature, 1 8 3, 1 8 5                        Thorn, Rene, 1 78 , 1 9 8- 1 99
Sou ria u , Etienne, 2 1 5-2 1 6 , 462, 464-465         Thought. Sec Modern thought; Th i n k i ng
Space, 50, 63-64                                        Time: a tomic notion o f, 1 9 1 - 1 94, 1 96-
Space-time, 1 6 7- 1 6 8                                   1 99; cond i tions of knowledge and,
Specious present, 5 9-62, 70, 1 8 3- 1 84,                 50; God and, 455-456; nature o f, 5 6 ;
   1 99, 326, 3 7 1                                        pa ssage o f nature not the s a m e as, 5 5 ;
Speculative efficacy, 509-5 1 0 , 5 1 4-5 1 5 , 5 1 7      perce ption o f, 5 9-60; physica l, 3 72. See
Specula tive interpreta tion, 277-293                     a/so Instantaneousness; S i m ulta neity;
Specula tive philosophy, 8-1 5 , 1 7- 1 8 ,                Space-time; Specious present
   23 3-239, 250, 252, 255, 277-2 7 8 , 292,            Togetherness, 257-2 5 8 , 26 3-264, 455
   3 5 1 , 395, 420-42 1 , 4 90, 5 0 1 , 509-5 1 0,     Tolera nce, 5 1 3
   5 1 2-5 1 3, 5 1 7                                   Tra d ition, 3 2 3-324, 327, 332
Specula tive presence, 509, 5 1 4-5 1 5                 Tra nscendence, 208-209, 254, 4 8 3-4 8 4
Speculative proposi t i ons, 267                        Tra nsmutation, 344-347
Spiders, 90                                             Trick o f evil, 275, 2 7 8 , 2 9 1 , 3 1 0, 3 1 9, 327,
Spinoza , Baruch, 1 4 7, 1 4 8 , 206, 227, 229,            333-334, 3 94, 5 1 3 , 5 1 7
   265, 447, 5 00, 5 1 5                                Tri n ity, Christian d octrine of, 5
Stengers, Isa bel le, i x-xv                            Tri ple envisagement, 1 84 , 205-206 , 2 1 4-
Stern, Daniel, 8 9 , 92                                    2 1 7, 370
Stoicism, 309, 490                                      Tropisms, 433
Storks, 4 3 9                                           Trust, 1 5 , 1 7, 36-37, 5 9 , 1 25 , 2 3 3 , 269,
Structu re, 45, 47                                         484. Sec a/so Faith
Subjective a i ms, 299, 3 6 0-36 1 , 373, 385,          Truth, 47, 1 1 2, 1 5 1 , 25 1-252, 4 1 3 , 4 3 8 ,
   389                                                    4 4 7 . Sec a/so Attention t o truth
Su bjectivist principle, 3 95-3 9 9 , 4 0 1
Subjectivity, 222, 277-2 79, 2 8 1 . Sec a/so           Ultimate: creativity as, 254-256, 2 5 8 ,
   Excess of su bjectivity                                 264-265; defined, 2 5 4 ; o f expla nations,
Subjects, 1 90, 259-260, 296, 2 9 8 , 299,                 1 44- 1 4 5; m i nd/knowledge as, o f nature,
   3 8 1 , 3 84, 4 7 1 , 4 94 . Sec a/so Su perjects       35-3 6 , 4 1 , 49, 6 7, 75, 77, 1 05; a q ues
Subl ime, 505                                              tion as, 4 99; Whitehead ian, 1 06
Su perjects, 296, 299, 3 8 1 , 3 8 4-3 8 5 , 4 7 1 -    Universa ls, 7 8-79, 303
   473. See a/so S u bjects                             Unknowable, the, 1 4 5 , 234-235 , 25 8
Surviva l , perception and, 65-66, 69, 1 09-
   1 10                                                 Va lery, Pa u l , 505
Sym bolic reference, 402-405                            Va l ue: actu a l ization and, 205, 207; i n
Symmetry, 375-377                                         contempora ry period, 1 64; defined,
Synesthesia, 35 1-353                                      1 56- 1 5 7; envisagement and, 207; i n fec
                                                           tion and, 1 6 3 ; not psychologica l , 1 5 7;
Ta king-into-accou n t, 1 8 7-1 8 8 , 1 94                 rea l ization a n d , 202; as success, 1 5 7- 1 5 9
Te i l h a rd de Cha rd i n , Pierre, 4 8 1             Va rela, Fra ncesco, 1 78
Tempora l i za tion, 1 90, 1 93                         Vector form, 367, 3 6 9-3 7 1 , 379, 470
Territory, 4 34-436, 440                                Verba l phrases, 407
Tha les, 270                                            Virtua l , the, 463
Theism, 5, 4 9 1 -494                                   Von Neum a n n , John, 1 30
Theology: Christian, 5 , 220, 3 6 3 , 3 9 3 , 45 1 ,
   4 8 9 ; Whitehead a n d , ix, xiv, 5                 Wa d d i ngton, Conra d , 1 77
Therapy, philosophy as, 5 1 0-5 1 3, 5 1 7              Wa sps, 4 3 2 , 4 3 3
Th ink ing: circu lar, 2 3 3 , 236, 23 8-239,           Weber, M a x , 1 3 5
   25 1 ; exactness i n , 5 2-5 3; ha bits of, 1 3 7;   Wei n berg, Stephen, 1 25
   inadequacy o f, 450-45 1 ; in ma thematics,          Western civil ization , 1 1 4-1 1 5
                                                                                             I N D E X    5 3 1




Wh iteh ead, Al fred North : ca reer o f, 4-5;             o f lectu res i n , 24; specula tive nature o f,
 death of, 5; persona l l i fe o f, 3-4, 42;               8- 1 5 ; as thera py, 5 1 0-5 1 1 ; a n d thinking,
 reputa tion of, ix, 3, 5-6. See also specific             6 , 1 5-22, 27
 works                                                  Whole-part rela tionship, 1 74-1 76
Wh itehea d , Eric, 4                                   " Wh y " versus " how," 1 3- 1 4
Wh itehea d 's philosophy: as a d ventu re,             Wittgenstein, Ludwig, i x , 8 , 1 25 , 2 3 5 , 349-
 5 1 6; a m bition of, 8; assessment o f,                  350, 5 1 0
  508-5 1 9; concepts in, 1 7; dema nds                 Wonder, 503
  of, 7, 9-1 0; free and savage na ture o f,            Wordsworth, Wi l l i a m , 1 5 2
  27; influence of, 1 2 8 ; influences on,              "Work t o b e d one," 462-46 5
  42, 55, 78, 1 1 2; interpreta tion of, 2 5 3 ;        Wors h i p, 1 3 3, 4 8 2-4 84
  m a thema tica l cha racteristics o f , 6 , 1 5 ,     Writing, philosophy a n d , 23-27
  32-33, 35, 4 8 , 1 1 9, 4 8 9 ; neutra l ( neither
  cele bra tory nor denunciatory) sta nce               Yea rning, 207, 2 1 5 , 2 1 6 , 2 2 8 , 3 1 4 ,
  of, xi, x i i, 2, 9, 1 2, 1 5 , 40, 5 3 , 7 1 , 74,      315
  1 1 3 , 1 24, 20 1 , 2 5 8 , 275-278 , 280, 4 9 6 ,
  508-5 1 1 ; n o a d j u d icator in, 259; role        Zeno's paradox, 1 96-1 97, 1 99
