[pdf page 001]

THE
ESSENTIAL
PEIRCE

[pdf page 003]

THE
E S S E N T I A L
P E I R C E
Selected Philosophical Writings
V O L U M E 1
(1867- 1893)
edited by
Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel
Indiana
University
Press
B L O O M I N G T O N A N D I N D I A N A P O L I S

[pdf page 004]

This book is a publication of
Indiana University Press
601 North Morton Street
Bloomington, IN 47404-3797 USA
http://iupress.indiana.edu
Telephone orders 800-842-6796
Fax orders 812-855-7931
Orders by e-mail iuporder@indiana.edu
© 1992 by Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. The Association of American
University Presses’ Resolution on Permissions constitutes the only
exception to this prohibition.
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z 39.48-1984.
O O tm
Manufactured in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Peirce, Charles S. (Charles Sanders), 1839- 1914.
[Selections. 1992]
The essential Peirce : selected philosophical writings / edited by
Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Contents: v. 1. 1867- 1893.
ISBN 0-253-32849-7 (alk. paper). — ISBN 0-253-20721-5 (pbk.:
alk. paper)
1. Philosophy. I. Houser, Nathan. II. Kloesel, Christian J. W.
III. Title.
B945.P4125 1991
191—dc20 91-32113
5 6 7 8 06 05 04 03

[pdf page 005]

The old Sphinx bit her thick lip,—
Said, “ Who taught thee me to name?
I am thy spirit, yoke-fellow,
O f thine eye I am eyebeam.”
— Emerson
Greek sculpture of the Sphinx, in the British Museum,
as reproduced in the Century Dictionary

[pdf page 007]

Chronology / ix
Foreword by Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel / xi
Introduction by Nathan Houser / xix
Contents
1 . On a New List of Categories (1867) i
T h e J o u rn al of S p e c u la t iv e P h ilo so ph y
C o g n it io n S e r ie s
2. Questions Concerning Certain Faculties
Claimed for Man (1868) n
3. Some Consequences of Four Incapacities (1868) 28
4. Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic (1869) 56
5. Fraser’s The Works o f George Berkeley (1871) 83
6. On a New Class of Observations, suggested by the
principles of Logic (1877) 106
I l l u s t r a t i o n s o f t h e L o g ic o f S c ie n c e
7. The Fixation of Belief (1877) 109
8. How to Make Our Ideas Clear (1878) 124
9. The Doctrine of Chances (1878) 142
10. The Probability of Induction (1878) 155
1 1 . The Order of Nature (1878) 170
12. Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis (1878) 186
13. [from] On the Algebra of Logic (1880) 200
14. Introductory Lecture on the Study of Logic (1882) 210
15. Design and Chance (1883-84) 215

[pdf page 008]

viii I Contents
16. [from] On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the
Philosophy of Notation (1885) 225
17. An American Plato: Review of Royce’s
Religious Aspect of Philosophy (1885) 229
18. One, Two, Three: Kantian Categories (1886) 242
19. A Guess at the Riddle (1887-88) 245
20. Trichotomie (1888) 280
T h e M o n is t M e t a p h y s ic a l S e r ie s
2 1. The Architecture of Theories (1891) 285
22. The Doctrine of Necessity Examined (1892) 298
23. The Law of Mind (1892) 312
24. Man’s Glassy Essence (1892) 334
25. Evolutionary Love (1893) 352
Notes / 373
Index / 389

[page ix]

C H R O N O L O G Y
1839 Born on 10 Sept. in Cambridge, M A, to Benjamin and Sarah
Hunt (Mills) Peirce
1855 Entered Harvard College
1859 Graduated (A.B.) from Harvard
Tem porary aide in U.S. Coast Survey, fall to spring ’6o
1860 Studied classification with Agassiz, summer-fall
1861 Entered Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard
Appointed regular aide in Coast Survey, i July
1862 Married to Harriet Melusina Fay, 16 Oct.
1863 Graduated summa cum laude (Sc.B.) in chemistry from Lawrence
Scientific School
1865 Harvard lectures on “ The Logic of Science,” spring
Began Logic Notebook, 12 Nov.; last entry in Nov. ’09
1866 Lowell Institute lectures on “ The Logic of Science; or Induc­
tion and Hypothesis,” 24 Oct.— 1 Dec.
1867 Elected to American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 30 Jan.
1869 First of ca. 300 Nation reviews, in Mar.; last in Dec. ’08
Assistant at Harvard Observatory, Oct. ’69-Dec. ’72
Harvard lectures on “ British Logicians,” Dec.—Jan.
1870 First Survey assignment in Europe: 18 June—7 Mar. ’71
1872 Founding member of Cambridge Metaphysical Club, Jan.
In charge of Survey office, spring-summer
Put in charge of pendulum experiments, beginning in Nov.
Promoted to rank of Assistant in the Survey, 1 Dec.
1875 Second Survey assignment in Europe: Apr. ’75-Aug. ’76
Served as first official American delegate to International Geo­
detic Association in Paris, 20-29 Sept.
1876 Separated from Melusina in Oct.
1877 Elected to National Academy of Sciences, 20 Apr.
Third Survey assignment in Europe: 13 Sept.— 18 Nov.
Represented U.S. at International Geodetic Association confer­
ence in Stuttgart, 27 Sept.— 2 Oct.
1878 Photometric Researches published in Aug.
1879 Lecturer in Logic (till ’84) at Johns Hopkins University
First meeting of JH U Metaphysical Club, 28 Oct.
1880 Elected to London Mathematical Society, 11 Mar.
Fourth Survey assignment in Europe: Apr.— Aug.
French Academy address on value of gravity, 14 June
1881 Elected to American Association for the Advancement of Sci­
ence in Aug.

[page x]

x I Chronology
1883 Studies in Logic published in spring
Divorced from Melusina, 24 Apr.
Married to Juliette Froissy (Pourtales), 30 Apr.
Fifth and final Survey assignment in Europe: May—Sept.
1884 In charge of Office of Weights and Measures, Oct.— 22 Feb. ’85
1888 Purchased “ Arisbe,” outside Milford, PA
1889 Contributor to Century Dictionary
1891 Resigned from Coast and Geodetic Survey, 31 Dec.
1892 Lowell lectures on “ The History of Science,” 28 N ov.—5 Jan.
1893 Petrus Peregrinus announced; prospectus only published
“ Search for a Method” announced by Open Court; not com­
pleted
1894 “ The Principles of Philosophy” (in 12 vols.) announced by
H enry Holt Co.; not completed
“ How to Reason” rejected by both Macmillan and Ginn Co.
1895 “ N ew Elements of Mathematics” rejected by Open Court
1896 Consulting chemical engineer (till ’02), St. Lawrence Power Co.
1898 Cambridge lectures on “ Reasoning and the Logic of Things,”
10 Feb.—7 Mar.
“ The History of Science” announced by G. P. Putnam’s; not
completed
1901 Contributor to Dictionary o f Philosophy and Psychology
1902 Grant application for “ Proposed Memoirs on Minute Logic”
rejected by Carnegie Institution
1903 Harvard lectures on “ Pragmatism,” 26 Mar.— 17 May
Lowell lectures on “ Some Topics of Logic,” 23 Nov.— 17 Dec.
1907 Harvard Philosophy Club lectures on “ Logical Methodeutic,”
8-13 Apr.
1909 Last published article, “ Some Amazing Mazes”
1914 Died on 19 April

[page xi]

F O R E W O R D
The purpose of this collection of writings by Charles Sanders Peirce
is to provide, in a convenient format, those of his most important
papers that will enable readers to form a relatively complete impres­
sion of the main doctrines of his system of philosophy and to study its
development. The present volume covers a period of about twenty-
seven years, roughly one-half of Peirce’s immensely productive life;
the remaining two decades will be covered in the second volume.
Limitations of space have forced us to exclude, almost entirely, his
mathematical, logical, and scientific writings, as well as his many con­
tributions to such disciplines as history and psychology. (But readers
should be forewarned that Peirce’s thought, more than that of any
other classic American philosopher, is self-consciously related to math­
ematical, logical, and scientific conceptions. Many of his most signifi­
cant scientific writings are available in the annual reports of the U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey and the first six volumes of the Writings of
Charles S. Peirce; his logical writings in volumes 2-4 of the Collected
Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce; and his mathematical writings in the
four volumes of Carolyn Eisele’s The New Elements ofMathematics.) The
writings in this volume are arranged chronologically from 1867 to 1893,
ending with Peirce’s first sustained and systematic presentation of his
evolutionary metaphysics in the Monist.
The Introduction provides a summary account of Peirce’s philoso­
phy, which serves as a general background and provides structure for
the twenty-five items in the present volume. These begin with Peirce’s
highly regarded alternative to Kantian philosophy, his “ N ew List of
Categories,” from which he sets out to develop a new system of
thought that will answer many of the perennial questions of philoso­
phy. In theJournal o fSpeculative Philosophy Cognition Series (items 2-4),
he attempts to work out a new account of mind and reality based on
the results of his “ new list” and to provide the foundation for a truly
objective and empirical system of philosophy, in which epistemology
would be grounded in the representation of external facts; in brief, to
unify philosophy and science. In his review of Fraser’s Berkeley (item
5), Peirce gives an account of his newly embraced “ scholastic realism”
and develops a common-sense theory of truth and reality that goes far
in the direction of his soon-to-be-born pragmatism. Not surprisingly,
his pragmatic turn is also apparent in “ A N ew Class of Observations”
(item 6); for, by this time, his pragmatism was already five years old.
It is noteworthy that in this paper Peirce includes sensations within
the class of ‘objects’ that should be studied scientifically by controlled

[page xii]

xii I Foreword
observation, and there is at least the suggestion that, for philosophical
and scientific investigations, he is beginning to consider phenome­
nology as an alternative to logic. The “ Illustrations of the Logic of
Science” (items 7-12) contain Peirce’s first published account of prag­
matism—though the name does not occur. This series, sometimes said
to be the lesson of Darwin for philosophy, marks an important stage
in Peirce’s continuing advance toward a more and more realistic sys­
tem of thought and, according to Max Fisch, it is “ the nineteenth-
century Discourse in the Method o fRightly Conducting the Reason and Search­
ingfor the Truth in the Sciences. ” Item 13, the first part of an essay on the
algebra of logic, deals with certain affinities between logical, epistemo-
logical, psychological, and physiological conceptions, which suggests
that Peirce had by this time acquired an architectonic purview. Cer­
tainly by 1882, in his outline for his Johns Hopkins logic course (item
14), he is emphasizing the underlying unity of the sciences, for he
proclaims that it is in the application of the methods of one science to
another that the chief advances of thought will be made in the years
to come.
If there is a significant turning-point in the twenty-five papers in
this volume, it comes in “ Design and Chance” (item 15), where Peirce
accepts the doctrine that absolute chance is an active agent in the
evolution of the universe and even of the laws of nature, a doctrine that
marks his turn toward the evolutionary metaphysics of the latter part
of this volume. The next two items represent another important step
in Peirce’s development, namely his recognition of the need for indices
both in logic and in thought, for it is only with indices that reference
can be made to individuals or to actual events and states of affairs. In
item 16, Peirce reintroduces his best-known semiotic triad (icon, index,
symbol), and in item 17 he proclaims the importance of the Outward
Clash, the compelling sense of an opposing other in all experience: and
thus takes an important step toward accepting the reality of second­
ness. After “ Design and Chance,” many of the strands of thought that
run through the first seventeen papers coalesce, and enough fell into
place sometime in 1885 to lead Peirce to his great guess at the riddle of
the universe. It was the synthesis of his theory of categories with his
new evolutionary cosmology that most directly led to his hypothesis
that “ three elements are active in the world” : first, chance; second, law;
and third, habit-taking. This guess is first formulated in item 18, and the
remaining seven items fill out the details and ramifications of this guess
for philosophy and science. “ A Guess at the Riddle” (item 19) consti­
tutes Peirce’s first general treatment of his new evolutionary philoso­
phy, a broad and systematic theory based on his guess. His “ discovery”
that the active elements of the universe are coincident with his catego­
ries leads him to accept them as the architectonic key to philosophy.
It is the key he proceeds to use to reorganize the different branches of

[page xiii]

Foreword I xiii
science and philosophy. Peirce projected “ A Guess at the Riddle” as
a full treatise on his new system of thought, in which all human
knowledge would be reorganized according to his architectonic pro­
gram, but circumstances prevented his completing that work. Item 20
provides, in a somewhat popular form, parts of what would have been
included in the unwritten second chapter of the larger treatise, and
items 21-25 fill in many of the remaining gaps. Thus, what began in 1867
as an analytical, epistemological philosophy, came to fruition in 1891-93
in the evolutionary and social philosophy of the five papers of the
Monist Metaphysical Series.
Peirce was fifty-three years old when the final paper in this volume
was published in 1893. He would live for another twenty-one years and,
during that time, would produce his most fully developed theory of
signs and many of his most subtle and profound metaphysical theories.
It was also during these later years that his interest in pragmatism was
rekindled and that, in an attempt to work out a proof of his pragma­
tism, he put into service his unique system of graphical logic (his
existential graphs) alongside his categories and his theory of signs.
As the present volume ends, Peirce has not yet arrived at many of
the views described in the Introduction. Not for another five years
would he be what Max Fisch has called “ a three-category realist,” and
he had been “ a two-category realist,” who accepted the reality of
secondness, for only about three years. Most of the papers in the
present volume were written while Peirce’s realism was limited to a
single universe, that of thirdness—or the world of thought. The
twenty-five papers should be read with this in mind, but also with the
understanding that Peirce is on his way toward a more complete realism.
But what should be kept in mind, above all, is that Peirce’s writings
are signs of a great intellect in theprocess of working its way toward the
truth.
But these signs are profuse. Peirce’s extant writings— and there are
many that were lost during his peregrinations for the Coast and Geo­
detic Survey and on several other occasions after his death— would fill
over one hundred (500-page) volumes. A selected edition of some fifty
volumes would be necessary to get a comprehensive sense of his work
in mathematics, the natural sciences, philosophy and logic, history and
psychology, and the several other areas to which he contributed. The
most ambitious multi-volume edition, Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A
Chronological Edition, is now underway at the Peirce Edition Project in
Indianapolis; thirty volumes are projected. The first multi-volume
edition appeared sixty years ago, when the first six of eight volumes
of the Collected Papers (1931-35, 1958) were published. Four other major
editions have appeared within the last fifteen years. Peirce’s Contribu­
tions to THE NATION was edited by Kenneth Ketner, in four parts,
between 1975 and 1988, and his New Elements of Mathematics, in four

[page xiv]

xiv I Foreword
volumes, by Carolyn Eisele in 1976. The following year saw the publi­
cation of Peirce’s Complete Published Works, a 149-microfiche edition
accompanied by a printed Comprehensive Bibliography (revised and en­
larged by 12 fiches in 1986), and in 1985, Carolyn Eisele brought out two
volumes of Historical Perspectives on Peirce J
s Logic of Science.
The present two-volume collection is not intended to replace the
more comprehensive editions, but to provide an affordable and reliable
text that covers the full extent of Peirce’s system of philosophy. Its
thematic boundaries are more expansive than those of several other
one- or two-volume collections; it is arranged chronologically, in two
parts, so as to permit study of the development of Peirce’s thought;
and, importantly, it pays especial attention to the integrity of the
edited text of his writings. Although the last few items cannot be said
to be fully critical texts, the volume as a whole may be considered
reliable from a textual point of view.
O f the twenty-five items included in this volume, nineteen were
published during Peirce’s lifetime. Since these are among his most
important philosophical writings, all have been republished in the
different volumes of the Collected Papers, and a number of them have
reappeared, in whole or in part, in various other anthologies and in the
first five volumes of Writings. The six remaining items (6,15, and 17-20)
are unpublished manuscripts and typescripts. Only items 17 and 19 are
included in the Collected Papers, and the remaining four items have
appeared for the first time, or will soon appear, in the Writings: item
6 in W3, item 15 in W4, item 18 in W5, item 20 in W6. All six manuscripts
and typescripts have been edited from the originals in H arvard’s
Houghton Library. The first eighteen items in the present volume
have been adopted directly from their appearance in the Writings,
volumes 2 through 5 (including some of the corrections in the second
printing of volume 2), and as these have been prepared according to the
standards of the Modern Language Association’s Committee on Schol­
arly Editions, they represent critical, authoritative texts. (For emenda­
tions and textual cruxes in these eighteen items, which are not repro­
duced in the Notes, readers should consult that edition.) We have
attempted to edit items 19-25 according to similar standards, but they
cannot be said to have had the benefit of the same intensive, complete
sort of historical, bio-bibliographical, and textual/editorial work that
is required in the preparation of a critical edition. This is especially
true for the five articles in the Monist Metaphysical Series (items 21-25),
for which there are a number of relevant manuscripts and galleys, and,
to a lesser degree, for “ A Guess at the Riddle” (item 19), for several
chapters of which there are more versions than one; in the latter, we
have chosen what seemed most representative and finished.
In all cases, we have corrected typographical errors and other obvi­

[page xv]

Foreword I xv
ous mistakes (and have listed most of the emendations in editorial notes
following Peirce’s text) but have retained inconsistencies in spelling
and punctuation when they reflect acceptable nineteenth-century
standards and practices. (Only the word “ indispensible” has been per­
mitted to appear in Peirce’s idiosyncratic form, for that is how he
consistently, and consciously, spelled it throughout his life.) Purely
cosmetic changes, such as the italicization of book titles or the indenta­
tion of opening paragraphs, have been made silently. We have also
supplied titles for the three untitled items (5,15, 20), and missing words
are supplied in italic brackets. For the rest, our editing has been guided
by restraint and accuracy, and the texts included here represent what
Peirce wrote, not what we think he should have written.
The twenty-five items in the present collection are printed with a
minimum of editorial intrusion in the text, although we have used a
few editorial symbols to reflect certain physical problems in both
published and unpublished papers, and have indicated, in standard
form (with superscript arabic numerals), where we have contributed
editorial notes. The footnotes appearing at the bottom of their respec­
tive pages are Peirce’s own and are identified by asterisks, daggers, and
so on. (In a few of these footnotes, we have provided, in square brack­
ets, additional information— such as names, dates, page numbers, and
references to papers in the Writings— which seemed more useful and
economical here than in additional entries in the Notes section.) The
(editorial) Notes, which are numbered consecutively within each of
the twenty-five items, provide various kinds of information (including
translations) that Peirce himself did not provide. Preceding this Fore­
word, there is a brief Chronology listing the most significant dates and
events in Peirce’s life and work, and the volume concludes with a
detailed Index.
Tw o other features in Peirce’s text must be mentioned: the edito­
rial symbols and the headnotes appearing between title and text. The
editorial symbols, as indicated, reflect physical problems, whether in
published papers or unpublished manuscripts and typescripts, and
they include the following: words (or parts of words) appearing in
italic brackets indicate that they have been supplied (or reconstructed)
by the editors; italic brackets enclosing three ellipsis points indicate
one or more lost manuscript pages; and sets of double slashes mark the
beginning and end of Peirce’s undecided alternate readings, with the
single slash dividing the original from the alternative inscription. The
headnotes, which appear in reduced type between the title of each item
and the text proper, serve several purposes. They identify each item
as a published paper or an unpublished manuscript; provide informa­
tion on its composition or publication (and its later use elsewhere in
Peirce’s work and its republication in one of the two main editions of

[page xvi]

xvi I Foreword
his writings); characterize its contents and main arguments; and indi­
cate its place in the overall development of Peirce’s system of philoso­
phy. Papers published during Peirce’s lifetime are identified by P
followed by a number and the bibliographic information provided in
the Comprehensive Bibliography (2nd rev. ed. [Bowling Green, OH: Phi­
losophy Documentation Center, 1986]). Unpublished papers are identi­
fied by M S followed by the number assigned in Richard Robin’s An­
notated Catalogue of the Papers o f Charles S. Peirce (Amherst: University
of Massachusetts Press, 1967) and his “ The Peirce Papers: A Supple­
mentary Catalogue” (Transactions o f the Charles S. Peirce Society 7 [1971]:
37—
57); when the reference is to newly numbered manuscripts in their
reassembled and chronologically arranged form as listed in the Writ­
ings, MS is printed in italic type (and followed by the new Peirce
Edition Project number). Republication (or first publication) of each
item is indicated by W (Writings of Charles S. Peirce), followed by vol­
ume and page numbers; CP (Collected Papers o f Charles Sanders Peirce),
followed by volume and paragraph numbers; and, in one instance,
H P P LS (Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic o f Science), followed by
page numbers. (Some of these identifying letters are used in the Intro­
duction as well, which also includes a reference to N EM , Carolyn
Eisele’s edition of The New Elements of Mathematics.)
Although there are several references, especially in the Introduc­
tion, to some of the more important secondary studies on Peirce’s
philosophy, it might have been helpful, some might say, to have pro­
vided a list of “ Secondary Studies” or “ Further Readings.” We decided
against such a list for three reasons: (1) the number of secondary studies
on Peirce has grown to enormous proportions, especially during the
last two decades, and brief articles are sometimes more helpful than
whole monographs; (2) whatever selection we might make (with its
concomitant exclusions) would be sure to exhibit our biases and criti­
cal dispositions; and (3) there are two useful lists of secondary studies,
through 1982, in the Comprehensive Bibliography and in The Relevance of
Charles Peirce (La Salle, IL: The Hegeler Institute, 1983), and the im­
provement in library indexing services and the growing use of biblio­
graphic databases have almost obviated the need for printed bibliogra­
phies. If there are two studies with which everyone should be familiar,
whether novice or seasoned scholar, they are Christopher Hookway’s
Peirce (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), which will shortly be
available in paperback, and Max Fisch’s Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragma­
tism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986), which represents
many years of searching scholarship. And we should not neglect to
mention that the Transactions, the journal of the Peirce Society, is
already in its twenty-seventh year.
N or should we neglect to mention, finally, that we have had some
help in the preparation of this first of our two volumes of Peirce’s

[page xvii]

Foreword I xvii
selected philosophical writings. We are grateful, for her invaluable
assistance, to Beth Sakaguchi; to our colleagues at the Indiana U niver­
sity Press, for their encouragement and cooperation; to the Indiana
University School of Liberal Arts for its continuing support; and to
André De Tienne, for his scholarly advice and careful reading of a
large part of the whole manuscript.
Indianapolis
July 1991
Nathan Houser
Christian Kloesel

[page xix]

I N T R O D U C T I O N
Charles Sanders Peirce was born on 10 September 1839 in Cambridge,
Massachusetts— when Darwin was only 30 years old— and he lived
until 1914, the year World War I began. His father, Benjamin Peirce,
was a distinguished professor at Harvard College and the most re­
spected mathematician in America. The Peirce family was well con­
nected in academic and scientific circles, and Charles grew up on
intimate terms with the leading figures. He was regarded as a prodigy
in both science and philosophy, and more brilliant in mathematics
than even his father. Unfortunately for Peirce, his independence of
mind, which was at first so much admired, turned out to be a severe
impediment to his success. In part this was due to the times. For as
James Feibleman has pointed out, with the expansion of the United
States and the rise of the great western cities, N ew England, and
especially Boston and Cambridge, became more and more insular and
conservative and grew fearful of genius and originality.1 As great a
thinker as any that America has ever produced, Peirce was thwarted
at almost every turn, and only by great effort of will was he able to
fulfill some of the promise he exhibited as a young man.
Peirce’s importance as a thinker was not entirely lost on his own
age. Among his friends and admirers were such respected philoso­
phers as William James, Josiah Roy ce, and John Dewey, and the re­
nowned mathematician and logician Ernst Schröder. Yet after a short
tenure at the Johns Hopkins University as a part-time lecturer in logic
(1879-1884), and a premature— and forced— retirement (1891) from the
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, where he was in charge of gravity
experiments and pendulum research, Peirce was unable to obtain reg­
ular employment again. He spent much of the latter third of his life
struggling to make ends meet, and many of his writings of those years
were done for pay. These include book reviews for newspapers and
popular journals, contributions to dictionaries and encyclopedias, and
translations (mainly from French and German). There were also a
number of philosophical articles composed to satisfy the expectations
and instructions of paying editors. For a period, beginning about 1890,
Peirce’s life was often dominated by one unsuccessful “ get rich
scheme” after another.2 By the turn of the century, he began to w orry
1. James Feibleman, “ The Relation of Peirce to N ew England Culture,” American
Journal of Economics and Sociology 4 (1944): 99-107.
2. For an account of some of these “ get rich schemes,” see Christian J. W. Kloesel,
“ Charles Peirce and Honoré de Clairefont,” Versus 49 (1988): 5-18.

[page xx]

xx I Introduction
about getting his program of philosophy and his discoveries in mathe­
matics and logic into print, but almost all his proposals failed to win
support. It was more than twenty years after his death, and only after
the Harvard Philosophy Department brought out a collection of his
papers, that scholars began more generally to glimpse the importance
and profundity of his thought. By 1936 Alfred North Whitehead would
describe America as the developing center of worthwhile philosophy,
and identify Charles Peirce and William James as the founders of the
American renaissance. “ O f these men,” Whitehead said, “ W.J. is the
analogue to Plato, and C.P. to Aristotle.” 3
Interest in Peirce has grown enormously in recent years, and esti­
mates of his significance as a thinker continue to run high. His work
in logic, algebraical and graphical, has come to be regarded as substan­
tial for both its historical impact and its enduring importance for
research. H ilary Putnam expressed his surprise upon discovering
“ how much that is quite familiar in modern logic actually became
known to the logical world through the efforts of Peirce and his stu­
dents,” 4 and W. V. Quine dates modern logic from “ the emergence of
general quantification theory at the hands of Frege and Peirce.” 5 More
recently, John Sowa has demonstrated how Peirce’s graphical system
of logic (his existential graphs) improves on other logics for the repre­
sentation of discourse, and the study of language generally, and he has
used the existential graphs as the logical foundation for his own con­
ceptual graphs, “ which combine Peirce’s logic with research on se­
mantic networks in artificial intelligence and computational linguis­
tics.” 6 In philosophy more generally, Peirce’s work has been the focus
of a considerable resurgence of interest throughout the world. This is
demonstrated by the growing number of books and articles about
Peirce, by increasing references to his ideas, and by the testimony of
respected philosophers such as Karl Popper, who regards Peirce as
“ one of the greatest philosophers of all time.” 7 Finally, in the rapidly
growing field of study known as semiotics, Peirce is universally ac­
knowledged as one of the founders, even the founder, and his theory
of signs is among the most frequently studied and systematically exam­
ined of all foundational theories. The importance of semiotics for all
3. Whitehead to Charles Hartshorne, 2 Jan. 1936, in Victor Lowe, Alfred North White­
head: The Man and His Work, ed. J. B. Schneewind (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1990), 2:345.
4. Hilary Putnam, “ Peirce the Logician,” Historia Mathematica 9 (1982): 295.
5. W. V. Quine, “ In the Logical Vestibule,” Times Literary Supplement, 12 July 1985,
p. 767.
6. John Sowa, “ Matching Logical Structure to Linguistic Structure,” in Studies in
the Logic of Charles S. Peirce (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992).
7. Quoted by James Bird, “ A Giant’s Voice from the Past,” Times Higher Education
Supplement, 8 Sept. 1989.

[page xxi]

Introduction I xxi
disciplines that deal crucially with representation (among them episte-
mology, linguistics, anthropology, and cognitive science, and probably
all the fine arts) is only beginning to be recognized. In his 1989 Jefferson
Lecture, Walker Percy argued that modern science is radically inco­
herent— “ not when it seeks to understand things and subhuman orga­
nisms and the cosmos itself, but when it seeks to understand man, not
man’s physiology or neurology or his bloodstream, but man qua man,
man when he is peculiarly human”— but that, with his theory of signs,
Peirce laid the groundwork for a coherent science of man that is yet
to be worked out.8
Peirce developed an early interest in philosophy, particularly the
writings of Kant, and in formal logic, but his training led him to
experimental science, especially two sciences with a marked mathe­
matical basis: astronomy and geodesy. His first book, Photometric Re­
searches (1878), was the result of several years of astronomical observa­
tions at the Harvard Observatory. It included Ptolemy’s catalogue of
stars, in a translation Peirce made from a manuscript in the Biblio­
thèque Nationale in Paris. He published many papers and mono­
graphs on geodesy, and one of these is still considered a classic in the
field. He was a geodesist with the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey for
nearly thirty years, and later he worked for a time as a consulting
chemical engineer for the St. Lawrence Power Company.
But throughout his life, committed as it was to science, he main­
tained a continuing research program in philosophy and logic. He
delivered series of lectures at different institutions from the mid-i86os
until after the turn of the century, and from 1879 to 1884 he taught logic
at the Johns Hopkins University, the first true graduate school in
America. When in the late 1880s he wrote definitions for the Century
Dictionary, it was no doubt his enthusiasm for the Hopkins model that
led him to define “ university” as “ an association of men for the pur­
pose of study, which confers degrees which are acknowledged as valid
throughout Christendom, is endowed, and is privileged by the state,
in order that the people may receive intellectual guidance and that the
theoretical problems which present themselves in the development of
civilization may be resolved.” The definition was the subject of an
anecdote by John Jay Chapman:
Charles Peirce wrote the definition of University in the Century Dictionary.
He called it an institution for purposes of study. They wrote to him that their
notion had been that a university was an institution for instruction. He wrote
back that if they had any such notion they were grievously mistaken, that a
8. Walker Percy, “ The Fateful Rift: The San Andreas Fault in the Modern Mind,”
18th Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities, delivered 3 May 1989 in Washington, D.C.

[page xxii]

xxii I Introduction
university had not and never had had anything to do with instruction and that
until we got over this idea we should not have any university in this country.9
In his day, Peirce was a more international figure than is generally
known. He visited Europe five times between 1870 and 1883, and al­
though he usually traveled as a scientist— to swing pendulums and to
compare American weights and measures with European standards—
he met prominent mathematicians and logicians as well as scientists,
including De Morgan, McColl, Jevons, Clifford, and Herbert Spencer.
Peirce corresponded with most of these scholars, and also with
Schroder, Cantor, Kempe, Jourdain, Victoria Lady Welby, and others.
Through Lady Welby, Peirce’s letters on semiotic were occasionally
passed on to C. K. Ogden who, with I. A. Richards, published some
of them in the classic The Meaning o f Meaning. Wittgenstein’s good
friend F. P. Ramsey was much impressed with these letters and, in his
review of the Tractatus, remarked that Wittgenstein would have prof­
ited from Peirce’s type-token distinction.10
Peirce’s systematic philosophy, which is the focus of the present
collection of writings, is difficult to characterize in a few words. For
one thing, it consists of a number of distinct but interrelated theories
and doctrines, any one of which could easily be the subject of whole
books— as some, in fact, have been. Among the most characteristic of
Peirce’s theories are his pragmatism (or “ pragmaticism,” as he later
called it), a method of sorting out conceptual confusions by relating
meaning to consequences; semiotic, his theory of information, repre­
sentation, communication, and the growth of knowledge; objective ide­
alism, his monistic thesis that matter is effete mind (with the corollary
that mind is inexplicable in terms of mechanics); fallibilism, the thesis
that no inquirer can ever claim with full assurance to have reached the
truth, for new evidence or information may arise that will reverberate
throughout one’s system of beliefs affecting even those most en­
trenched; tychism, the thesis that chance is really operative in the
universe; synechism, the theory that continuity prevails and that the
presumption of continuity is of enormous methodological importance
for philosophy; and, finally, agapism, the thesis that love, or sympathy,
has real influence in the world and, in fact, is “ the great evolutionary
agency of the universe.” The last three doctrines are part of Peirce’s
comprehensive evolutionary cosmology.
9. Max H. Fisch, “ Peirce at the Johns Hopkins University,” in Peirce, Semeiotic, and
Pragmatism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986), p. 36.
10. See Charles S. Hardwick, “ Peirce’s Influence on Some British Philosophers: A
Guess at the Riddle,” in Studies in Peirce's Semiotic (Peirce Studies 1, Lubbock: Institute
for Studies in Pragmaticism, 1979), p. 27. Ramsey’s review of Wittgenstein appeared in
Mind 32:128 (1923): 465-78.

[page xxiii]

Introduction I xxiii
Besides this imposing assemblage of theories, there is still another
barrier to an easy characterization of Peirce’s philosophy, signaled by
the reference to Darwin in the opening paragraph. Peirce’s philosophy
does not consist of a set of static doctrines, thought up and written
down once and for all; its development over his more than fifty years
of scholarship appropriately represents his Darwinian motivation.
Not only did he think of himself as working out an evolutionary
philosophy, one that includes humankind as part of the evolving natu­
ral world, but his writings illustrate his personal commitment to the
principle of evolutionary growth. Peirce was always open to the reve­
lations of experience and was prepared to change his theories accord­
ingly. Some of these changed dramatically over the course of his life;
nearly all changed in one way or another. We cannot draw one consist­
ent philosophy from Peirce’s writings without ignoring conflicting
passages. A tendency by some of Peirce’s commentators to overlook
this characteristic of his thought has led to much confusion. This point
was made rather dramatically by the late Indiana philosopher Arthur
F. Bentley:
What one says 20 years from what one says another time, must be studied as
Event-in-process.... Peirce did not have a modernized post-Jamesian vocabu­
lary for behaviors. He floundered and turned. . . . You can show Peirce as all
sorts of things. But take the full flow of Peirce’s development, his 1869 essays
for actuality; his relations logic—his statement about concepts in 187/8/ Sci
Monthly; his late effort at a functional logic nobody ever mentions, etc. You
have an event in progress. It is, for me, one of the greatest event/s7among all
events.11
It is impossible, in a short introduction, to present fully Peirce’s
most characteristic philosophical doctrines and theories, let alone give
serious attention to the development of his thought. It is difficult to
give even a satisfactory outline of his philosophical development. Over
the years, scholars have described the key steps in his intellectual life
in different ways. T o give some chronological structure to such stud­
ies, Max Fisch has divided Peirce’s philosophical activity into three
periods: (1) the Cambridge period (1851-1870), from his reading of
W hately’s Logic to his memoir on the logic of relatives; (2) the cosmo­
politan period (1870-1887), the time of his most important scientific
work, when he traveled extensively in Europe, as well as in the United
States and Canada; and (3) the Arisbe period (1887-1914), from his move
to Milford, Pennsylvania, until his death—the longest and philosoph­
ically most productive period.12
11. Arthur F. Bentley to Joseph Ratner, 1 July 1948. This letter is deposited with the
Bentley Papers in the Lilly Library, Indiana University.
12. Max H. Fisch, “ Peirce’s Arisbe: The Greek Influence in His Later Philosophy,”
in Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism, p. 227.

[page xxiv]

xxiv I Introduction
Gérard Deledalle has associated these periods more directly with
Peirce’s philosophical activity and has given them more figurative
names: (i) “ Leaving the Cave” (1851-1870), the period of the evolution
of Peirce’s thought beginning with his critique of Kantian logic and
Cartesianism; (2) “ The Eclipse of the Sun” (1870-1887), the period domi­
nated by his discovery of modern logic and pragmatism; and (3) “ The
Sun Set Free” (1887-1914), the period of his founding of semiotic on a
phenomenology based on his logic of relations and of his working out
his scientific metaphysics, the crowning-point of his philosophical
achievement.13
A somewhat different account of the principal stages of Peirce’s
development is given by M urray Murphey, who associates each of
Peirce’s key shifts of thought with important discoveries in logic. He
identifies four main phases: (1) Peirce’s Kantian phase (1857-1865/66); (2)
the phase beginning with the discovery of the irreducibility of the
three syllogistic figures (1866-1869/70); (3) the phase beginning with the
discovery of the logic of relations (1869/70-1884); and (4) the phase
beginning with the discovery of quantification and of set theory (1884-
1914).14
Probably the most significant development in Peirce’s intellectual
life was the evolution of his thought from its quasi-nominalist and
idealist beginnings to its broadly and strongly realist conclusion. Be­
cause there are so many variants of these doctrines, a few selections
from Peirce’s Century Dictionary definitions will help reveal his concep­
tions of these terms:
Nominalism: 1. The doctrine that nothing is general but names; more specifi­
cally, the doctrine that common nouns, as man, horse, represent in their gener­
ality nothing in the real things, but are mere conveniences for speaking of
many things at once, or at most necessities of human thought; individualism.
Idealism: 1. The metaphysical doctrine that the real is of the nature of thought;
the doctrine that all reality is in its nature psychical.
Realist: 1. A logician who holds that the essences of natural classes have some
mode of being in the real things; in this sense distinguished as a scholastic
realist; opposed to nominalist. 2. A philosopher who believes in the real exis­
tence of the external world as independent of all thought about it, or, at least,
of the thought of any individual or any number of individuals.
Peirce also defined “ ideal-realism” as “ a metaphysical doctrine which
combines the principles of idealism and realism.” As a variant of this
13. Gérard Deledalle, Charles S. Peirce: An Intellectual Biography (Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 1990), p. xxxi.
14. Murray G. Murphey, The Development of Peirce's Philosophy (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1961), p. 3.

[page xxv]

Introduction I xxv
term, he defined the ideal-realism of his father as “ the opinion that
nature and the mind have such a community as to impart to our
guesses a tendency toward the truth, while at the same time they
require the confirmation of empirical science.”
The lifelong tension between nominalism and realism in Peirce’s
own intellectual life is testament to the general importance he attached
to it; in fact, if any single question can be said to have been viewed by
Peirce as the most important philosophical question of his time, it is
that of deciding between the two doctrines. Peirce concurred in this
with his old schoolmate Francis Ellingwood Abbot, who in 1885 wrote
that “ so far was the old battle of Nominalism and Realism from being
fought out by the end of the fifteenth century that it is to-day the deep,
underlying problem of problems, on the right solution of which de­
pends the life of philosophy itself in the ages to come.” 15 For Peirce,
as for Abbot, the significance of the outcome of this “ battle” was not
limited to technical philosophy:
Though the question of realism and nominalism has its roots in the technicali­
ties of logic, its branches reach about our life. The question whether the genus
homo has any existence except as individuals, is the question whether there is
anything of any more dignity, worth, and importance than individual happi­
ness, individual aspirations, and individual life. Whether men really have
anything in common, so that the community is to be considered as an end in
itself, and if so, what the relative value of the two factors is, is the most
fundamental practical question in regard to every institution the constitution
of which we have it in our power to influence, (item 5)
According to Fisch, Peirce’s progress toward realism began early
and was gradual, but there were key steps that divide it into stages.16
Peirce took his first deliberate step in 1868 when, in the second paper
of his cognition series (item 3), he “ declares unobtrusively for realism.”
Although this step marks only a small shift in Peirce’s thought—
the introduction of “ the long run” into his theory of reality— it is
an important one, for it brings to an end his period of avowed nom­
inalism.17
Peirce’s second deliberate step was taken in 1871, when in his Berke­
ley review (item 5) he again declared for “ the realism of Scotus” and
15. Francis Ellingwood Abbot, Scientific Theism (London: Macmillan, 1885), pp. 11-12.
16. The account of Peirce’s progress toward realism contained in this and the follow­
ing eight paragraphs is based on Max Fisch, “ Peirce’s Progress from Nominalism to­
ward Realism,” in Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism, pp. 184-200; unless otherwise noted,
quotations are from that essay.
17. Whether Peirce was ever really a thoroughgoing nominalist or only a more
nominalistic realist than he would be later is discussed by Don D. Roberts in “ On
Peirce’s Realism” and Fred Michael in “Tw o Forms of Scholastic Realism in Peirce’s
Philosophy,” Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 6 (1970): 67-83 and 24 (1988): 317-48.

[page xxvi]

xxvi I Introduction
recognized that realism is temporally oriented toward the future while
nominalism is oriented toward the past. Fisch points out that this
second declaration came when, after a period of intensive study of the
schoolmen, Peirce had become well acquainted with the writings of
Duns Scotus.
Peirce took his third step in mid-1872 when, in the Cambridge
Metaphysical Club, he first presented his pragmatism in which the
meaning of conceptions is referred to future experience: “ So we say
that the inkstand upon the table is heavy. And what do we mean by
that? We only mean that if its support be removed it will fall to the
ground___So th at... knowledge of the thing which exists all the time,
exists only by virtue of the fact that when a certain occasion arises a
certain idea will come into the mind” ^3:30-31). A few months later,
Peirce wrote that “ no cognition . . . has an intellectual significance for
what it is in itself, but only for what it is in its effects upon other
thoughts. And the existence of a cognition is not something actual, but
consists in the fact that under certain circumstances some other cogni­
tion will arise” (W377). But the best-known statement of the doctrine
came in 1878, in the second of his “ Illustrations of the Logic of Sci­
ence,” in the now famous version of his pragmatic maxim: “ consider
what effects, which might conceivably have practical bearings, we
conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our conception
of these effects is the whole of our conception of the object.”
Fisch stops enumerating the steps toward realism in 1872, and di­
vides the rest of Peirce’s development into two periods, the pre-Monist
period (1872-1890) and the Monist period (1891-1914). He summarizes the
key factors of the former period as follows:
The chief developments in the pre-Monist period whose effects on Peirce’s
realism will appear in the Monist period are his pragmatism; his work on the
logic of relations and on truth-tables, indices, and quantification; the resulting
reformulation of his categories; his work and that of Cantor and Dedekind on
transfinite numbers; the appearance in 1885 of provocative books by Royce and
Abbot; and, at the end of the period, a fresh review of the history of philosophy
for purposes of defining philosophical terms for the Century Dictionary.
In the pre-Monist period, a step that had special importance for
Peirce’s philosophical development was his recognition, with the help
of his Johns Hopkins student O. H. Mitchell, of the need for indices
in his algebra of logic. Peirce recognized the need for indices in nota­
tions adequate for the full representation of reasoning because he had
come to understand the importance of pinning down thought to actual
situations. “ The actual world,” he said, “ cannot be distinguished from
a world of imagination by any description. Hence the need of pro­
nouns and indices” (item 16). Fisch points out that Peirce’s incorpora­

[page xxvii]

Introduction I xxvii
tion of indices into his system of logic called for a reformulation both
of his theory of signs and of his general theory of categories. It was
then that Peirce reintroduced the familiar icon-index-symbol trichot­
omy and his reformulated categories denoting three kinds of charac­
ters (singular, dual, and plural), which he associated with three kinds
of fact: “ fact about an object, fact about two objects (relation), fact
about several objects (synthetic fact)” ^5:244).
At the end of the pre-Monist period, Peirce took a major step to­
ward a more robust realism, a step related to his recognition of the
need for indices. This was his acceptance, in about 1890, of Scotus’s
haecceities— the reality of actuality or of secondness. Peirce could no
longer ignore the “ Outward Clash,” as Hegel had much to the detri­
ment of his system of philosophy. With the acceptance of the reality
of seconds, Peirce acknowledged the mode of being that distinguishes
the individual from the general, and isolated his categories of fact:
qualia, relations, and signs.
The Monist period began with the series of five papers that con­
cludes the present volume. It is the first of four series of papers that
Peirce contributed to the Monist, which, after its founding in 1890,
became his chief medium of publication. In each of these series, and
in many of his other writings of the period, he continued to weed out
the remaining nominalistic and many of the idealistic elements of his
philosophy. Peirce took his most decisive step toward realism in 1897.
Fisch has nicely illustrated this last great step by contrasting two
passages, one from a January 1897 review of the third volume of
Schroder’s Algebra und Logik der Relative, and the other from an 18
March 1897 letter to William James. In January, Peirce wrote: “ I for­
merly [as late as October 1896] defined the possible as that which in a
given state of information (real or feigned) we do not know not to be
true. But this definition today seems to me only a twisted phrase
which, by means of two negatives, conceals an anacoluthon” (CP 3.527).
T w o months later he wrote to James: “ The possible is a positive uni­
verse, and the two negations happen to fit it, but that is all” (CP 8.308).
Peirce thus added the possible as a third mode of being— and, in so
doing, gave up his long-held, Mill-inspired frequency theory of proba­
bility— and his scheme of categories was fundamentally complete. To
his categories in their form of thirdness (feeling, or signs of firstness;
sense of action and reaction, or signs of secondness; and sense of
learning or mediation, or signs of thirdness) and in their form of
secondness (qualia, or facts of firstness; relations, or facts of second­
ness; and signs, or facts of thirdness), Peirce now added what might
be called his ontological categories, his categories in their form of
firstness:firstness, or the being of positive qualitative possibility; second­
ness\ or the being of actual fact; and thirdness, or the being of law that
will govern facts in the future (CP 1.23).

[page xxviii]

xxviii I Introduction
Peirce was then, in 1897, what Fisch calls a “ three-category realist.”
He had very early accepted the reality of thirds, the universe of
thought or signs. This universe was the only reality Peirce the idealist
had admitted until about 1890 when he accepted the reality of seconds,
the universe of facts (influenced by Scotus). Finally, in 1897 he broad­
ened his evolving realism to accept the reality of firsts, the universe of
possibility (influenced by Aristotle). Recognizing the significance of
these steps for the growth of his thought, Peirce now characterized
himself as “ an Aristotelian of the scholastic wing, approaching Scot-
ism, but going much further in the direction of scholastic realism” (CP
5.77m).
One further step from the Monist period should be mentioned, for
it brings together two fundamental strands of Peirce’s thought: his
pragmatism and his semiotic. In his third Monist series, beginning in
1905, Peirce sought to prove his doctrine of pragmatism (pragmaticism),
and in the course of working out his proof, he wove his two great
theories into a unified doctrine. He concluded that his semiotic prag­
matism entails realism, so that a proof of pragmatism is, at the same
time, a proof of realism, and that the pragmatist is “ obliged to sub­
scribe to the doctrine of a real Modality, including real Necessity and
real Possibility” (CP 5.457).
Although Peirce was aware that at least some of the steps described
above were important milestones in his development, he did not re­
gard them as ushering in new systems of thought. According to Mur-
phey, Peirce regarded each phase of his thought as merely a revision
of “ a single over-all architectonic system” and always preserved as
much as he could from each earlier phase. His philosophy might be
likened to “ a house which is being continually rebuilt from within.” 18
Some scholars have not accepted the one-system account of Peirce’s
philosophy. Thomas Goudge, in particular, has argued that “ Peirce’s
ideas fall naturally into two broad groups whose opposite character is
a reflection of a deep conflict in his thinking” and that this opposition
is the result of his conflicting commitment to both naturalism and
transcendentalism.19 By “ naturalism” Goudge has in mind scientific
philosophy more or less in the positivist sense, a philosophy that puts
logical analysis on a pedestal and eschews speculation and system-
building. Transcendentalism, on the other hand, discounts logical
analysis in favor of metaphysical construction, embracing both specu­
lation and architectonic. Peirce the naturalist tended to nominalism,
while Peirce the transcendentalist tended to realism. It was Peirce the
naturalist who was the pragmatist, while Peirce the transcendentalist
18. Murray G. Murphey, The Development of Peirce's Philosophy, p. 3.
19. Thomas Goudge, The Thought of C. S. Peirce (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1950), p. xx.

[page xxix]

Introduction I xxix
tended to intuitionism. Goudge finds that Peirce’s naturalism was the
stronger tendency, which guided him in his researches in formal logic,
semiotic, scientific method, phenomenology, and critical metaphysics,
while the weaker transcendentalism “ is most apparent in his views on
cosmology, ethics, and theology.” 20
Goudge has indeed uncovered what may appear to be two Peirces,
but the finding of most recent scholarship is that the tension is not as
great as he thought. Peirce’s philosophy is broad and subtle and ap­
pears to be able to accommodate results that would be incompatible
in narrower systems of thought. It is not possible here to argue for the
coherence of the various claims and doctrines that Goudge and others
have found to be in conflict. The best that can be done is to outline the
basic architecture of Peirce’s philosophy and to give a glimpse of its
overall unity.
For Peirce, as for Kant, logic was the key to philosophy. He claimed
that from the age of twelve, after reading his brother’s copy of
W hately’s Elements o f Logic, he could no longer think of anything
except as an exercise in logic.21 Peirce’s study of logic was not limited
to the formal theory of deductive reasoning or to the foundations of
mathematics, although he made important contributions to both.
When he sought the professorship of physics at the Johns Hopkins
(before being appointed part-time lecturer in logic), he wrote to Presi­
dent Daniel C. Gilman that it was as a logician that he sought to head
that department and that he had learned physics in his study of logic.
“ The data for the generalizations of logic are the special methods of
the different sciences,” he pointed out, and “ to penetrate these meth­
ods the logician has to study various sciences rather profoundly.”
But it was not just as a theory of reasoning or as a critique of
methods that logic was important for philosophy. “ Philosophy,”
Peirce said, “ seeks to explain the universe at large, and to show what
there is intelligible or reasonable in it. It is therefore committed to the
notion (a postulate, which however may not be completely true) that
the process of nature and the process of thought are alike” (N EM
4:375). Whether completely true or not, if philosophy seeks to explain
the universe at large, and if our explanations presuppose a rational
organization of the universe— which, otherwise, would hardly be ex­
plicable at all— then we are, in effect, committed to the thesis that the
process of nature is (or is like) a rational process. Logic, therefore, has
more than heuristic value for philosophy.
It is important to bear in mind that when Peirce called himself a
logician—the first and perhaps only person to have his occupation
20. Ibid., pp. 5-7.
21. Max H. Fisch, Introduction to Writings of Charles S. Peirce (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1982), i:xviii.

[page xxx]

xxx I Introduction
listed as “ logician” in Who’s Who— he was not thinking of himself as
a logical technician or as a logicist who viewed logic as the deductive
foundation for mathematics. Although his many contributions to tech­
nical logic— including his 1881 axiomatization of the natural numbers,
his 1885 quantification theory and introduction of truth-functional
analysis, and his lifelong development of the logic of relations—have
considerable importance for the foundations of mathematics, his main
concern was to build an adequate theory of science and an objective
theory of rationality. His general conception of logic was closer to
modern-day philosophy of science, together with epistemology and
philosophical logic, than to today’s mathematical logic. In his later
years, Peirce gave a great deal of attention to the classification and
relations of the sciences, and he came to associate much of what we
would today call mathematical logic with mathematics; logic, on the
other hand, he came to regard as a normative science concerned with
intellectual goodness, and, in his most developed view, it is coextensive
with semiotic, which constitutes the very heart of philosophy.
Peirce’s philosophy is thoroughly systematic— some might say it is
systematic to a fault. Central to his system is the idea that certain
conceptions are fundamental to others, those to still others, and so on;
so that it is possible to analyze our various theoretical systems (our
sciences) into a dependency hierarchy. At the top of this hierarchy (or
at the base if we envision a ladder of conceptions) we find a set of
universal categories, an idea Peirce shared with many of the greatest
systematic thinkers including Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel. Peirce’s uni­
versal categories are three: firstness, secondness, and thirdness. First­
ness is that which is as it is independently of anything else. Secondness
is that which is as it is relative to something else. Thirdness is that
which is as it is as mediate between two others. In Peirce’s opinion,
all conceptions at the most fundamental level can be reduced to these
three.
This theory of categories, in its most abstracted form, belongs to
mathematics, which stands at the pinnacle of the sciences. Peirce fol­
lowed his father in defining mathematics as the science which deduces
consequences from hypotheses—from what is given— but there is
more to it than that. Mathematics is a science of discovery that investi­
gates the realm of abstract forms, the realm of ideal objects (entia
rationis). It is the mathematician who first discovers the fundamental­
l y of triadicity by finding that monadic, dyadic, and triadic relations
are irreducible, while relations of any degree (or adicity) greater than
triadic can be expressed in combinations of triadic relations. This is
known as Peirce’s reduction thesis.
Mathematics presupposes no other science but is presupposed by
all other sciences. After mathematics comes philosophy, which has
three main branches: phenomenology, normative science, and meta­

[page xxxi]

Introduction I xxxi
physics—dependent on each other in reverse order. Not surprisingly,
Peirce’s categories make their appearance in each of these parts of
philosophy (as they must if they are universal categories). He ex­
plained this in the fifth of a series of lectures on pragmatism given at
Harvard in 1903:
Philosophy has three grand divisions. The first is Phenomenology, which
simply contemplates the Universal Phenomenon and discerns its ubiquitous
elements, Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, together perhaps with other
series of categories. The second grand division is Normative Science, which
investigates the universal and necessary laws of the relation of Phenomena to
Ends, that is, perhaps, to Truth, Right, and Beauty. The third grand division
is Metaphysics, which endeavors to comprehend the Reality of the Phenom­
ena. (CP 5.121)
Before giving this division, Peirce had warned his audience: “ N ow I
am going to make a series of assertions which will sound w ild” (CP
5.120), but he stressed that it was essential to his case for pragmatism.
The three divisions of philosophy are directly related to the catego­
ries. In attending to the universal elements of phenomena in their
immediate phenomenal character, phenomenology treats of phenom­
ena as firsts. Here the categories appear as fundamental categories of
experience (or consciousness): firstness is the monadic element of expe­
rience usually identified with feeling, secondness is the dyadic element
identified with the sense of action and reaction, and thirdness is the
triadic element identified with the sense of learning or mediation as
in thought or semiosis.
In attending to the laws of the relation of phenomena to ends,
normative science treats of phenomena as seconds. The three norma­
tive sciences—esthetics, ethics, logic—were associated with three
kinds of goodness: esthetical goodness (esthetics considers “ those
things whose ends are to embody qualities of feeling” ), ethical good­
ness (ethics considers “ those things whose ends lie in action” ), and
logical goodness (logic considers “ those things whose end is to repre­
sent something” ). The normative sciences correspond to the three
categories and are dependent on each other, again in reverse order.
Logic (or semiotic), in turn, has three branches: speculative grammar,
critic, and speculative rhetoric. (Sometimes Peirce used different
names.) Speculative grammar studies what is requisite for representa­
tion of any kind; it is the study of the “ general conditions of signs being
signs” (CP 1.444). Critic is the formal science of the truth of representa­
tions; it is the study of the reference of signs to their objects. Specula­
tive rhetoric studies how knowledge is transmitted; it might be called
the science of interpretation. (These three branches correspond more
or less to Carnap’s syntactics-semantics-pragmatics triad, which he

[page xxxii]

xxxii I Introduction
learned from Charles Morris, who had probably derived it from
Peirce.)
The three normative sciences are followed by metaphysics, the
third and last branch of philosophy. The general task of metaphysics
is “ to study the most general features of reality and real objects” (item
21). In attempting to comprehend the reality of phenomena, that is, in
treating of phenomena as representing something that is inherently
mind-independent, metaphysics treats of phenomena as thirds. Logic
(semiotic), the normative science immediately preceding metaphysics,
gives structure to metaphysical investigations which are, not surpris­
ingly, replete with triadic divisions. Among these we find possibility,
actuality, destiny; chance, law, habit; and mind, matter, evolution.
Most typical of Peirce’s metaphysical theories are his objective
idealism and his evolutionary cosmology. In “ The Architecture of
Theories” (item 21), Peirce characterized objective idealism as holding
that “ matter is effete mind,” mind that has become hide-bound with
habit. According to this doctrine, matter is mind that has lost so much
of the element of spontaneity through the acquisition of habits that it
has taken on the dependable law-governed nature we attribute to
material substance. It is the one intelligible theory of the universe,
according to Peirce, a monism that regards psychical law as primor­
dial, and physical law as derived and special.
Peirce’s wide-ranging evolutionary cosmology is more difficult to
characterize briefly. Some regard it as the weakest part of his work; W.
B. Gallie called it the “ white elephant” of Peirce’s philosophy.22 But
others hail Peirce’s cosmology as the prelude to contemporary cosmo­
logical physics.23 It should be remembered that, according to Peirce,
part of the purpose of philosophy is to explain the universe at large.
In this he was a follower of the earliest Greek philosophers. In any
case, Peirce’s cosmological story goes roughly as follows.24
In the beginning there was nothing. But this primordial nothing
was not the nothingness of a void or empty space, it was a no-thing-ness,
the nothingness characteristic of the absence of any determination.
Peirce described this state as “ completely undetermined and dimen-
22. W. B. Gallie, Peirce and Pragmatism (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1952), p. 215.
23. For example, see Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Order Out of Chaos (New
York: Bantam, 1984), pp. 302-03.
24. M y account of Peirce’s cosmological theory is based, in part, on Peter T. Turley,
Peirce's Cosmology (New York: Philosophical Library, 1977). Randall R. Dipert, in a review
of Turley (Nature and System 1 [1979]: 134-41), warned that “ by shunning key logical and
mathematical issues in Peirce’s writing, certain important aspects of his writing, such
as his synechism, his theory of relations, and his theory of ‘evolving dimensionality’ of
continua can hardly be discussed at all. . . . Every volume of Peirce’s writing should
perhaps contain the warning: ‘Let no one enter here who is ignorant of logic, mathemat­
ics, and the history of science.’ ” Dipert is no doubt correct; for without such knowledge,
it is not possible to penetrate fully the depths of Peirce’s metaphysics.

[page xxxiii]

Introduction I xxxiii
sionless potentiality,” which may be characterized by freedom,
chance, and spontaneity (CP 6.193, 2°°)*
The first step in the evolution of the world is the transition from
undetermined and dimensionless potentiality to determined potential­
ity. The agency in this transition is chance or pure spontaneity. This
new state is a Platonic world, a world of pure firsts, a world of qualities
that are mere eternal possibilities. We have moved, Peirce says, from
a state of absolute nothingness to a state of chaos.
Up to this point in the evolution of the world, all we have is real
possibility, firstness; nothing is actual yet— there is no secondness.
Somehow, the possibility or potentiality of the chaos is self-actualiz­
ing, and the second great step in the evolution of the world is that in
which the world of actuality emerges from the Platonic world of
qualities. The world of secondness is a world of events, or facts, whose
being consists in the mutual interaction of actualized qualities. But this
world does not yet involve thirdness, or law.
The transition to a world of thirdness, the third great step in
cosmic evolution, is the result of a habit-taking tendency inherent in
the world of events. Peirce liked to illustrate with dice or playing cards
how single random events, if their mere occurrence established a tend­
ency, however slight, for the recurrence of events of that type, could
lead to large-scale uniformities. A habit-taking tendency is a generaliz­
ing tendency, and the emergence of all uniformities, from time and
space to physical matter and even the laws of nature, can be explained
as the result of the universe’s tendency to take habits. Peirce regarded
this surrender of chance and freedom to habit and law as a growth
toward concrete reasonableness. Although he at times envisioned an
end of history marked by the crystallization of mind that has become
completely law-governed and without any residual spontaneity (truly
concrete reasonableness), he sometimes held that an element of freedom
and originality will persist in a universe that has reached a state of
equilibrium between chance and law.
This is only a partial sketch of some of the characteristic theories
and doctrines of Peirce’s metaphysics, the third and final division of
philosophy. It does not account for the role of semiosis or the power
of love in the evolution of the cosmos, nor does it distinguish between
the different modes of evolution that characterize Peirce’s more devel­
oped thought (as in item 25). (In his classification of the sciences, philos­
ophy is followed by the special sciences, such as physics and psychol­
ogy, then by sciences of review, and, finally, by practical sciences such
as pedagogics.)
The preceding summary provides a mere skeletal account of
Peirce’s system of philosophy, but it should suffice to convey a sense
of both its breadth and its unity. When viewed as a whole, Peirce’s
philosophy may be characterized in different ways but, however char­

[page xxxiv]

xxxiv I Introduction
acterized, it must be said to be a scientific philosophy. This acknowl­
edges both its empirical character and its adherence to scientific, or
experimental, methodology. Certainly it is appropriate to call Peirce’s
philosophy an empirical philosophy, and he himself thought of his
pragmatism as a “ propepositivism.” But Peirce should not be re­
garded, as he sometimes is, as a positivist.
Peirce asserted quite emphatically that “ experience is our only
teacher,” and thus embraced a fundamental tenet of classical empiri­
cism. Yet he rejected the doctrine of a tabula rasa, claiming that there
“ is not one drop of principle in the whole vast reservoir of established
scientific theory that has sprung from any other source than the power
of the human mind to originate ideas that are true.” But this power to
originate ideas is feeble, Peirce said, and “ the truths are almost
drowned in a flood of false notions.” Experience enables us to “ filter
o ff’ the false ideas, “ letting the truth pour on in its mighty current”
(CP 5.50).
Peirce’s devotion to mathematics and science, his emphasis on the
scientific method, and his pragmatic maxim (which sounds a lot like
a verification principle) certainly suggest an affinity between pragma­
tism and positivism. As late as 1905, he explained the purpose of his
pragmatism in a way that seems to share significant positivist con­
cerns:
It will serve to show that almost every proposition of ontological metaphysics
is either meaningless gibberish—one word being defined by other words, and
they by still others, without any real conception ever being reached—or else
is downright absurd; so that all such rubbish being swept away, what will
remain of philosophy will be a series of problems capable of investigation by
the observational methods of the true sciences. (CP 5.423)
The pragmatic maxim may thus be taken as a test for whether our
conceptions, and our theories, are indexed to experience, or whether
they are part of a mere language game. But though there are many
points in common between pragmatism and positivism, there are im­
portant differences, especially Peirce’s insistence on realism and on the
legitimacy of abductive reasoning, and his denial of a sharp demarca­
tion between the language of observation and the language of theory.25
Peirce’s general philosophy is sometimes called apragmatic philoso­
phy, where pragmatism is taken as more than just a theory of meaning
or a method for analyzing conceptions. It combines Peirce’s brand of
empiricism with scientific method and the process orientation of Dar­
w in’s evolutionism— together with an Aristotelian teleological twist—
25. See David Gruender, “ Pragmatism, Science, and Metaphysics,” in The Relevance
of Charles Peirce, ed. Eugene Freeman (La Salle: The Hegeler Institute, 1983): 271-90.

[page xxxv]

Introduction I xxxv
into a broad philosophical program. It is a philosophy in which purpose
appears to play the part for Peirce that intentionality played for Bren-
tano. The mark of intelligence, on Peirce’s view, is purpose, and pur­
pose is always related to action. Peirce’s pragmatism may thus be seen
as a praxis philosophy: “ The elements of every concept enter into
logical thought at the gate of perception and make their exit at the gate
of purposive action; and whatever cannot show its passports at both
those two gates is to be arrested as unauthorized by reason” (CP 5.212).
Pragmatism, however, focuses on intellectual purport, which would
seem to encompass only part of the range of possible semiosis. Conse­
quently, pragmatism may be narrower than, or apply to only part of,
Peirce’s general theory of signs. Perhaps it is best to describe his
philosophy as a semiotic philosophy. But, in that case, is it a semiotic
idealism or realism? As either alternative can be supported, the choice
seems to depend on who makes it.
According to David Savan, Peirce is a semiotic idealist. Savan dis­
tinguishes between two forms of semiotic idealism: a mild variety that
holds that any properties, attributes, or characteristics of whatever
exists depend upon the system of signs, representations, or interpreta­
tions through which they are signified, and a strong variety that holds
that the very existence of anything depends upon the system of signs,
representations, and interpretations which purport to refer to it.
Savan claims that Peirce is a mild semiotic idealist.26
According to Thomas Short, on the other hand, Peirce is a semiotic
realist.27 The decision to label Peirce one way or the other seems to
reflect the relative importance one attaches to the different elements
of the sign relation, and often seems to be a matter of emphasis rather
than a divergence of doctrine. Since he explicitly embraced a more and
more encompassing realism, it might seem more appropriate to follow
Short and call Peirce a semiotic realist—especially as that reflects his
pragmatic admonition that our conceptions are meaningless unless
they have reference to something outside of intellect: “ it is necessary
that a method should be found by which our beliefs may be deter­
mined by nothing human, but by some external permanency— by
something upon which our thinking has no effect” (item 7). Yet one
could counter that Peirce’s adherence to his doctrine of objective ideal­
ism also recommends Savan’s viewpoint. It is interesting to consider
whether Peirce’s philosophy might be best represented in his defini­
tion of his father’s ideal-realism, which “ combines the principles of
idealism and realism.”
26. David Savan, “ Toward a Refutation of Semiotic Idealism,” Semiotic Inquiry 3
(1983): 1-8.
27. Thomas L. Short, “ What They Said in Amsterdam: Peirce’s Semiotic Today,”
Semiotica 60 (1986): 103-28.

[page xxxvi]

xxxvi I Introduction
Peirce’s theory of signs has, more than any of his other theories,
attracted widespread attention in recent years. It was an outgrowth of
many factors and influences including, perhaps primarily, his study of
and reaction to Schiller but especially Kant; his study of logic, most
importantly the logics of De Morgan and Boole (and also those of
Aristotle and the medieval logicians); his reaction to Darwin and the
idea of evolution; and, finally, the growing abstraction in mathematics,
perhaps especially the development of topology and non-Euclidean
geometry. Under all these influences Peirce acquired new insights and
directions, and was led along paths never before traveled. But, more
than anything else, it was his discovery that his sign conception could
clear up many theretofore intractable philosophical problems that con­
vinced him of the importance of signs. After rejecting certain Kantian
restrictions on what could or could not be represented, he undertook
an investigation of the entire range of representability and studied,
among other things, conceptions of God, mathematical infinity, total­
ity, immediacy, and necessity. As a result of these investigations Peirce
developed and sharpened his semiotic ideas, and with the addition of
certain phenomenological conceptions, he arrived at the view that “ all
consciousness is sign consciousness” and that in studying signs one
addresses “ whatever could be a subject of philosophic concern and
insight.” 28 Believing that in semiotic he had a better ground for philos­
ophy than in traditional epistemology, Peirce worked at expanding his
findings into a general theory of signs, and later, in considering what
the universe must be like for signs (or semiosis) to be possible, he built
a semiotic framework for most of his major philosophical work.
In its most abbreviated form, Peirce’s theory of signs goes some­
thing like this. A sign is anything which stands for something to
something. What the sign stands fo r is its object, what it stands to is
the interpretant. The sign relation is fundamentally triadic: eliminate
either the object or the interpretant and you annihilate the sign. This
was the key insight of Peirce’s semiotic, and one that distinguishes it
from most theories of representation that attempt to make sense of
signs (representations) that are related only to objects.
As his theory evolved, Peirce came to distinguish between different
kinds of objects and interpretants. Every sign has two objects, a dy­
namic object, “ the really efficient but not immediately present object,”
and an immediate object, “ the object as the sign represents it.” And
every sign has three interpretants, a final (or logical) interpretant,
which is the “ effect that would be produced on the mind by the sign
28. Joseph L. Esposito, “On the Origins and Foundations of Peirce’s Semiotic,” in
Studies in Peirce's Semiotic (Peirce Studies 1, Lubbock: Institute for Studies in Pragmati-
cism, 1979), p. 20. Much of this paragraph is derived from Esposito’s paper, which gives
a good historical introduction to Peirce’s semiotic.

[page xxxvii]

Introduction I xxxvii
after sufficient development of thought,” a dynamic interprétant,
which is the “ effect actually produced on the mind,” and an immediate
interprétant, which is the “ interprétant represented or signified in the
sign” (CP 8.343). Any given sign only partially reveals its dynamic
object, and that partial revelation constitutes its immediate object.
Sim ilarly, the final interprétant of a sign is the result of (or is what
would result from) a history of semiotic interaction with the given
dynamic object, while the dynamic interprétant is the effect the sign
actually produces (at a given time), and the immediate interprétant is
the immediate significance of the sign independent of any previous
history involving its object.
Peirce explained that signs can be divided in different ways accord­
ing to this analysis of the structure of signs. If we consider the nature
of any given sign (the ground of the sign), it will be found to be
intrinsically either a quality (a qualisign), an existent thing or event (a
sinsign), or a law or habit (a legisign). If we consider a sign’s relation
to its dynamic object, we will find that it is like its object (an icon), that
it has an actual, existential connection with its object (an index), or that
it is related to its object by convention or habit (a symbol). If we
consider the relation of the sign to its final interprétant— how the sign
is interpreted— it will appear to be a sign of possibility (a rheme), a sign
of actual existence (a dicent), or a sign of law (an argument). Since
every sign is something in itself, has a relation to its object, and repre­
sents its object in some way or other, the above divisions can be used
to yield a classification of signs that makes more distinctions than most
rival theories.
Using only these three triadic divisions of signs, as Peirce often did,
we derive a ten-fold classification of signs sufficient for most analytical
purposes. For example, we can identify a paint chip (as a sign of color)
as a rhematic-iconic-qualisign, a weathervane as a dicent-indexical-
sinsign, and a proper name as a rhematic-indexical-legisign. But, un­
fortunately, as anyone knows who has tried to work out examples of
Peirce’s classes, it is not as easy as we might think— which means
either that we do not quite understand Peirce or that his theory is a
bit ambiguous.
The fact is, Peirce did not settle exclusively on his ten-fold classifi­
cation of signs, but developed a more complex classification based on
ten rather than three triadic divisions. In this fuller analysis Peirce
considered such three-fold divisions as the nature of immediate objects
(descriptives, or indefinites; designatives, or singulars; and copulatives,
or generals) and the nature of the assurance afforded the interpreter
(abducents, or assurance by instinct; inducents, or assurance by experi­
ence; and deducents, or assurance by form or habit). With these ten
divisions, Peirce was able to isolate sixty-six distinct classes of signs
and, thus, to eliminate most of the ambiguity of his more abbreviated

[page xxxviii]

xxxviii I Introduction
classification. But Peirce never completed this part of his general the­
ory, and the precise nature and order of the ten trichotomies remains
an important problem for semiotic theorists to work out more fully.
Perhaps in our present state of understanding of language and semiosis
we have no need for such complexity—just as we once had no need for
relativity physics— but where principled distinctions can be made,
they should be made, and, in any case, they will probably someday be
needed.
So far, this sketch of Peirce’s theory of signs has focused on specula­
tive grammar, which considers “ in what sense and how there can be
any true proposition and false proposition, and what are the general
conditions to which thought or signs of any kind must conform in
order to assert anything” (CP 2.206). The philosopher who concen­
trates on this branch of semiotic investigates representation relations
(signs), seeks to work out the necessary and sufficient conditions for
representing, and classifies the different possible kinds of representa­
tion. Speculative grammar is often presented as if it were the whole
of Peirce’s semiotic, perhaps because that is where we encounter some
of his best-known trichotomies.
The second branch of semiotic, critic, is “ the science of the neces­
sary conditions of the attainment of truth” (CP 1.445). I* *s “ that part
of logic . . . which, setting out with such assumptions as that every
assertion is either true or false, and not both, and that some proposi­
tions may be recognized to be true, studies the constituent parts of
arguments and produces a classification of arguments” (CP 2.205). By
means of this classification, arguments “ that are bad are thrown into
one division, and those which are good into another, these divisions
being defined by marks recognizable even if it be not known whether
the arguments are good or bad.” To complete its task, critic “ has to
divide good arguments by recognizable marks into those which have
different orders of validity, and has to afford means for measuring the
strength of arguments” (CP 2.203). Thus, in addition to investigating
truth conditions in general, the philosopher who concentrates on
critic will investigate Peirce’s well-known division of reasoning into
abduction, induction, and deduction (and the corresponding theories
of abductive, inductive, and deductive logic). Much of what made up
the traditional logic curriculum belongs in critic, as does much that is
dealt with in philosophical logic, especially topics that concern truth
and reference.
The third branch of semiotic, speculative rhetoric, is “ the study of
the necessary conditions of the transmission of meaning by signs from
mind to mind, and from one state of mind to another” (CP 1.445). More
succinctly, it studies the conditions for the development and growth
of thought. The focus for the philosopher who studies this branch is

[page xxxix]

Introduction I xxxix
the relation between representations and interpreting thoughts (or
interpretations). Whereas critic is the science of the necessary condi­
tions for the attainment of truth, speculative rhetoric is the science of
the general conditions for the attainment of truth. Peirce often empha­
sized the study of methods of reasoning as a main concern of speculative
rhetoric, and he sometimes suggested that this branch of logic might
be better named “ methodeutic.” Questions of meaning and interpreta­
tion dominate this branch, and it may be that pragmatism, as a theory
of meaning or inquiry, belongs here. So may the contemporary study
of hermeneutics, something Peirce himself once suggested, although
with reference to Aristotle’s hermeneutic. Be that as it may, it would
appear that Peirce’s theory of signs encompasses much of what lies at
the heart of modern philosophy, and it has relevance for many other
disciplines.
Peirce’s analysis of the sign relation as fundamentally triadic moti­
vated much that is unique in his philosophy. His insistence that every
interpretant is related to its object through the mediation of a sign
constitutes a denial of intuition; for intuition requires a direct dyadic
relation between an interpretant and its object— somehow we just
know something about an object (a person, a state of affairs, whatever)
without the intervention of a sign. There is no good reason to suppose
that we have such a faculty, as Peirce argued in the first paper of his
cognition series (item 2). (And yet, in a different sense, Peirce gives us
a compelling theory of intuition. With an appeal to abduction and to
his belief that we are attuned to nature through centuries of evolution­
ary development—so that we are actual embodiments of natural prin­
ciples— Peirce argues, following his father, that we have a natural
inclination to the truth, a tendency to guess correctly. But this is a
semiotic kind of intuition that bears the Peircean sign of the three.)
But how does an object determine its interpretant through the
mediation of a sign? According to Peirce, the dynamic object, the
really efficient but not immediately present object, is the object that
somehow determines the sign and through the sign mediately deter­
mines an interpretant. How can an object that is external to the sign
(the immediate object is the internal object) be a determining force in
shaping the interpretant? Notice that this amounts to asking how
objects (or the external world) can determine mind.
Every sign represents an object (in some way or other) to the inter­
pretant. The interpretant is, or helps make up, a habit that “ guides”
our future (and present) actions or thought with respect to the object
in question, or objects like the one in question. If the interpretant is
untrue to the object, our behavior will not be (or may not be) success­
ful— reality will have its way with us. Not until our interpretants (our
ideas or intellectual habits) are fully attuned to their objects will we

[page xl]

xl I Introduction
avoid unexpected confrontations with a resistant reality. In this way,
the real object determines or shapes our mind, our reservoir of intellec­
tual habits.
Does this make Peirce a semiotic realist? It would seem so. Not only
does the mind represent the world, it represents it in a certain way:
namely, the way it isforced to represent the world by the resistance of the world
to error. Surely this is a kind of realism. And it is also a semiotic account
of pragmatism which, as Christopher Hookway points out, “ is sup­
posed to explain how an independent reality can constrain our opin­
ions through perception.” 29
But this is not the whole story. Our perceptions themselves are, to
some extent, constrained by previous opinions, and our thoughts by
past thoughts, so that it cannot be said that the only determining factor
in our lives is a resistant external reality. There are many ways to live
in the world, and intellect does not constrain us to a single path. There
is far more to an intellect than the mere representation of external
objects: there are plans and purposes and ideals, all of which can be
infixed in intellectual habits that predetermine future behavior. And, of
course, future behavior will shape the world that is to come. What is
so interesting about Peirce’s views is that we as individuals, we as
humanity, have some measure of control over our intellectual habits.
We have a choice. We can deliberately, though with effort, change our
intellectual habits— which means that we can change our minds: and that
means that we have some measure of control over which of the many
possible futures will be ours. Perhaps this is semiotic idealism but, if
so, it is an idealism compatible with semiotic realism.
Peirce’s inclusion of the interpretant as fundamental in the sign
relation shows that all thought is to some degree a matter of interpreta­
tion. All advanced thought uses symbols of one kind or another, and
thus rests on convention. On Peirce’s view, then, all advanced thinking
depends on one’s participation in a linguistic or semiotic community.
Peirce’s stress on the importance of community was a common theme
throughout his work, and it increased as he came to understand more
fully the importance of convention for semiosis. Peirce appealed to a
community of inquirers for his theory of truth, and he regarded the
identification with community as fundamental for the advancement of
knowledge (the end of the highest semiosis) and, also, for the advance­
ment of human relations. Peirce’s semiotic theory of inquiry is some­
times regarded as a “ logical socialism,” a view supported by the follow­
ing provocative remark (in item 25):
Here, then, is the issue. The gospel of Christ says that progress comes from
every individual merging his individuality in sympathy with his neighbors.
29. Christopher Hookway, Peirce (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), p. 246.

[page xli]

Introduction I xli
On the other side, the conviction of the nineteenth century is that progress
takes place by virtue of every individual’s striving for himself with all his
might and trampling his neighbor under foot whenever he gets a chance to do
so. This may accurately be called the Gospel of Greed.
The sentiment expressed here is similar to that in Peirce’s statement
about the significance of the nominalism-realism question for life.
Clearly, his brand of realism is opposed not only to nominalism but
also to the “ gospel of greed” (or what is sometimes referred to as “ crass
materialism” ).
This has been, at best, a preliminary sketch of Peirce’s system of
thought and of some of the more characteristic of his philosophical
doctrines, and much has been left out. For example, there has been no
discussion of Peirce’s opposition to determinism (in item 22), or of the
intriguing story of his working his way to his guess at the riddle of the
universe that led him to his evolutionary cosmology.30 Little has been
said about his lifelong study of mathematics and his nearly lifelong
study and practice of experimental science, or of the importance of
these for his philosophy. His phenomenology and his theories of es­
thetics and ethics have barely been mentioned, even though they offer
unique and important insights and perspectives for current research,
and provide essential support for other parts of his system of thought.
His phenomenology has begun to attract widespread attention, and it
may turn out that his phenomenological derivation of his categories is
of more importance for philosophy than his mathematico-logical deri­
vation. Finally, some scholars might highlight the evolution of his very
profound religious views, which are often thought of as completing his
metaphysics. It can only be hoped that what has been said here is
enough to give a sense of the breadth and profundity—and unity— of
Peirce’s philosophical thought, and to inspire the reader to the some­
times difficult but always rewarding study of his writings.
Nathan Houser
30. For a brief rendition of this “ intriguing story,” see Fisch, “ Peirce’s Arisbe,” in
Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism, pp. 229-38.

[page 1]

1
On a New List of Categories
P 32: Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences 7 (1868)1287-98. [Also published in ¡¥2:49-59
(with thefour otherpapers in the so-called PAAAS Series and
with references to related manuscripts published in Wi) and
in CPi.545-59. Peirce completely rewrote thepaper to serve as
the opening chapter o f his 1894 “How to Reason ” (MS 403).]
Presented to the Academy on 14 May 1867, this paper is,
according to Peirce, “perhaps the least unsatisfactory,from a
logicalpoint ofview, that I ever succeeded in producing” and,
with item 3 below, one of his two “strongest philosophical
works. ” The culmination ofa ten-year effort and the keystone
of Peirce’s system o f philosophy, it argues for a new post-
Kantian set o fcategories (or univeral conceptions) by demon­
strating that they are requiredfor the unification of experi­
ence. Peirce’s argument is essentially a logical derivation,
though it depends on a type of mental separation he called
\prescision \ which is also requiredfor his laterphenomenolog­
ical derivation o f the categories.
§1. This paper is based upon the theory already established,1 that
the function of conceptions is to reduce the manifold of sensuous
impressions to unity, and that the validity of a conception consists in
the impossibility of reducing the content of consciousness to unity
without the introduction of it.
§2. This theory gives rise to a conception of gradation among those
conceptions which are universal. For one such conception may unite
the manifold of sense and yet another may be required to unite the
conception and the manifold to which it is applied; and so on.
§3. That universal conception which is nearest to sense is that of
the present, in general. This is a conception, because it is universal. But
as the act of attention has no connotation at all, but is the pure denota­
tive power of the mind, that is to say, the power which directs the
mind to an object, in contradistinction to the power of thinking any
predicate of that object,—so the conception of what ispresent in general,
which is nothing but the general recognition of what is contained in

[page 2]

2 I The Essential Peirce
attention, has no connotation, and therefore no proper unity. This
conception of the present in general, or i t in general, is rendered in
philosophical language by the word “ substance” in one of its mean­
ings. Before any comparison or discrimination can be made between
what is present, what is present must have been recognized as such,
as it, and subsequently the metaphysical parts which are recognized
by abstraction are attributed to this it, but the it cannot itself be made
a predicate. This it is thus neither predicated of a subject, nor in a
subject, and accordingly is identical with the conception of substance.
§4. The unity to which the understanding reduces impressions is
the unity of a proposition. This unity consists in the connection of the
predicate with the subject; and, therefore, that which is implied in the
copula, or the conception of being, is that which completes the work
of conceptions of reducing the manifold to unity. The copula (or
rather the verb which is copula in one of its senses) means either
actually is or would be, as in the two propositions, “ There is no griffin,”
and “ A griffin is a winged quadruped.” The conception of being con­
tains only that junction of predicate to subject wherein these two verbs
agree. The conception of being, therefore, plainly has no content.
If we say “ The stove is black,” the stove is the substance, from which
its blackness has not been differentiated, and the is, while it leaves the
substance just as it was seen, explains its confusedness, by the applica­
tion to it of blackness as a predicate.
Though being does not affect the subject, it implies an indefinite
determinability of the predicate. For if one could know the copula and
predicate of any proposition, as “ . . . is a tailed-man,” he would know
the predicate to be applicable to something supposable, at least. Ac­
cordingly, we have propositions whose subjects are entirely indefinite,
as “ There is a beautiful ellipse,” where the subject is merely something
actual or potential; but we have no propositions whose predicate is
entirely indeterminate, for it would be quite senseless to say, “A has
the common characters of all things,” inasmuch as there are no such
common characters.
Thus substance and being are the beginning and end of all concep­
tion. Substance is inapplicable to a predicate, and being is equally so
to a subject.
§5. The terms “ prescision” and “ abstraction,” which were formerly
applied to every kind of separation, are now limited, not merely to
mental separation, but to that which arises from attention to one ele­
ment and neglect of the other. Exclusive attention consists in a definite
conception or supposition of one part of an object, without any supposi­
tion of the other. Abstraction or prescision ought to be carefully distin­
guished from two other modes of mental separation, which may be
termed discrimination and dissociation. Discrimination has to do merely
with the essences of terms, and only draws a distinction in meaning.

[page 3]

On a New List o f Categories I 3
Dissociation is that separation which, in the absence of a constant
association, is permitted by the law of association of images. It is the
consciousness of one thing, without the necessary simultaneous con­
sciousness of the other. Abstraction or prescision, therefore, supposes
a greater separation than discrimination, but a less separation than
dissociation. Thus I can discriminate red from blue, space from color,
and color from space, but not red from color. I can prescind red from
blue, and space from color (as is manifest from the fact that I actually
believe there is an uncolored space between my face and the wall); but
I cannot prescind color from space, nor red from color. I can dissociate
red from blue, but not space from color, color from space, nor red from
color.
Prescision is not a reciprocal process. It is frequently the case, that,
while A cannot be prescinded from B, B can be prescinded from A.
This circumstance is accounted for as follows. Elementary concep­
tions only arise upon the occasion of experience; that is, they are
produced for the first time according to a general law, the condition
of which is the existence of certain impressions. N ow if a conception
does not reduce the impressions upon which it follows to unity, it is
a mere arbitrary addition to these latter; and elementary conceptions
do not arise thus arbitrarily. But if the impressions could be definitely
comprehended without the conception, this latter would not reduce
them to unity. Hence, the impressions (or more immediate concep­
tions) cannot be definitely conceived or attended to, to the neglect of
an elementary conception which reduces them to unity. On the other
hand, when such a conception has once been obtained, there is, in
general, no reason why the premises which have occasioned it should
not be neglected, and therefore the explaining conception may fre­
quently be prescinded from the more immediate ones and from the
impressions.
§6. The facts now collected afford the basis for a systematic method
of searching out whatever universal elementary conceptions there may
be intermediate between the manifold of substance and the unity of
being. It has been shown that the occasion of the introduction of a
universal elementary conception is either the reduction of the mani­
fold of substance to unity, or else the conjunction to substance of
another conception. And it has further been shown that the elements
conjoined cannot be supposed without the conception, whereas the
conception can generally be supposed without these elements. Now,
empirical psychology discovers the occasion of the introduction of a
conception, and we have only to ascertain what conception already lies
in the data which is united to that of substance by the first conception,
but which cannot be supposed without this first conception, to have
the next conception in order in passing from being to substance.
It may be noticed that, throughout this process, introspection is not

[page 4]

4 I The Essential Peirce
resorted to. Nothing is assumed respecting the subjective elements of
consciousness which cannot be securely inferred from the objective
elements.
§7. The conception of being arises upon the formation of a proposi­
tion. A proposition always has, besides a term to express the substance,
another to express the quality of that substance; and the function of
the conception of being is to unite the quality to the substance. Qual­
ity, therefore, in its very widest sense, is the first conception in order
in passing from being to substance.
Quality seems at first sight to be given in the impression. Such
results of introspection are untrustworthy. A proposition asserts the
applicability of a mediate conception to a more immediate one. Since
this is asserted, the more mediate conception is clearly regarded inde­
pendently of this circumstance, for otherwise the two conceptions
would not be distinguished, but one would be thought through the
other, without this latter being an object of thought, at all. The medi­
ate conception, then, in order to be asserted to be applicable to the
other, must first be considered without regard to this circumstance,
and taken immediately. But, taken immediately, it transcends what is
given (the more immediate conception), and its applicability to the
latter is hypothetical. Take, for example, the proposition, “ This stove
is black.” Here the conception of this stove is the more immediate, that
of black the more mediate, which latter, to be predicated of the former,
must be discriminated from it and considered in itself not as applied
to an object, but simply as embodying a quality, blackness. N ow this
blackness is a pure species or abstraction, and its application to this stove
is entirely hypothetical. The same thing is meant by “ the stove is
black,” as by “ there is blackness in the stove.” Embodying blackness is
the equivalent of black. * The proof is this. These conceptions are
applied indifferently to precisely the same facts. If, therefore, they
were different, the one which was first applied would fulfil every
function of the other; so that one of them would be superfluous. Now
a superfluous conception is an arbitrary fiction, whereas elementary
conceptions arise only upon the requirement of experience; so that a
superfluous elementary conception is impossible. Moreover, the con­
ception of a pure abstraction is indispensible, because we cannot com­
prehend an agreement of two things, except as an agreement in some
respect, and this respect is such a pure abstraction as blackness. Such
a pure abstraction, reference to which constitutes a quality or general
attribute, may be termed a ground.
Reference to a ground cannot be prescinded from being, but being
can be prescinded from it.
*This agrees with the author of De Generibus et Speciebus, Ouvrages Inédits d'Abélard
[Paris, 1836], p. 528.

[page 5]

On a New List of Categories I 5
§8. Empirical psychology has established the fact that we can know
a quality only by means of its contrast with or similarity to another.2
By contrast and agreement a thing is referred to a correlate, if this term
may be used in a wider sense than usual. The occasion of the introduc­
tion of the conception of reference to a ground is the reference to a
correlate, and this is, therefore, the next conception in order.
Reference to a correlate cannot be prescinded from reference to a
ground; but reference to a ground may be prescinded from reference
to a correlate.
§9. The occasion of reference to a correlate is obviously by compari­
son. This act has not been sufficiently studied by the psychologists, and
it will, therefore, be necessary to adduce some examples to show in
what it consists. Suppose we wish to compare the letters p and b. We
may imagine one of them to be turned over on the line of writing as
an axis, then laid upon the other, and finally to become transparent so
that the other can be seen through it. In this way we shall form a new
image which mediates between the images of the two letters, inasmuch
as it represents one of them to be (when turned over) the likeness of
the other. Again, suppose we think of a murderer as being in relation
to a murdered person; in this case we conceive the act of the murder,
and in this conception it is represented that corresponding to every
murderer (as well as to every murder) there is a murdered person; and
thus we resort again to a mediating representation which represents
the relate as standing for a correlate with which the mediating repre­
sentation is itself in relation. Again, suppose we look out the word
homme in a French dictionary; we shall find opposite to it the word
man, which, so placed, represents homme as representing the same
two-legged creature which man itself represents. By a further accumu­
lation of instances, it would be found that every comparison requires,
besides the related thing, the ground, and the correlate, also a mediating
representation which represents the relate to be a representation o f the same
correlate which this mediating representation itselfrepresents. Such a mediat­
ing representation may be termed an interpretant, because it fulfils the
office of an interpreter, who says that a foreigner says the same thing
which he himself says. The term “ representation” is here to be under­
stood in a very extended sense, which can be explained by instances
better than by a definition. In this sense, a word represents a thing to
the conception in the mind of the hearer, a portrait represents the
person for whom it is intended to the conception of recognition, a
weathercock represents the direction of the wind to the conception of
him who understands it, a barrister represents his client to the judge
and jury whom he influences.
Every reference to a correlate, then, conjoins to the substance the
conception of a reference to an interpretant; and this is, therefore, the
next conception in order in passing from being to substance.

[page 6]

6 I The Essential Peirce
Reference to an interprétant cannot be prescinded from reference
to a correlate; but the latter can be prescinded from the former.
§10. Reference to an interprétant is rendered possible and justified
by that which renders possible and justifies comparison. But that is
clearly the diversity of impressions. If we had but one impression, it
would not require to be reduced to unity, and would therefore not
need to be thought of as referred to an interprétant, and the conception
of reference to an interprétant would not arise. But since there is a
manifold of impressions, we have a feeling of complication or confu­
sion, which leads us to differentiate this impression from that, and
then, having been differentiated, they require to be brought to unity.
N ow they are not brought to unity until we conceive them together
as being ours, that is, until we refer them to a conception as their
interprétant. Thus, the reference to an interprétant arises upon the
holding together of diverse impressions, and therefore it does not join
a conception to the substance, as the other two references do, but
unites directly the manifold of the substance itself. It is, therefore, the
last conception in order in passing from being to substance.
§11. The five conceptions thus obtained, for reasons which will be
sufficiently obvious, may be termed categories. That is,
B E IN G ,
Quality (Reference to a Ground),
Relation (Reference to a Correlate),
Representation (Reference to an Interprétant),
SU B S T A N C E .
The three intermediate conceptions may be termed accidents.
§12. This passage from the many to the one is numerical. The
conception of a third is that of an object which is so related to two
others, that one of these must be related to the other in the same way
in which the third is related to that other. N ow this coincides with the
conception of an interprétant. An other is plainly equivalent to a corre­
late. The conception of second differs from that of other, in implying
the possibility of a third. In the same way, the conception of self
implies the possibility of an other. The Ground is the self abstracted
from the concreteness which implies the possibility of an other.
§13. Since no one of the categories can be prescinded from those
above it, the list of supposable objects which they afford is,
What is.
Quale— that which refers to a ground,
Relate—that which refers to ground and correlate,
Representamen—that which refers to ground, correlate,
and interprétant.
It.

[page 7]

§14. A quality may have a special determination which prevents its
being prescinded from reference to a correlate. Hence there are two
kinds of relation.
1st. That of relates whose reference to a ground is a prescindible or
internal quality.
2d. That of relates whose reference to a ground is an unprescindible
or relative quality.
In the former case, the relation is a mere concurrence of the corre­
lates in one character, and the relate and correlate are not distin­
guished. In the latter case the correlate is set over against the relate,
and there is in some sense an opposition.
Relates of the first kind are brought into relation simply by their
agreement. But mere disagreement (unrecognized) does not constitute
relation, and therefore relates of the second kind are only brought into
relation by correspondence in fact.
A reference to a ground may also be such that it cannot be pre­
scinded from a reference to an interpretant. In this case it may be
termed an imputed quality. If the reference of a relate to its ground can
be prescinded from reference to an interpretant, its relation to its
correlate is a mere concurrence or community in the possession of a
quality, and therefore the reference to a correlate can be prescinded
from reference to an interpretant. It follows that there are three kinds
of representations.
1st. Those whose relation to their objects is a mere community in
some quality, and these representations may be termed Likenesses.
2d. Those whose relation to their objects consists in a correspon­
dence in fact, and these may be termed Indices or Signs.
3d. Those the ground of whose relation to their objects is an im­
puted character, which are the same as general signs, and these may be
termed Symbols.
§15. I shall now show how the three conceptions of reference to a
ground, reference to an object, and reference to an interpretant are the
fundamental ones of at least one universal science, that of logic. Logic
is said to treat of second intentions as applied to first. It would lead me
too far away from the matter in hand to discuss the truth of this
statement; I shall simply adopt it as one which seems to me to afford
a good definition of the subject-genus of this science. Now, second
intentions are the objects of the understanding considered as represen­
tations, and the first intentions to which they apply are the objects of
those representations. The objects of the understanding, considered as
representations, are symbols, that is, signs which are at least poten­
tially general. But the rules of logic hold good of any symbols, of those
which are written or spoken as well as of those which are thought.
They have no immediate application to likenesses or indices, because
no arguments can be constructed of these alone, but do apply to ail
On a New List of Categories I 7

[page 8]

8 I The Essential Peirce
symbols. All symbols, indeed, are in one sense relative to the under­
standing, but only in the sense in which also all things are relative to
the understanding. On this account, therefore, the relation to the
understanding need not be expressed in the definition of the sphere of
logic, since it determines no limitation of that sphere. But a distinction
can be made between concepts which are supposed to have no exis­
tence except so far as they are actually present to the understanding,
and external symbols which still retain their character of symbols so
long as they are only capable of being understood. And as the rules of
logic apply to these latter as much as to the former (and though only
through the former, yet this character, since it belongs to all things,
is no limitation), it follows that logic has for its subject-genus all
symbols and not merely concepts.* We come, therefore, to this, that
logic treats of the reference of symbols in general to their objects. In
this view it is one of a trivium of conceivable sciences. The first would
treat of the formal conditions of symbols having meaning, that is of the
reference of symbols in general to their grounds or imputed charac­
ters, and this might be called formal grammar; the second, logic, would
treat of the formal conditions of the truth of symbols; and the third
would treat of the formal conditions of the force of symbols, or their
power of appealing to a mind, that is, of their reference in general to
interpretants, and this might be called formal rhetoric.
There would be a general division of symbols, common to all these
sciences; namely, into,
i°: Symbols which directly determine only their grounds or imputed
qualities, and are thus but sums of marks or terms;
2°: Symbols which also independently determine their objects by
means of other term or terms, and thus, expressing their own objective
validity, become capable of truth or falsehood, that is, are proposi­
tions; and,
3°: Symbols which also independently determine their interpretants,
and thus the minds to which they appeal, by premising a proposition
or propositions which such a mind is to admit. These are arguments.
And it is remarkable that, among all the definitions of the proposi­
tion, for example, as the oratio indicativa, as the subsumption of an
object under a concept, as the expression of the relation of two con­
cepts, and as the indication of the mutable ground of appearance, there
is, perhaps, not one in which the conception of reference to an object
*Herbart says: “ Unsre sämmtlichen Gedanken lassen sich von zwei Seiten be­
trachten; theils als Thätigkeiten unseres Geistes, theils in Hinsicht dessen, was durch
sie gedacht wird. In letzterer Beziehung heissen sie Begriffe, welches Wort, indem es das
Begriffene bezeichnet, zu abstrahiren gebietet von der Art und Weise, wie wir den
Gedanken empfangen, produciren, oder reproduciren mögen.” But the whole difference
between a concept and an external sign lies in these respects which logic ought, accord­
ing to Herbart, to abstract from.3

[page 9]

or correlate is not the important one. In the same way, the conception
of reference to an interprétant or third, is always prominent in the
definitions of argument.
In a proposition, the term which separately indicates the object of
the symbol is termed the subject, and that which indicates the ground
is termed the predicate. The objects indicated by the subject (which are
always potentially a plurality,— at least, of phases or appearances) are
therefore stated by the proposition to be related to one another on the
ground of the character indicated by the predicate. N ow this relation
may be either a concurrence or an opposition. Propositions of concur­
rence are those which are usually considered in logic; but I have shown
in a paper upon the classification of arguments that it is also necessary
to consider separately propositions of opposition, if we are to take
account of such arguments as the following:—
Whatever is the half of anything is less than that of which it is the
half;
A is half of B:
.'.A is less than B.
The subject of such a proposition is separated into two terms, a
“ subject nominative” and an “ object accusative.”
In an argument, the premises form a representation of the conclu­
sion, because they indicate the interprétant of the argument, or repre­
sentation representing it to represent its object. The premises may
afford a likeness, index, or symbol of the conclusion. In deductive
argument, the conclusion is represented by the premises as by a gen­
eral sign under which it is contained. In hypotheses, som ething//^ the
conclusion is proved, that is, the premises form a likeness of the con­
clusion. Take, for example, the following argument:—
M is, for instance, P \ P ", P"’, and P iy;
S is P \ P", P"\ and P iv:
/. 5 is M.
Here the first premise amounts to this, that “P', P " , P"', and P 1V”
is a likeness of M , and thus the premises are or represent a likeness of
the conclusion. That it is different with induction another example
will show.
S', S '\ S ”\ and S iV are taken as samples of the collection M;
S ’, S \ S ’\ and S iv are P:
All M is P.
Hence the first premise amounts to saying that “S \ S ", S"', and S 1V”
is an index of M. Hence the premises are an index of the conclusion.
The other divisions of terms, propositions, and arguments arise
from the distinction of extension and comprehension. I propose to
On a New List o f Categories I 9

[page 10]

10 I The Essential Peirce
treat this subject in a subsequent paper.4 But I will so far anticipate
that, as to say that there is, first, the direct reference of a symbol to its
objects, or its denotation; second, the reference of the symbol to its
ground, through its object, that is, its reference to the common charac­
ters of its objects, or its connotation; and third, its reference to its
interpretants through its object, that is, its reference to all the syntheti­
cal propositions in which its objects in common are subject or predi­
cate, and this I term the information it embodies. And as every addi­
tion to what it denotes, or to what it connotes, is effected by means of
a distinct proposition of this kind, it follows that the extension and
comprehension of a term are in an inverse relation, as long as the
information remains the same, and that every increase of information
is accompanied by an increase of one or other of these two quantities.
It may be observed that extension and comprehension are very often
taken in other senses in which this last proposition is not true.
This is an imperfect view of the application which the conceptions
which, according to our analysis, are the most fundamental ones find
in the sphere of logic. It is believed, however, that it is sufficient to
show that at least something may be usefully suggested by considering
this science in this light.

[page 11]

2
Questions Concerning Certain
Faculties Claimedfor Man
P 26: Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2 (1868)1103-14.
[Also published in W21193-2n (with related letters and earlier
attempts at this article and the two thatfollow) and in CP
5.213-63.] Item 2 is thefirst o f three articles usually referred
to as the JS P Cognition Series, in which Peirce develops some
of the results and consequences o f item 1 and attempts “to
prove and to trace the consequences o f certain propositions in
epistemology tending toward the recognition of the reality of
continuity and o fgenerality and going to show the absurdity
of individualism and of egoism. ” (In “ The Law o f Mind ”
[item 23], he indicates that this is an early attempt at develop­
ing his doctrine o f synechism.) Peirce’s opposition to Carte-
sianism results in thefollowingfour denials: (1) we have no
power o f introspection, but all knowledge of the internal
world is derived by hypothetical reasoningfrom our knowl-
edge o f externalfacts, (2) we have no power of intuition, but
every cognition is determined logically by previous cogni­
tions, (3) we have no power o f thinking without signs, and
(4) we have no conception of the absolutely incognizable.
Q u e s t i o n i. Whether by the simple contemplation of a cognition, indepen­
dently o f any previous knowledge and without reasoning from signs, we are
enabled rightly to judge whether that cognition has been determined by a
previous cognition or whether it refers immediately to its object.
Throughout this paper, the term intuition will be taken as signify­
ing a cognition not determined by a previous cognition of the same
object, and therefore so determined by something out of the conscious­
ness.* Let me request the reader to note this. Intuition here will be
*The word intuitus first occurs as a technical term in St. Anselm’s Monologium. He
wished to distinguish between our knowledge of God and our knowledge of finite things
(and, in the next world, of God, also); and thinking of the saying of St. Paul, Videmus
nunc per speculum in aenigmate: tunc autemfacie adfaciem, he called the former speculation
and the latter intuition.1 This use of “ speculation” did not take root, because that word

[page 12]

12 I The Essential Peirce
nearly the same as “ premise not itself a conclusion” ; the only differ­
ence being that premises and conclusions are judgments, whereas an
intuition may, as far as its definition states, be any kind of cognition
whatever. But just as a conclusion (good or bad) is determined in the
mind of the reasoner by its premise, so cognitions not judgments may
be determined by previous cognitions; and a cognition not so deter­
mined, and therefore determined directly by the transcendental ob­
ject, is to be termed an intuition.
Now, it is plainly one thing to have an intuition and another to
know intuitively that it is an intuition, and the question is whether
these two things, distinguishable in thought, are, in fact, invariably
connected, so that we can always intuitively distinguish between an
intuition and a cognition determined by another. Every cognition, as
something present, is, of course, an intuition of itself. But the determi­
nation of a cognition by another cognition or by a transcendental
object is not, at least so far as appears obviously at first, a part of the
immediate content of that cognition, although it would appear to be
an element of the action or passion of the transcendental ego, which
is not, perhaps, in consciousness immediately; and yet this transcen­
dental action or passion may invariably determine a cognition of itself,
so that, in fact, the determination or non-determination of the cogni­
tion by another may be a part of the cognition. In this case, I should
say that we had an intuitive power of distinguishing an intuition from
another cognition.
There is no evidence that we have this faculty, except that we seem
to feel that we have it. But the weight of that testimony depends
entirely on our being supposed to have the power of distinguishing in
this feeling whether the feeling be the result of education, old associa­
tions, etc., or whether it is an intuitive cognition; or, in other words,
it depends on presupposing the very matter testified to. Is this feeling
infallible? And is this judgment concerning it infallible and so on, ad
infinitum? Supposing that a man really could shut himself up in such
a faith, he would be, of course, impervious to the truth, “ evidence-
proof.”
But let us compare the theory with the historic facts. The power
already had another exact and widely different meaning. In the middle ages, the term
“ intuitive cognition” had two principal senses, ist, as opposed to abstractive cognition,
it meant the knowledge of the present as present, and this is its meaning in Anselm; but
2d, as no intuitive cognition was allowed to be determined by a previous cognition, it
came to be used as the opposite of discursive cognition (see Scotus, In sententias, lib. 2,
dist. 3, qu. 9), and this is nearly the sense in which I employ it. This is also nearly the
sense in which Kant uses it, the former distinction being expressed by his sensuous and
non-sensuous. (See Werke, herausg. Rosenkrantz, Thl. 2, S. 713, 31, 41, 100, u. s. w.) An
enumeration of six meanings of intuition may be found in Hamilton’s Reid, p. 759.

[page 13]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man I 13
of intuitively distinguishing intuitions from other cognitions has not
prevented men from disputing very warm ly as to which cognitions are
intuitive. In the middle ages, reason and external authority were re­
garded as two coordinate sources of knowledge, just as reason and the
authority of intuition are now; only the happy device of considering
the enunciations of authority to be essentially indemonstrable had not
yet been hit upon. All authorities were not considered as infallible, any
more than all reasons; but when Berengarius said that the authorita­
tiveness of any particular authority must rest upon reason, the propo­
sition was scouted as opinionated, impious, and absurd. Thus, the
credibility of authority was regarded by men of that time simply as an
ultimate premise, as a cognition not determined by a previous cogni­
tion of the same object, or, in our terms, as an intuition. It is strange
that they should have thought so, if, as the theory now under discus­
sion supposes, by merely contemplating the credibility of the author­
ity, as a Fakir does his God, they could have seen that it was not an
ultimate premise! Now, what if our internal authority should meet the
same fate, in the history of opinions, as that external authority has met?
Can that be said to be absolutely certain which many sane, well-
informed, and thoughtful men already doubt?*
Every lawyer knows how difficult it is for witnesses to distinguish
between what they have seen and what they have inferred. This is
*The proposition of Berengarius is contained in the following quotation from his
De Sacra Coena: “Maximi plane cordis est, per omnia ad dialecticam confugere, quia confugere ad
earn ad rationem est confugere, quo qui non confugity cum secundum rationem sit factus ad
imaginem dei, suum honorem reliquit, necpotest renovari de die in diem ad imaginem dei. ” 2 The
most striking characteristic of medieval reasoning, in general, is the perpetual resort to
authority. When Fredegisus3 and others wish to prove that darkness is a thing, although
they have evidently derived the opinion from nominalistic-Platonistic meditations, they
argue the matter thus: “ God called the darkness, night” ; then, certainly, it is a thing,
for otherwise before it had a name, there would have been nothing, not even a fiction
to name. Abelard thinks it worth while to cite Boethius, when he says that space has
three dimensions, and when he says that an individual cannot be in two places at once.4
The author of De Generibus et Speciebus, a work of a superior order, in arguing against
a Platonic doctrine, says that if whatever is universal is eternal, the form and matter of
Socrates, being severally universal, are both eternal, and that, therefore, Socrates was
not created by God, but only put together, uquod quantum a vero deviet, palam est. ” The
authority is the final court of appeal. The same author, where in one place he doubts
a statement of Boethius, finds it necessary to assign a special reason why in this case it
is not absurd to do so. Exceptio probat regulam in casibus non exceptis.5 Recognized authori­
ties were certainly sometimes disputed in the twelfth century; their mutual contradic­
tions insured that; and the authority of philosophers was regarded as inferior to that of
theologians. Still, it would be impossible to find a passage where the authority of
Aristotle is directly denied upon any logical question. “Sunt et multi errores eius, ” says
John of Salisbury, “qui in scripturis tam Ethnicis, quamfidelibus poterunt inveniri: verum in
logica parem habuisse non legitur. ” 6 “Sed nihil adversus Aristotelem, ” says Abelard, and in
another place, “Sed si Aristotelem Peripateticorum principem culpare possumus, quam amplius
in hac arte recepimus?”1 The idea of going without an authority, or of subordinating
authority to reason, does not occur to him.

[page 14]

14 I The Essential Peirce
particularly noticeable in the case of a person who is describing the
performances of a spiritual medium or of a professed juggler. The
difficulty is so great that the juggler himself is often astonished at the
discrepancy between the actual facts and the statement of an intelli­
gent witness who has not understood the trick. A part of the very
complicated trick of the Chinese rings consists in taking two solid
rings linked together, talking about them as though they were sepa­
rate— taking it for granted, as it were—then pretending to put them
together, and handing them immediately to the spectator that he may
see that they are solid. The art of this consists in raising, at first, the
strong suspicion that one is broken. I have seen M cAlister8do this with
such success, that a person sitting close to him, with all his faculties
straining to detect the illusion, would have been ready to swear that
he saw the rings put together, and, perhaps, if the juggler had not
professedly practised deception, would have considered a doubt of it
as a doubt of his own veracity. This certainly seems to show that it is
not always very easy to distinguish between a premise and a conclu­
sion, that we have no infallible power of doing so, and that in fact our
only security in difficult cases is in some signs from which we can infer
that a given fact must have been seen or must have been inferred. In
trying to give an account of a dream, every accurate person must often
have felt that it was a hopeless undertaking to attempt to disentangle
waking interpretations and fillings out from the fragmentary images
of the dream itself.
The mention of dreams suggests another argument. A dream, as far
as its own content goes, is exactly like an actual experience. It is
mistaken for one. And yet all the world believes that dreams are
determined, according to the laws of the association of ideas, &c., by
previous cognitions. If it be said that the faculty of intuitively recog­
nizing intuitions is asleep, I reply that this is a mere supposition,
without other support. Besides, even when we wake up, we do not find
that the dream differed from reality, except by certain marks, darkness
and fragmentariness. Not unfrequently a dream is so vivid that the
memory of it is mistaken for the memory of an actual occurrence.
A child has, as far as we know, all the perceptive powers of a man.
Yet question him a little as to how he knows what he does. In many
cases, he will tell you that he never learned his mother-tongue; he
always knew it, or he knew it as soon as he came to have sense. It
appears, then, that he does not possess the faculty of distinguishing, by
simple contemplation, between an intuition and a cognition deter­
mined by others.
There can be no doubt that before the publication of Berkeley’s
book on Vision,9 it had generally been believed that the third dimen­
sion of space was immediately intuited, although, at present, nearly all
admit that it is known by inference. We had been contemplating the

[page 15]

object since the very creation of man, but this discovery was not made
until we began to reason about it.
Does the reader know of the blind spot on the retina? Take a
number of this journal, turn over the cover so as to expose the white
paper, lay it sideways upon the table before which you must sit, and
put two cents upon it, one near the left-hand edge, and the other to
the right. Put your left hand over your left eye, and with the right eye
look steadily at the left-hand cent. Then, with your right hand, move
the right-hand cent (which is now plainly seen) towards the left hand.
When it comes to a place near the middle of the page it will disap­
pear— you cannot see it without turning your eye. Bring it nearer to
the other cent, or carry it further away, and it will reappear; but at that
particular spot it cannot be seen. Thus it appears that there is a blind
spot nearly in the middle of the retina; and this is confirmed by anat­
omy. It follows that the space we immediately see (when one eye is
closed) is not, as we had imagined, a continuous oval, but is a ring, the
filling up of which must be the work of the intellect. What more
striking example could be desired of the impossibility of distinguish­
ing intellectual results from intuitional data, by mere contemplation?
A man can distinguish different textures of cloth by feeling; but not
immediately, for he requires to move his fingers over the cloth, which
shows that he is obliged to compare the sensations of one instant with
those of another.
The pitch of a tone depends upon the rapidity of the succession of
the vibrations which reach the ear. Each of those vibrations produces
an impulse upon the ear. Let a single such impulse be made upon the
ear, and we know, experimentally, that it is perceived. There is, there­
fore, good reason to believe that each of the impulses forming a tone
is perceived. N or is there any reason to the contrary. So that this is the
only admissible supposition. Therefore, the pitch of a tone depends
upon the rapidity with which certain impressions are successively
conveyed to the mind. These impressions must exist previously to any
tone; hence, the sensation of pitch is determined by previous cogni­
tions. Nevertheless, this would never have been discovered by the
mere contemplation of that feeling.
A similar argument may be urged in reference to the perception
of two dimensions of space. This appears to be an immediate intuition.
But if we were to see immediately an extended surface, our retinas
must be spread out in an extended surface. Instead of that, the retina
consists of innumerable needles pointing towards the light, and whose
distances from one another are decidedly greater than the minimum
visibile. 10 Suppose each of those nerve-points conveys the sensation of
a little colored surface. Still, what we immediately see must even then
be, not a continuous surface, but a collection of spots. Who could
discover this by mere intuition? But all the analogies of the nervous
Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man I 15

[page 16]

16 I The Essential Peirce
system are against the supposition that the excitation of a single nerve
can produce an idea as complicated as that of a space, however small.
If the excitation of no one of these nerve-points can immediately
convey the impression of space, the excitation of all cannot do so. For,
the excitation of each produces some impression (according to the
analogies of the nervous system), hence, the sum of these impressions
is a necessary condition of any perception produced by the excitation
of all; or, in other terms, a perception produced by the excitation of
all is determined by the mental impressions produced by the excitation
of every one. This argument is confirmed by the fact that the existence
of the perception of space can be fully accounted for by the action of
faculties known to exist, without supposing it to be an immediate
impression. For this purpose, we must bear in mind the following facts
of physio-psychology: i. The excitation of a nerve does not of itself
inform us where the extremity of it is situated. If, by a surgical opera­
tion, certain nerves are displaced, our sensations from those nerves do
not inform us of the displacement. 2. A single sensation does not
inform us how many nerves or nerve-points are excited. 3. We can
distinguish between the impressions produced by the excitations of
different nerve-points. 4. The differences of impressions produced by
different excitations of similar nerve-points are similar. Let a momen­
tary image be made upon the retina. By No. 2, the impression thereby
produced will be indistinguishable from what might be produced by
the excitation of some conceivable single nerve. It is not conceivable
that the momentary excitation of a single nerve should give the sensa­
tion of space. Therefore, the momentary excitation of all the nerve-
points of the retina cannot, immediately or mediately, produce the
sensation of space. The same argument would apply to any unchang­
ing image on the retina. Suppose, however, that the image moves over
the retina. Then the peculiar excitation which at one instant affects
one nerve-point, at a later instant will affect another. These will con­
vey impressions which are very similar by 4, and yet which are distin­
guishable by 3. Hence, the conditions for the recognition of a relation
between these impressions are present. There being, however, a very
great number of nerve-points affected by a very great number of suc­
cessive excitations, the relations of the resulting impressions will be
almost inconceivably complicated. N ow, it is a known law of mind,
that when phenomena of an extreme complexity are presented, which
yet would be reduced to order or mediate simplicity by the application
of a certain conception, that conception sooner or later arises in appli­
cation to those phenomena. In the case under consideration, the con­
ception of extension would reduce the phenomena to unity, and, there­
fore, its genesis is fully accounted for. It remains only to explain why
the previous cognitions which determine it are not more clearly appre­
hended. For this explanation, I shall refer to a paper upon a new list

[page 17]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed fo r Man I 17
of categories, §5,* merely adding that just as we are able to recognize
our friends by certain appearances, although we cannot possibly say
what those appearances are and are quite unconscious of any process
of reasoning, so in any case when the reasoning is easy and natural to
us, however complex may be the premises, they sink into insignifi­
cance and oblivion proportionately to the satisfactoriness of the theory
based upon them. This theory of space is confirmed by the circum­
stance that an exactly similar theory is imperatively demanded by the
facts in reference to time. That the course of time should be immedi­
ately felt is obviously impossible. For, in that case, there must be an
element of this feeling at each instant. But in an instant there is no
duration and hence no immediate feeling of duration. Hence, no one
of these elementary feelings is an immediate feeling of duration; and,
hence the sum of all is not. On the other hand, the impressions of any
moment are very complicated,— containing all the images (or the ele­
ments of the images) of sense and memory, which complexity is reduc­
ible to mediate simplicity by means of the conception of time.t
*Proceedings of the American Academy, May 14, 1867. [Item 1 above, pp. 1-10.]
tThe above theory of space and time does not conflict with that of Kant so much
as it appears to do. They are in fact the solutions of different questions. Kant, it is true,
makes space and time intuitions, or rather forms of intuition, but it is not essential to
his theory that intuition should mean more than “ individual representation.” The
apprehension of space and time results, according to him, from a mental process,— the
“ Synthesis der Apprehension in der Anschauung.” (See Critik d. reinen Vernunft. Ed. 1781,
pp. 98 et seq.) M y theory is merely an account of this synthesis.
The gist of Kant’s “ Transcendental ^Esthetic” is contained in two principles. First,
that universal and necessary propositions are not given in experience. Second, that
universal and necessary facts are determined by the conditions of experience in general.
By a universal proposition is meant merely, one which asserts something of all of a
sphere,— not necessarily one which all men believe. By a necessary proposition, is meant
one which asserts what it does, not merely of the actual condition of things, but of every
possible state of things; it is not meant that the proposition is one which we cannot help
believing. Experience, in Kant’s first principle, cannot be used for a product of the
objective understanding, but must be taken for the first impressions of sense with
consciousness conjoined and worked up by the imagination into images, together with
all which is logically deducible therefrom. In this sense, it may be admitted that univer­
sal and necessary propositions are not given in experience. But, in that case, neither are
any inductive conclusions which might be drawn from experience, given in it. In fact,
it is the peculiar function of induction to produce universal and necessary propositions.
Kant points out, indeed, that the universality and necessity of scientific inductions are
but the analogues of philosophic universality and necessity; and this is true, in so far
as it is never allowable to accept a scientific conclusion without a certain indefinite
drawback. But this is owing to the insufficiency in the number of the instances; and
whenever instances may be had in as large numbers as we please, ad infinitum, a truly
universal and necessary proposition is inferable. As for Kant’s second principle, that the
truth of universal and necessary propositions is dependent upon the conditions of the
general experience, it is no more nor less than the principle of Induction. I go to a fair
and draw from the “ grab-bag” twelve packages. Upon opening them, I find that every
one contains a red ball. Here is a universal fact. It depends, then, on the condition of
the experience. What is the condition of the experience? It is solely that the balls are
the contents of packages drawn from that bag, that is, the only thing which determined
the experience, was the drawing from the bag. I infer, then, according to the principle

[page 18]

18 I The Essential Peirce
We have, therefore, a variety of facts, all of which are most readily
explained on the supposition that we have no intuitive faculty of
distinguishing intuitive from mediate cognitions. Some arbitrary hy­
pothesis may otherwise explain any one of these facts; this is the only
theory which brings them to support one another. Moreover, no facts
require the supposition of the faculty in question. Whoever has studied
the nature of proof will see, then, that there are here very strong
reasons for disbelieving the existence of this faculty. These will
become still stronger when the consequences of rejecting it have, in
this paper and in a following one, been more fully traced out.
Q u e s t io n 2. Whether we have an intuitive self-consciousness.
Self-consciousness, as the term is here used, is to be distinguished
both from consciousness generally, from the internal sense, and from
pure apperception. Any cognition is a consciousness of the object as
represented; by self-consciousness is meant a knowledge of ourselves.
Not a mere feeling of subjective conditions of consciousness, but of our
personal selves. Pure apperception is the self-assertion of t h e ego; the
self-consciousness here meant is the recognition of my private self. I
know that / (not merely the I) exist. The question is, how do I know
it; by a special intuitive faculty, or is it determined by previous cogni­
tions?
Now, it is not self-evident that we have such an intuitive faculty,
for it has just been shown that we have no intuitive power of distin­
guishing an intuition from a cognition determined by others. There­
fore, the existence or non-existence of this power is to be determined
upon evidence, and the question is whether self-consciousness can be
explained by the action of known faculties under conditions known to
exist, or whether it is necessary to suppose an unknown cause for this
cognition, and, in the latter case, whether an intuitive faculty of self-
consciousness is the most probable cause which can be supposed.
It is first to be observed that there is no known self-consciousness
to be accounted for in extremely young children. It has already been
pointed out by Kant* that the late use of the very common word “ I”
with children indicates an imperfect self-consciousness in them, and
that, therefore, so far as it is admissible for us to draw any conclusion
of Kant, that what is drawn from the bag will contain a red ball. This is induction. Apply
induction not to any limited experience but to all human experience and you have the
Kantian philosophy, so far as it is correctly developed.
Kant’s successors, however, have not been content with his doctrine. Nor ought
they to have been. For, there is this third principle: “ Absolutely universal propositions
must be analytic.” For whatever is absolutely universal is devoid of all content or
determination, for all determination is by negation. The problem, therefore, is not how
universal propositions can be synthetical, but how universal propositions appearing to
be synthetical can be evolved by thought alone from the purely indeterminate.
*Werke, vii (2), 11.

[page 19]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man I 19
in regard to the mental state of those who are still younger, it must be
against the existence of any self-consciousness in them.
On the other hand, children manifest powers of thought much
earlier. Indeed, it is almost impossible to assign a period at which
children do not already exhibit decided intellectual activity in direc­
tions in which thought is indispensable to their well-being. The com­
plicated trigonometry of vision, and the delicate adjustments of coor­
dinated movement, are plainly mastered very early. There is no reason
to question a similar degree of thought in reference to themselves.
A very young child may always be observed to watch its own body
with great attention. There is every reason why this should be so, for
from the child’s point of view this body is the most important thing
in the universe. Only what it touches has any actual and present
feeling; only what it faces has any actual color; only what is on its
tongue has any actual taste.
N o one questions that, when a sound is heard by a child, he thinks,
not of himself as hearing, but of the bell or other object as sounding.
How when he wills to move a table? Does he then think of himself as
desiring, or only of the table as fit to be moved? That he has the latter
thought, is beyond question; that he has the former, must, until the
existence of an intuitive self-consciousness is proved, remain an arbi­
trary and baseless supposition. There is no good reason for thinking
that he is less ignorant of his own peculiar condition than the angry
adult who denies that he is in a passion.
The child, however, must soon discover by observation that things
which are thus fit to be changed are apt actually to undergo this
change, after a contact with that peculiarly important body called
W illy or Johnny. This consideration makes this body still more impor­
tant and central, since it establishes a connection between the fitness
of a thing to be changed and a tendency in this body to touch it before
it is changed.
The child learns to understand the language; that is to say, a con­
nection between certain sounds and certain facts becomes established
in his mind. He has previously noticed the connection between these
sounds and the motions of the lips of bodies somewhat similar to the
central one, and has tried the experiment of putting his hand on those
lips and has found the sound in that case to be smothered. He thus
connects that language with bodies somewhat similar to the central
one. By efforts, so unenergetic that they should be called rather in­
stinctive, perhaps, than tentative, he learns to produce those sounds.
So he begins to converse.
It must be about this time that he begins to find that what these
people about him say is the very best evidence of fact. So much so, that
testimony is even a stronger mark of fact than thefacts themselves, or
rather than what must now be thought of as the appearances themselves.

[page 20]

20 I The Essential Peirce
(I may remark, by the way, that this remains so through life; testimony
will convince a man that he himself is mad.) A child hears it said that
the stove is hot. But it is not, he says; and, indeed, that central body
is not touching it, and only what that touches is hot or cold. But he
touches it, and finds the testimony confirmed in a striking way. Thus,
he becomes aware of ignorance, and it is necessary to suppose a self in
which this ignorance can inhere. So testimony gives the first dawning
of self-consciousness.
But, further, although usually appearances are either only con­
firmed or merely supplemented by testimony, yet there is a certain
remarkable class of appearances which are continually contradicted by
testimony. These are those predicates which we know to be emotional,
but which he distinguishes by their connection with the movements
of that central person, himself (that the table wants moving, etc.).
These judgments are generally denied by others. Moreover, he has
reason to think that others, also, have such judgments which are quite
denied by all the rest. Thus, he adds to the conception of appearance
as the actualization of fact, the conception of it as something private
and valid only for one body. In short, error appears, and it can be
explained only by supposing a self which is fallible.
Ignorance and error are all that distinguish our private selves from
the absolute ego of pure apperception.
N ow, the theory which, for the sake of perspicuity, has thus been
stated in a specific form, may be summed up as follows: At the age at
which we know children to be self-conscious, we know that they have
been made aware of ignorance and error; and we know them to possess
at that age powers of understanding sufficient to enable them then to
infer from ignorance and error their own existence. Thus we find that
known faculties, acting under conditions known to exist, would rise
to self-consciousness. The only essential defect in this account of the
matter is, that while we know that children exercise as much under­
standing as is here supposed, we do not know that they exercise it in
precisely this way. Still the supposition that they do so is infinitely
more supported by facts, than the supposition of a wholly peculiar
faculty of the mind.
The only argument worth noticing for the existence of an intuitive
self-consciousness is this. We are more certain of our own existence
than of any other fact; a premise cannot determine a conclusion to be
more certain than it is itself; hence, our own existence cannot have
been inferred from any other fact. The first premise must be admitted,
but the second premise is founded on an exploded theory of logic. A
conclusion cannot be more certain than that some one of the facts
which support it is true, but it may easily be more certain than any
one of those facts. Let us suppose, for example, that a dozen witnesses
testify to an occurrence. Then my belief in that occurrence rests on

[page 21]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man I 21
the belief that each of those men is generally to be believed upon oath.
Yet the fact testified to is made more certain than that any one of those
men is generally to be believed. In the same way, to the developed
mind of man, his own existence is supported by every otherfact, and is,
therefore, incomparably more certain than any one of these facts. But
it cannot be said to be more certain than that there is another fact, since
there is no doubt perceptible in either case.
It is to be concluded, then, that there is no necessity of supposing
an intuitive self-consciousness, since self-consciousness may easily be
the result of inference.
Q u e s t io n 3. Whether we have an intuitivepower ofdistinguishing between
the subjective elements o f different kinds o f cognitions.
Every cognition involves something represented, or that of which
we are conscious, and some action or passion of the self whereby it
becomes represented. The former shall be termed the objective, the
latter the subjective, element of the cognition. The cognition itself is
an intuition of its objective element, which may therefore be called,
also, the immediate object. The subjective element is not necessarily
immediately known, but it is possible that such an intuition of the
subjective element of a cognition of its character, whether that of
dreaming, imagining, conceiving, believing, etc., should accompany
every cognition. The question is whether this is so.
It would appear, at first sight, that there is an overwhelming array
of evidence in favor of the existence of such a power. The difference
between seeing a color and imagining it is immense. There is a vast
difference between the most vivid dream and reality. And if we had
no intuitive power of distinguishing between what we believe and
what we merely conceive, we never, it would seem, could in any way
distinguish them; since if we did so by reasoning, the question would
arise whether the argument itself was believed or conceived, and this
must be answered before the conclusion could have any force. And
thus there would be a regressus ad infinitum. Besides, if we do not know
that we believe, then, from the nature of the case, we do not believe.
But be it noted that we do not intuitively know the existence of this
faculty. For it is an intuitive one, and we cannot intuitively know that
a cognition is intuitive. The question is, therefore, whether it is neces­
sary to suppose the existence of this faculty, or whether then the facts
can be explained without this supposition.
In the first place, then, the difference between what is imagined or
dreamed and what is actually experienced, is no argument in favor of
the existence of such a faculty. For it is not questioned that there are
distinctions in what is present to the mind, but the question is,
whether independently of any such distinctions in the immediate ob­
jects of consciousness, we have any immediate power of distinguishing
different modes of consciousness. Now, the very fact of the immense

[page 22]

22 I The Essential Peirce
difference in the immediate objects of sense and imagination, suffi­
ciently accounts for our distinguishing those faculties; and instead of
being an argument in favor of the existence of an intuitive power of
distinguishing the subjective elements of consciousness, it is a power­
ful reply to any such argument, so far as the distinction of sense and
imagination is concerned.
Passing to the distinction of belief and conception, we meet the
statement that the knowledge of belief is essential to its existence.
Now, we can unquestionably distinguish a belief from a conception,
in most cases, by means of a peculiar feeling of conviction; and it is a
mere question of words whether we define belief as that judgment
which is accompanied by this feeling, or as that judgment from which
a man will act. We may conveniently call the former sensational, the
latter active belief. That neither of these necessarily involves the other,
will surely be admitted without any recital of facts. Taking belief in
the sensational sense, the intuitive power of reorganizing it will
amount simply to the capacity for the sensation which accompanies
the judgment. This sensation, like any other, is an object of conscious­
ness; and therefore the capacity for it implies no intuitive recognition
of subjective elements of consciousness. If belief is taken in the active
sense, it may be discovered by the observation of external facts and
by inference from the sensation of conviction which usually accom­
panies it.
Thus, the arguments in favor of this peculiar power of conscious­
ness disappear, and the presumption is again against such a hypothesis.
Moreover, as the immediate objects of any two faculties must be admit­
ted to be different, the facts do not render such a supposition in any
degree necessary.
Q u e s t io n 4. Whether we have any power o f introspection, or whether our
whole knowledge of the internal world is derived from the observation of
external facts.
It is not intended here to assume the reality of the external world.
Only, there is a certain set of facts which are ordinarily regarded as
external, while others are regarded as internal. The question is
whether the latter are known otherwise than by inference from the
former. By introspection, I mean a direct perception of the internal
world, but not necessarily a perception of it as internal. N or do I mean
to limit the signification of the word to intuition, but would extend it
to any knowledge of the internal world not derived from external
observation.
There is one sense in which any perception has an internal object,
namely, that every sensation is partly determined by internal condi­
tions. Thus, the sensation of redness is as it is, owing to the constitu­
tion of the mind; and in this sense it is a sensation of something
internal. Hence, we may derive a knowledge of the mind from a

[page 23]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man I 23
consideration of this sensation, but that knowledge would, in fact, be
an inference from redness as a predicate of something external. On the
other hand, there are certain other feelings— the emotions, for exam­
ple— which appear to arise in the first place, not as predicates at all,
and to be referable to the mind alone. It would seem, then, that by
means of these, a knowledge of the mind may be obtained, which is
not inferred from any character of outward things. The question is
whether this is really so.
Although introspection is not necessarily intuitive, it is not self-
evident that we possess this capacity; for we have no intuitive faculty
of distinguishing different subjective modes of consciousness. The
power, if it exists, must be known by the circumstance that the facts
cannot be explained without it.
In reference to the above argument from the emotions, it must be
admitted that if a man is angry, his anger implies, in general, no
determinate and constant character in its object. But, on the other
hand, it can hardly be questioned that there is some relative character
in the outward thing which makes him angry, and a little reflection
will serve to show that his anger consists in his saying to himself, “ this
thing is vile, abominable, etc.,” and that it is rather a mark of returning
reason to say, “ I am angry.” In the same way any emotion is a predica­
tion concerning some object, and the chief difference between this and
an objective intellectual judgment is that while the latter is relative to
human nature or to mind in general, the former is relative to the
particular circumstances and disposition of a particular man at a par­
ticular time. What is here said of emotions in general, is true in particu­
lar of the sense of beauty and of the moral sense. Good and bad are
feelings which first arise as predicates, and therefore are either predi­
cates of the not-I, or are determined by previous cognitions (there
being no intuitive power of distinguishing subjective elements of con­
sciousness).
It remains, then, only to inquire whether it is necessary to suppose
a particular power of introspection for the sake of accounting for the
sense of willing. N ow, volition, as distinguished from desire, is noth­
ing but the power of concentrating the attention, of abstracting.
Hence, the knowledge of the power of abstracting may be inferred
from abstract objects, just as the knowledge of the power of seeing is
inferred from colored objects.
It appears, therefore, that there is no reason for supposing a power
of introspection; and, consequently, the only way of investigating a
psychological question is by inference from external facts.
Q u e s t io n 5. Whether we can think without signs.
This is a familiar question, but there is, to this day, no better
argument in the affirmative than that thought must precede every
sign. This assumes the impossibility of an infinite series. But Achilles,

[page 24]

24 I The Essential Peirce
as a fact, will overtake the tortoise. How this happens, is a question
not necessary to be answered at present, as long as it certainly does
happen.
If we seek the light of external facts, the only cases of thought
which we can find are of thought in signs. Plainly, no other thought
can be evidenced by external facts. But we have seen that only by
external facts can thought be known at all. The only thought, then,
which can possibly be cognized is thought in signs. But thought which
cannot be cognized does not exist. All thought, therefore, must neces­
sarily be in signs.
A man says to himself, “ Aristotle is a man; therefore, he is fallible.”
Has he not, then, thought what he has not said to himself, that all men
are fallible? The answer is, that he has done so, so far as this is said in
his therefore. According to this, our question does not relate tofact, but
is a mere asking for distinctness of thought.
From the proposition that every thought is a sign, it follows that
every thought must address itself to some other, must determine some
other, since that is the essence of a sign. This, after all, is but another
form of the familiar axiom, that in intuition, i.e. in the immediate
present, there is no thought, or, that all which is reflected upon has
past. Hinc loquor inde est. That, since any thought, there must have been
a thought, has its analogue in the fact that, since any past time, there
must have been an infinite series of times. T o say, therefore, that
thought cannot happen in an instant, but requires a time, is but an­
other way of saying that every thought must be interpreted in another,
or that all thought is in signs.
Q u e s t i o n 6. Whether a sign can have any meaning, i f by its definition it
is the sign o f something absolutely incognizable.
It would seem that it can, and that universal and hypothetical
propositions are instances of it. Thus, the universal proposition, “ all
ruminants are cloven-hoofed,” speaks of a possible infinity of animals,
and no matter how many ruminants may have been examined, the
possibility must remain that there are others which have not been
examined. In the case of a hypothetical proposition, the same thing is
still more manifest; for such a proposition speaks not merely of the
actual state of things, but of every possible state of things, all of which
are not knowable, inasmuch as only one can so much as exist.
On the other hand, all our conceptions are obtained by abstractions
and combinations of cognitions first occurring in judgments of experi­
ence. Accordingly, there can be no conception of the absolutely incog­
nizable, since nothing of that sort occurs in experience. But the mean­
ing of a term is the conception which it conveys. Hence, a term can
have no such meaning.
If it be said that the incognizable is a concept compounded of the

[page 25]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed fo r Man I 25
concept not and cognizable, it may be replied that not is a mere syn-
categorematic term and not a concept by itself.
If I think “ white,” I will not go so far as Berkeley and say that I
think of a person seeing,11 but I will say that what I think is of the
nature of a cognition, and so of anything else which can be experi­
enced. Consequently, the highest concept which can be reached by
abstractions from judgments of experience— and therefore, the highest
concept which can be reached at all— is the concept of something of
the nature of a cognition. Not, then, or what is other than, if a concept,
is a concept of the cognizable. Hence, not-cognizable, if a concept, is
a concept of the form “A, not-A, ” and is, at least, self-contradictory.
Thus, ignorance and error can only be conceived as correlative to a real
knowledge and truth, which latter are of the nature of cognitions.
Over against any cognition, there is an unknown but knowable reality;
but over against all possible cognition, there is only the self-contradic-
tory. In short, cognizability (in its widest sense) and being are not
merely metaphysically the same, but are synonymous terms.
T o the argument from universal and hypothetical propositions, the
reply is, that though their truth cannot be cognized with absolute
certainty, it may be probably known by induction.
Q u e s t io n 7. Whether there is any cognition not determined by a previous
cognition.
It would seem that there is or has been; for since we are in posses­
sion of cognitions, which are all determined by previous ones, and
these by cognitions earlier still, there must have been a first in this
series or else our state of cognition at any time is completely deter­
mined, according to logical laws, by our state at any previous time. But
there are many facts against the last supposition, and therefore in favor
of intuitive cognitions.
On the other hand, since it is impossible to know intuitively that
a given cognition is not determined by a previous one, the only way
in which this can be known is by hypothetic inference from observed
facts. But to adduce the cognition by which a given cognition has been
determined is to explain the determinations of that cognition. And it
is the only way of explaining them. For something entirely out of
consciousness which may be supposed to determine it, can, as such,
only be known and only adduced in the determinate cognition in
question. So, that to suppose that a cognition is determined solely by
something absolutely external, is to suppose its determinations incapa­
ble of explanation. N ow, this is a hypothesis which is warranted under
no circumstances, inasmuch as the only possible justification for a
hypothesis is that it explains the facts, and to say that they are ex­
plained and at the same time to suppose them inexplicable is self­
contradictory.

[page 26]

26 I The Essential Peirce
If it be objected that the peculiar character of red is not determined
by any previous cognition, I reply that that character is not a character
of red as a cognition; for if there be a man to whom red things look
as blue ones do to me and vice versa, that man’s eyes teach him the same
facts that they would if he were like me.
Moreover, we know of no power by which an intuition could be
known. For, as the cognition is beginning, and therefore in a state of
change, at only the first instant would it be intuition. And, therefore,
the apprehension of it must take place in no time and be an event
occupying no time.* Besides, all the cognitive faculties we know of are
relative, and consequently their products are relations. But the cogni­
tion of a relation is determined by previous cognitions. N o cognition
not determined by a previous cognition, then, can be known. It does
not exist, then, first, because it is absolutely incognizable, and second,
because a cognition only exists so far as it is known.
The reply to the argument that there must be a first is as follows:
In retracing our way from conclusions to premises, or from deter­
mined cognitions to those which determine them, we finally reach, in
all cases, a point beyond which the consciousness in the determined
cognition is more lively than in the cognition which determines it. We
have a less lively consciousness in the cognition which determines our
cognition of the third dimension than in the latter cognition itself; a
less lively consciousness in the cognition which determines our cogni­
tion of a continuous surface (without a blind spot) than in this latter
cognition itself; and a less lively consciousness of the impressions
which determine the sensation of tone than of that sensation itself.
Indeed, when we get near enough to the external this is the universal
rule. N ow let any horizontal line represent a cognition, and let the
length of the line serve to measure (so to speak) the liveliness of con­
sciousness in that cognition. A point, having no length, will, on this
principle, represent an object quite out of consciousness. Let one hori­
zontal line below another represent a cognition which determines the
cognition represented by that other and which has the same object as
the latter. Let the finite distance between two such lines represent that
they are two different cognitions. With this aid to thinking, let us see
whether “ there must be a first.” Suppose an inverted triangle V to be
gradually dipped into water. At any date or instant, the surface of the
water makes a horizontal line across that triangle. This line represents
a cognition. At a subsequent date, there is a sectional line so made,
higher upon the triangle. This represents another cognition of the
same object determined by the former, and having a livelier conscious­
ness. The apex of the triangle represents the object external to the
*This argument, however, only covers a part of the question. It does not go to show
that there is no cognition undetermined except by another like it.

[page 27]

Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man I 27
mind which determines both these cognitions. The state of the triangle
before it reaches the water, represents a state of cognition which
contains nothing which determines these subsequent cognitions. To
say, then, that if there be a state of cognition by which all subsequent
cognitions of a certain object are not determined, there must subse­
quently be some cognition of that object not determined by previous
cognitions of the same object, is to say that when that triangle is dipped
into the water there must be a sectional line made by the surface of
the water lower than which no surface line had been made in that way.
But draw the horizontal line where you will, as many horizontal lines
as you please can be assigned at finite distances below it and below one
another. For any such section is at some distance above the apex,
otherwise it is not a line. Let this distance be a. Then there have been
similar sections at the distances Via, lA a , Vsa, V\6a, above the apex,
and so on as far as you please. So that it is not true that there must be
a first. Explicate the logical difficulties of this paradox (they are identi­
cal with those of the Achilles) in whatever way you may. I am content
with the result, as long as your principles are fully applied to the
particular case of cognitions determining one another. Deny motion,
if it seems proper to do so; only then deny the process of determination
of one cognition by another. Say that instants and lines are fictions;
only say, also, that states of cognition and judgments are fictions. The
point here insisted on is not this or that logical solution of the diffi­
culty, but merely that cognition arises by aprocess of beginning, as any
other change comes to pass.
In a subsequent paper, I shall trace the consequences of these prin­
ciples, in reference to the questions of reality, of individuality, and of
the validity of the laws of logic.

[page 28]

3
Some Consequences of
Four Incapacities
P 27: Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2 (1868):140-57.
[Alsopublished in W2:211-42 and in CP5.264-317.] With item
1 above, one of Peirce’s two “strongest philosophical works, ”
this article develops an account of mind and realityfrom the
ground prepared in item 2. Peirce asserts that all mental
events are valid inferences, and claims that as every thought
is a sign, so man himself is a sign. He also gives a fairly
detailed account of his theory of signs as of 1868, and makes
hisfirst published declaration for scholastic realism. (Peirce’s
philosophy of mind as developed here is, according to Christo­
pher Hookway, a type offunctionalism.)
Descartes is the father of modern philosophy, and the spirit of
Cartesianism— that which principally distinguishes it from the scho­
lasticism which it displaced— may be compendiously stated as follows:
1. It teaches that philosophy must begin with universal doubt;
whereas scholasticism had never questioned fundamentals.
2. It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is to be found in the
individual consciousness; whereas scholasticism had rested on the tes­
timony of sages and of the Catholic Church.
3. The multiform argumentation of the middle ages is replaced by
a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous
premises.
4. Scholasticism had its mysteries of faith, but undertook to explain
all created things. But there are many facts which Cartesianism not
only does not explain, but renders absolutely inexplicable, unless to
say that “ God makes them so” is to be regarded as an explanation.
In some, or all of these respects, most modern philosophers have
been, in effect, Cartesians. N ow without wishing to return to scholasti­
cism, it seems to me that modern science and modern logic require us
to stand upon a very different platform from this.
1. We cannot begin with complete doubt. We must begin with all
the prejudices which we actually have when we enter upon the study

[page 29]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 29
of philosophy. These prejudices are not to be dispelled by a maxim, for
they are things which it does not occur to us can be questioned. Hence
this initial scepticism will be a mere self-deception, and not real doubt;
and no one who follows the Cartesian method will ever be satisfied
until he has formally recovered all those beliefs which in form he has
given up. It is, therefore, as useless a preliminary as going to the North
Pole would be in order to get to Constantinople by coming down
regularly upon a meridian. A person may, it is true, in the course of
his studies, find reason to doubt what he began by believing; but in that
case he doubts because he has a positive reason for it, and not on
account of the Cartesian maxim. Let us not pretend to doubt in philos­
ophy what we do not doubt in our hearts.
2. The same formalism appears in the Cartesian criterion, which
amounts to this: “ Whatever I am clearly convinced of, is true.” If I
were really convinced, I should have done with reasoning, and should
require no test of certainty. But thus to make single individuals abso­
lute judges of truth is most pernicious. The result is that metaphysi­
cians w ill all agree that metaphysics has reached a pitch of certainty
far beyond that of the physical sciences;— only they can agree upon
nothing else. In sciences in which men come to agreement, when a
theory has been broached, it is considered to be on probation until this
agreement is reached. After it is reached, the question of certainty
becomes an idle one, because there is no one left who doubts it. We
individually cannot reasonably hope to attain the ultimate philosophy
which we pursue; we can only seek it, therefore, for the community of
philosophers. Hence, if disciplined and candid minds carefully exam­
ine a theory and refuse to accept it, this ought to create doubts in the
mind of the author of the theory himself.
3. Philosophy ought to imitate the successful sciences in its meth­
ods, so far as to proceed only from tangible premises which can be
subjected to careful scrutiny, and to trust rather to the multitude and
variety of its arguments than to the conclusiveness of any one. Its
reasoning should not form a chain which is no stronger than its weak­
est link, but a cable whose fibres may be ever so slender, provided they
are sufficiently numerous and intimately connected.
4. Every unidealistic philosophy supposes some absolutely inex­
plicable, unanalyzable ultimate; in short, something resulting from
mediation itself not susceptible of mediation. N ow that anything is
thus inexplicable can only be known by reasoning from signs. But the
only justification of an inference from signs is that the conclusion
explains the fact. T o suppose the fact absolutely inexplicable, is not to
explain it, and hence this supposition is never allowable.
In the last number of this journal will be found a piece entitled
“ Questions concerning certain Faculties claimed for Man,” which has
been written in this spirit of opposition to Cartesianism. That criti­

[page 30]

30 I The Essential Peirce
cism of certain faculties resulted in four denials, which for conve­
nience may here be repeated:
1. We have no power of Introspection, but all knowledge of the
internal world is derived by hypothetical reasoning from our knowl­
edge of external facts.
2. We have no power of Intuition, but every cognition is deter­
mined logically by previous cognitions.
3. We have no power of thinking without signs.
4. We have no conception of the absolutely incognizable.
These propositions cannot be regarded as certain; and, in order to
bring them to a further test, it is now proposed to trace them out to
their consequences. We may first consider the first alone; then trace the
consequences of the first and second; then see what else will result
from assuming the third also; and, finally, add the fourth to our hypo­
thetical premises.
In accepting the first proposition, we must put aside all prejudices
derived from a philosophy which bases our knowledge of the external
world on our self-consciousness. We can admit no statement concern­
ing what passes within us except as a hypothesis necessary to explain
what takes place in what we commonly call the external world. More­
over when we have upon such grounds assumed one faculty or mode
of action of the mind, we cannot, of course, adopt any other hypothesis
for the purpose of explaining any fact which can be explained by our
first supposition, but must carry the latter as far as it will go. In other
words, we must, as far as we can do so without additional hypotheses,
reduce all kinds of mental action to one general type.
The class of modifications of consciousness with which we must
commence our inquiry must be one whose existence is indubitable,
and whose laws are best known, and, therefore (since this knowledge
comes from the outside), which most closely follows external facts;
that is, it must be some kind of cognition. Here we may hypothetically
admit the second proposition of the former paper, according to which
there is no absolutely first cognition of any object, but cognition arises
by a continuous process. We must begin, then, with a process of cogni­
tion, and with that process whose laws are best understood and most
closely follow external facts. This is no other than the process of valid
inference, which proceeds from its premise, A , to its conclusion, B,
only if, as a matter of fact, such a proposition as B is always or usually
true when such a proposition as A is true. It is a consequence, then,
of the first two principles whose results we are to trace out, that
we must, as far as we can, without any other supposition than that
the mind reasons, reduce all mental action to the formula of valid
reasoning.
But does the mind in fact go through the syllogistic process? It is
certainly very doubtful whether a conclusion— as something existing

[page 31]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 31
in the mind independently, like an image— suddenly displaces two
premises existing in the mind in a similar way. But it is a matter of
constant experience, that if a man is made to believe in the premises,
in the sense that he will act from them and will say that they are true,
under favorable conditions he will also be ready to act from the conclu­
sion and to say that that is true. Something, therefore, takes place
within the organism which is equivalent to the syllogistic process.
A valid inference is either complete or incomplete. An incomplete
inference is one whose validity depends upon some matter of fact not
contained in the premises. This implied fact might have been stated
as a premise, and its relation to the conclusion is the same whether it
is explicitly posited or not, since it is at least virtually taken for
granted; so that every valid incomplete argument is virtually complete.
Complete arguments are divided into simple and complex. A complex
argument is one which from three or more premises concludes what
might have been concluded by successive steps in reasonings each of
which is simple. Thus, a complex inference comes to the same thing
in the end as a succession of simple inferences.
A complete, simple, and valid argument, or syllogism, is either
apodictic or probable. An apodictic or deductive syllogism is one whose
validity depends unconditionally upon the relation of the fact inferred
to the facts posited in the premises. A syllogism whose validity should
depend not merely upon its premises, but upon the existence of some
other knowledge, would be impossible; for either this other knowledge
would be posited, in which case it would be a part of the premises, or
it would be implicitly assumed, in which case the inference would be
incomplete. But a syllogism whose validity depends partly upon the
non-existence of some other knowledge, is a probable syllogism.
A few examples will render this plain. The two following argu­
ments are apodictic or deductive:
1. N o series of days of which the first and last are different days of
the week exceeds by one a multiple of seven days; now the first and
last days of any leap-year are different days of the week, and therefore
no leap-year consists of a number of days one greater than a multiple
of seven.
2. Among the vowels there are no double letters; but one of the
double letters (w) is compounded of two vowels: hence, a letter com­
pounded of two vowels is not necessarily itself a vowel.
In both these cases, it is plain that as long as the premises are true,
however other facts may be, the conclusions will be true. On the other
hand, suppose that we reason as follows:— “ A certain man had the
Asiatic cholera. He was in a state of collapse, livid, quite cold, and
without perceptible pulse. He was bled copiously. During the process
he came out of collapse, and the next morning was well enough to be
about. Therefore, bleeding tends to cure the cholera.” This is a fair

[page 32]

32 I The Essential Peirce
probable inference, provided that the premises represent our whole
knowledge of the matter. But if we knew, for example, that recoveries
from cholera were apt to be sudden, and that the physician who had
reported this case had known of a hundred other trials of the remedy
without communicating the result, then the inference would lose all
its validity.
The absence of knowledge which is essential to the validity of any
probable argument relates to some question which is determined by
the argument itself. This question, like every other, is whether certain
objects have certain characters. Hence, the absence of knowledge is
either whether besides the objects which, according to the premises,
possess certain characters, any other objects possess them; or, whether
besides the characters which, according to the premises, belong to
certain objects, any other characters not necessarily involved in these
belong to the same objects. In the former case, the reasoning proceeds
as though all the objects which have certain characters were known,
and this is induction; in the latter case, the inference proceeds as though
all the characters requisite to the determination of a certain object or
class were known, and this is hypothesis. This distinction, also, may be
made more plain by examples.
Suppose we count the number of occurrences of the different let­
ters in a certain English book, which we may call A. O f course, every
new letter which we add to our count will alter the relative number
of occurrences of the different letters; but as we proceed with our
counting, this change will be less and less. Suppose that we find that
as we increase the number of letters counted, the relative number of
e’s approaches nearly u ]
A per cent of the whole, that of the ty
s 8V2 per
cent, that of the ^ ’s 8 per cent, that of the s’s 7V2 per cent, &c. Suppose
we repeat the same observations with half a dozen other English writ­
ings (which we may designate as B, CyD, E, F' G) with the like result.
Then we may infer that in every English writing of some length, the
different letters occur with nearly those relative frequencies.
N ow this argument depends for its validity upon our not knowing
the proportion of letters in any English writing besides A , By Q DyE,
Fy and G. For if we know it in respect to Hy and it is not nearly the
same as in the others, our conclusion is destroyed at once; if it is the
same, then the legitimate inference is from A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H,
and not from the first seven alone. This, therefore, is an induction.
Suppose, next, that a piece of writing in cypher is presented to us,
without the key. Suppose we find that it contains something less than
26 characters, one of which occurs about n per cent of all the times,
another 8V2 per cent, another 8 per cent, and another 7I/2 per cent. Sup­
pose that when we substitute for these e, ty a, and s, respectively, we
are able to see how single letters may be substituted for each of the
other characters so as to make sense in English, provided, however,

[page 33]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 33
that we allow the spelling to be wrong in some cases. If the writing
is of any considerable length, we may infer with great probability that
this is the meaning of the cipher.
The validity of this argument depends upon there being no other
known characters of the writing in cipher which would have any
weight in the matter; for if there are— if we know, for example,
whether or not there is any other solution of it—this must be allowed
its effect in supporting or weakening the conclusion. This, then, is
hypothesis.
All valid reasoning is either deductive, inductive, or hypothetic; or
else it combines two or more of these characters. Deduction is pretty
well treated in most logical text-books; but it will be necessary to say
a few words about induction and hypothesis in order to render what
follows more intelligible.
Induction may be defined as an argument which proceeds upon the
assumption that all the members of a class or aggregate have all the
characters which are common to all those members of this class con­
cerning which it is known, whether they have these characters or not;
or, in other words, which assumes that that is true of a whole collection
which is true of a number of instances taken from it at random. This
might be called statistical argument. In the long run, it must generally
afford pretty correct conclusions from true premises. If we have a bag
of beans partly black and partly white, by counting the relative pro­
portions of the two colors in several different handfuls, we can approx­
imate more or less to the relative proportions in the whole bag, since
a sufficient number of handfuls would constitute all the beans in the
bag. The central characteristic and key to induction is, that by taking
the conclusion so reached as major premise of a syllogism, and the
proposition stating that such and such objects are taken from the class
in question as the minor premise, the other premise of the induction
will follow from them deductively. Thus, in the above example we
concluded that all books in English have about n X
A per cent of their
letters e’s. From that as major premise, together with the proposition
that A , B, CyD, E , F, and G are books in English, it follows deductively
that A , B, C, D, E, F, and G have about n lA per cent of their letters e's.
Accordingly, induction has been defined by Aristotle as the inference
of the major premise of a syllogism from its minor premise and conclu­
sion.1 The function of an induction is to substitute for a series of many
subjects, a single one which embraces them and an indefinite number
of others. Thus it is a species of “ reduction of the manifold to unity.”
Hypothesis may be defined as an argument which proceeds upon
the assumption that a character which is known necessarily to involve
a certain number of others, may be probably predicated of any object
which has all the characters which this character is known to involve.
Just as induction may be regarded as the inference of the major prem­

[page 34]

34 I The Essential Peirce
ise of a syllogism, so hypothesis may be regarded as the inference of
the minor premise, from the other two propositions. Thus, the exam­
ple taken above consists of two such inferences of the minor premises
of the following syllogisms:
1. Every English writing of some length in which such and such char­
acters denote e, ty a, and s, has about \\X
A p er cent of the first sort
of marks, 8V2 of the second, 8 of the third, and 7I/2 of the fourth;
This secret writing is an English writing of some length, in which
such and such characters denote e, t, a, and sy respectively:
This secret writing has about 1114percen t of its characters of the first
kind, 8V2 of the second, 8 of the third, and 7I/2 of the fourth.
2. A passage written with such an alphabet makes sense when such and
such letters are severally substituted for such and such characters.
This secret writing is written with such an alphabet.
.'. This secret writing makes sense when such and such substitutions
are made.
The function of hypothesis is to substitute for a great series of
predicates forming no unity in themselves, a single one (or small
number) which involves them all, together (perhaps) with an indefinite
number of others. It is, therefore, also a reduction of a manifold to
unity.* Every deductive syllogism may be put into the form
^Several persons versed in logic have objected that I have here quite misapplied the
term hypothesis, and that what I so designate is an argument from analogy.2 It is a
sufficient reply to say that the example of the cipher has been given as an apt illustration
of hypothesis by Descartes (Rule 10, Œuvres choisies: Paris, 1865, page 334), by Leibniz
(Nouveaux Essais, lib. 4, ch. 12, §13, Ed. Erdmann, p. 383 b), and (as I learn from D. Stewart;
Works, vol. 3, pp. 305 et seqq.)3 by Gravesande, Boscovich, Hartley, and G. L. Le Sage.
The term Hypothesis has been used in the following senses:— 1. For the theme or proposi­
tion forming the subject of discourse. 2. For an assumption. Aristotle divides theses or
propositions adopted without any reason into definitions and hypotheses.4The latter are
propositions stating the existence of something. Thus the geometer says, “ Let there be
a triangle.” 3. For a condition in a general sense. We are said to seek other things than
happiness t>7ToOécreoiç, conditionally. The best republic is the ideally perfect, the
second the best on earth, the third the best \)7ro0ecr€(x)<;, under the circumstances.
Freedom is the vttoOecric; or condition of democracy. 4. For the antecedent of a hypo­
thetical proposition. 5. For an oratorical question which assumes facts. 6. In the Synopsis
of Psellus,5 for the reference of a subject to the things it denotes. 7. Most commonly in
modern times, for the conclusion of an argument from consequence and consequent to
antecedent. This is my use of the term. 8. For such a conclusion when too weak to be
a theory accepted into the body of a science.
I give a few authorities to support the seventh use:
Chauvin.— Lexicon Rationale, 1st Ed.— “ Hypothesis est propositio, quæ assumitur ad
probandam aliam veritatem incognitam. Requirunt multi, ut hæc hypothesis vera esse
cognoscatur, etiam antequam appareat, an alia ex eâ deduci possint. Verum aiunt alii,
hoc unum desiderari, ut hypothesis pro vera admittatur, quod nempe ex hac talia deduci-
tur, quæ respondent phænomenis, et satisfaciunt omnibus difficultatibus, quæ hac parte
in re, et in iis quæ de ea apparent, occurrebant.” 6
Newton.— “ Hactenus phænomena cœlorum et maris nostri per vim gravitatis ex-
posui, sed causam gravitatis nondum assignavi. . . . Rationem vero harum gravitatis

[page 35]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 35
If A, then B;
But A:
:.B
And as the minor premise in this form appears as antecedent or reason
of a hypothetical proposition, hypothetic inference may be called rea­
soning from consequent to antecedent.
The argument from analogy, which a popular writer upon logic9
calls reasoning from particulars to particulars, derives its validity from
its combining the characters of induction and hypothesis, being
analyzable either into a deduction or an induction, or a deduction and
a hypothesis.
But though inference is thus of three essentially different species,
it also belongs to one genus. We have seen that no conclusion can be
legitimately derived which could not have been reached by successions
proprietatum ex phaenomenis nondum potui deducere, et hypotheses non fingo. Quic-
quid enim ex phaenomenis non deducitur, hypothesis vocanda est. . . . In hác Philosophiá
Propositiones deducuntur ex phaenomenis, et redduntur generales per inductionem.”
Principia. Ad fin.1
Sir Wm. Hamilton.— “Hypotheses, that is, propositions which are assumed with proba­
bility, in order to explain or prove something else which cannot otherwise be explained
or proved.”—Lectures on Logic (Am. Ed.), p. 188.
“ The name of hypothesis is more emphatically given to provisory suppositions, which
serve to explain the phenomena in so far as observed, but which are only asserted to be
true, if ultimately confirmed by a complete induction.”— Ibid., p. 364.
“ When a phenomenon is presented which can be explained by no principle afforded
through experience, we feel discontented and uneasy; and there arises an effort to
discover some cause which may, at least provisionally, account for the outstanding
phenomenon; and this cause is finally recognized as valid and true, if, through it, the
given phenomenon is found to obtain a full and perfect explanation. The judgment in
which a phenomenon is referred to such a problematic cause, is called a Hypothesis. ”—
Ibid., pp. 449, 450. See also Lectures on Metaphysics, p. 117.
J. S. Mill.— “ An hypothesis is any supposition which we make (either without actual
evidence, or on evidence avowedly insufficient), in order to endeavor to deduce from it
conclusions in accordance with facts which are known to be real; under the idea that
if the conclusions to which the hypothesis leads are known truths, the hypothesis itself
either must be, or at least is likely to be true.”— Logic (6th Ed.), vol. 2, p. 8.
Kant.— “I f all the consequents of a cognition are true, the cognition itself is true. . . . It is
allowable, therefore, to conclude from consequent to a reason, but without being able
to determine this reason. From the complexus of all consequents alone can we conclude
the truth of a determinate reason. . . . The difficulty with this positive and direct mode
of inference (modusponens) is that the totality of the consequents cannot be apodeictically
recognized, and that we are therefore led by this mode of inference only to a probable
and hypothetically true cognition (Hypotheses). ”—Logik by Jasche, Werke, ed. Rosenkranz
and Schubert, vol. 3, p. 221.
“ A hypothesis is the judgment of the truth of a reason on account of the sufficiency
of the consequents.” — Ibid., p. 262.
Herbart.— “ We can make hypotheses, thence deduce consequents, and afterwards
see whether the latter accord with experience. Such suppositions are termed hypothe­
ses.”— Einleitung; Werke, vol. 1, p. 53.®
Beneke.— “ Affirmative inferences from consequent to antecedent, or hypotheses.” —
System der Logik, vol. 2, p. 103.
There would be no difficulty in greatly multiplying these citations.

[page 36]

36 I The Essential Peirce
of arguments having two premises each, and implying no fact not
asserted.
Either of these premises is a proposition asserting that certain
objects have certain characters. Every term of such a proposition
stands either for certain objects or for certain characters. The conclu­
sion may be regarded as a proposition substituted in place of either
premise, the substitution being justified by the fact stated in the other
premise. The conclusion is accordingly derived from either premise by
substituting either a new subject for the subject of the premise, or a
new predicate for the predicate of the premise, or by both substitu­
tions. N ow the substitution of one term for another can be justified
only so far as the term substituted represents only what is represented
in the term replaced. If, therefore, the conclusion be denoted by the
formula,
S is P;
and this conclusion be derived, by a change of subject, from a premise
which may on this account be expressed by the formula,
M is P,
then the other premise must assert that whatever thing is represented
by S is represented by Af, or that
Every S is an M;
while, if the conclusion, S is P\ is derived from either premise by a
change of predicate, that premise may be written
S is M;
and the other premise must assert that whatever characters are implied
in P are implied in M, or that
Whatever is M is P.
In either case, therefore, the syllogism must be capable of expression
in the form,
5 is M; M is P:
S is P
Finally, if the conclusion differs from either of its premises, both
in subject and predicate, the form of statement of conclusion and
premise may be so altered that they shall have a common term. This
can always be done, for if P is the premise and C the conclusion, they
may be stated thus:
The state of things represented in P is real,
and
The state of things represented in C is real.

[page 37]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 37
In this case the other premise must in some form virtually assert
that every state of things such as is represented by C is the state of
things represented in P.
All valid reasoning, therefore, is of one general form; and in seek­
ing to reduce all mental action to the formulas of valid inference, we
seek to reduce it to one single type.
An apparent obstacle to the reduction of all mental action to the
type of valid inferences is the existence of fallacious reasoning. Every
argument implies the truth of a general principle of inferential proce­
dure (whether involving some matter of fact concerning the subject of
argument, or merely a maxim relating to a system of signs), according
to which it is a valid argument. If this principle is false, the argument
is a fallacy; but neither a valid argument from false premises, nor an
exceedingly weak, but not altogether illegitimate, induction or hy­
pothesis, however its force may be over-estimated, however false its
conclusion, is a fallacy.
N ow words, taken just as they stand, if in the form of an argument,
thereby do imply whatever fact may be necessary to make the argu­
ment conclusive; so that to the formal logician, who has to do only with
the meaning of the words according to the proper principles of inter­
pretation, and not with the intention of the speaker as guessed at from
other indications, the only fallacies should be such as are simply ab­
surd and contradictory, either because their conclusions are absolutely
inconsistent with their premises, or because they connect propositions
by a species of illative conjunction, by which they cannot under any
circumstances be validly connected.
But to the psychologist an argument is valid only if the premises
from which the mental conclusion is derived would be sufficient, if
true, to justify it, either by themselves, or by the aid of other proposi­
tions which had previously been held for true. But it is easy to show
that all inferences made by man, which are not valid in this sense,
belong to four classes, viz.: i. Those whose premises are false; 2. Those
which have some little force, though only a little; 3. Those which result
from confusion of one proposition with another; 4. Those which result
from the indistinct apprehension, wrong application, or falsity, of a
rule of inference. For, if a man were to commit a fallacy not of either
of these classes, he would, from true premises conceived with perfect
distinctness, without being led astray by any prejudice or other judg­
ment serving as a rule of inference, draw a conclusion which had really
not the least relevancy. If this could happen, calm consideration and
care could be of little use in thinking, for caution only serves to insure
our taking all the facts into account, and to make those which we do
take account of, distinct; nor can coolness do anything more than to
enable us to be cautious, and also to prevent our being affected by a
passion in inferring that to be true which we wish were true, or which

[page 38]

38 I The Essential Peirce
we fear may be true, or in following some other wrong rule of infer­
ence. But experience shows that the calm and careful consideration of
the same distinctly conceived premises (including prejudices) will in­
sure the pronouncement of the same judgment by all men. N ow if a
fallacy belongs to the first of these four classes and its premises are
false, it is to be presumed that the procedure of the mind from these
premises to the conclusion is either correct, or errs in one of the other
three ways; for it cannot be supposed that the mere falsity of the
premises should affect the procedure of reason when that falsity is not
known to reason. If the fallacy belongs to the second class and has some
force, however little, it is a legitimate probable argument, and belongs
to the type of valid inference. If it is of the third class and results from
the confusion of one proposition with another, this confusion must be
owing to a resemblance between the two propositions; that is to say,
the person reasoning, seeing that one proposition has some of the
characters which belong to the other, concludes that it has all the
essential characters of the other, and is equivalent to it. N ow this is a
hypothetic inference, which though it may be weak, and though its
conclusion happens to be false, belongs to the type of valid inferences;
and, therefore, as the nodus of the fallacy lies in this confusion, the
procedure of the mind in these fallacies of the third class conforms to
the formula of valid inference. If the fallacy belongs to the fourth class,
it either results from wrongly applying or misapprehending a rule of
inference, and so is a fallacy of confusion, or it results from adopting
a wrong rule of inference. In this latter case, this rule is in fact taken
as a premise, and therefore the false conclusion is owing merely to the
falsity of a premise. In every fallacy, therefore, possible to the mind
of man, the procedure of the mind conforms to the formula of valid
inference.
The third principle whose consequences we have to deduce is, that,
whenever we think, we have present to the consciousness some feeling,
image, conception, or other representation, which serves as a sign. But
it follows from our own existence (which is proved by the occurrence
of ignorance and error) that everything which is present to us is a
phenomenal manifestation of ourselves. This does not prevent its
being a phenomenon of something without us, just as a rainbow is at
once a manifestation both of the sun and of the rain. When we think,
then, we ourselves, as we are at that moment, appear as a sign. N ow
a sign has, as such, three references: ist, it is a sign to some thought
which interprets it; 2d, it is a sign fo r some object to which in that
thought it is equivalent; 3d, it is a sign, in some respect or quality,
which brings it into connection with its object. Let us ask what the
three correlates are to which a thought-sign refers.
1. When we think, to what thought does that thought-sign which

[page 39]

Some Consequences o f Four Incapacities I 39
is ourself address itself? It may, through the medium of outward
expression, which it reaches perhaps only after considerable internal
development, come to address itself to thought of another person. But
whether this happens or not, it is always interpreted by a subsequent
thought of our own. If, after any thought, the current of ideas flows
on freely, it follows the law of mental association. In that case, each
former thought suggests something to the thought which follows it,
i.e. is the sign of something to this latter. Our train of thought may,
it is true, be interrupted. But we must remember that, in addition to
the principal element of thought at any moment, there are a hundred
things in our mind to which but a small fraction of attention or con­
sciousness is conceded. It does not, therefore, follow, because a new
constituent of thought gets the uppermost, that the train of thought
which it displaces is broken off altogether. On the contrary, from our
second principle, that there is no intuition or cognition not deter­
mined by previous cognitions, it follows that the striking in of a new
experience is never an instantaneous affair, but is an event occupying
time, and coming to pass by a continuous process. Its prominence in
consciousness, therefore, must probably be the consummation of a
growing process; and if so, there is no sufficient cause for the thought
which had been the leading one just before, to cease abruptly and
instantaneously. But if a train of thought ceases by gradually dying
out, it freely follows its own law of association as long as it lasts, and
there is no moment at which there is a thought belonging to this series,
subsequently to which there is not a thought which interprets or
repeats it. There is no exception, therefore, to the law that every
thought-sign is translated or interpreted in a subsequent one, unless
it be that all thought comes to an abrupt and final end in death.
2. The next question is: For what does the thought-sign stand—
what does it name— what is its suppositum? The outward thing, un­
doubtedly, when a real outward thing is thought of. But still, as the
thought is determined by a previous thought of the same object, it only
refers to the thing through denoting this previous thought. Let us
suppose, for example, that Toussaint is thought of, and first thought
of as a Negro, but not distinctly as a man. If this distinctness is after­
wards added, it is through the thought that a Negro is a man; that is
to say, the subsequent thought, man, refers to the outward thing by
being predicated of that previous thought, Negro, which has been had
of that thing. If we afterwards think of Toussaint as a general, then
we think that this Negro, this man, was a general. And so in every case
the subsequent thought denotes what was thought in the previous
thought.
3. The thought-sign stands for its object in the respect which is
thought; that is to say, this respect is the immediate object of conscious­

[page 40]

40 I The Essential Peirce
ness in the thought, or, in other words, it is the thought itself, or at
least what the thought is thought to be in the subsequent thought to
which it is a sign.
We must now consider two other properties of signs which are of
great importance in the theory of cognition. Since a sign is not identi­
cal with the thing signified, but differs from the latter in some respects,
it must plainly have some characters which belong to it in itself, and
have nothing to do with its representative function. These I call the
material qualities of the sign. As examples of such qualities, take in the
word “ man” its consisting of three letters— in a picture, its being flat
and without relief. In the second place, a sign must be capable of being
connected (not in the reason but really) with another sign of the same
object, or with the object itself. Thus, words would be of no value at
all unless they could be connected into sentences by means of a real
copula which joins signs of the same thing. The usefulness of some
signs— as a weathercock, a tally, & c.—consists wholly in their being
really connected with the very things they signify. In the case of a
picture such a connection is not evident, but it exists in the power of
association which connects the picture with the brain-sign which la­
bels it. This real, physical connection of a sign with its object, either
immediately or by its connection with another sign, I call the pure
demonstrative application of the sign. N ow the representative function
of a sign lies neither in its material quality nor in its pure demonstra­
tive application; because it is something which the sign is, not in itself
or in a real relation to its object, but which it is to a thought, while both
of the characters just defined belong to the sign independently of its
addressing any thought. And yet if I take all the things which have
certain qualities and physically connect them with another series of
things, each to each, they become fit to be signs. If they are not re­
garded as such they are not actually signs, but they are so in the same
sense, for example, in which an unseen flower can be said to be red,
this being also a term relative to a mental affection.
Consider a state of mind which is a conception. It is a conception
by virtue of having a meaning, a logical comprehension; and if it is
applicable to any object, it is because that object has the characters
contained in the comprehension of this conception. N ow the logical
comprehension of a thought is usually said to consist of the thoughts
contained in it; but thoughts are events, acts of the mind. Tw o
thoughts are two events separated in time, and one cannot literally be
contained in the other. It may be said that all thoughts exactly similar
are regarded as one; and that to say that one thought contains another,
means that it contains one exactly similar to that other. But how can
two thoughts be similar? Tw o objects can only be regarded as similar
if they are compared and brought together in the mind. Thoughts have
no existence except in the mind; only as they are regarded do they

[page 41]

Some Consequences o f Four Incapacities I 41
exist. Hence, two thoughts cannot be similar unless they are brought
together in the mind. But, as to their existence, two thoughts are
separated by an interval of time. We are too apt to imagine that we can
frame a thought similar to a past thought, by matching it with the
latter, as though this past thought were still present to us. But it is
plain that the knowledge that one thought is similar to or in any way
truly representative of another, cannot be derived from immediate
perception, but must be an hypothesis (unquestionably fully justifiable
by facts), and that therefore the formation of such a representing
thought must be dependent upon a real effective force behind con­
sciousness, and not merely upon a mental comparison. What we must
mean, therefore, by saying that one concept is contained in another,
is that we normally represent one to be in the other; that is, that we
form a particular kind of judgment,* of which the subject signifies one
concept and the predicate the other.
N o thought in itself, then, no feeling in itself, contains any others,
but is absolutely simple and unanalyzable; and to say that it is com­
posed of other thoughts and feelings, is like saying that a movement
upon a straight line is composed of the two movements of which it is
the resultant; that is to say, it is a metaphor, or fiction, parallel to the
truth. Every thought, however artificial and complex, is, so far as it is
immediately present, a mere sensation without parts, and therefore, in
itself, without similarity to any other, but incomparable with any
other and absolutely sui generis. t Whatever is wholly incomparable
with anything else is wholly inexplicable, because explanation consists
in bringing things under general laws or under natural classes. Hence
every thought, in so far as it is a feeling of a peculiar sort, is simply
an ultimate, inexplicable fact. Yet this does not conflict with my postu­
late that no fact should be allowed to stand as inexplicable; for, on the
one hand, we never can think, “ This is present to me,” since, before
we have time to make the reflection, the sensation is past, and, on the
other hand, when once past, we can never bring back the quality of
the feeling as it was in andfo r itself or know what it was like in itself
or even discover the existence of this quality except by a corollary from
our general theory of ourselves, and then not in its idiosyncrasy, but
only as something present. But, as something present, feelings are all
alike and require no explanation, since they contain only what is
universal. So that nothing which we can truly predicate of feelings is
*A judgment concerning a minimum of information, for the theory of which see
my paper on Comprehension and Extension, in the Proceedings of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences, vol. 7, p. 426. [W270-86.]
tObserve that I say in itself I am not so wild as to deny that my sensation of red
to-day is like my sensation of red yesterday. I only say that the similarity can consist only
in the physiological force behind consciousness,— which leads me to say, I recognize this
feeling the same as the former one, and so does not consist in a community of sensation.

[page 42]

42 I The Essential Peirce
left inexplicable, but only something which we cannot reflectively
know. So that we do not fall into the contradiction of making the
Mediate immediable. Finally, no present actual thought (which is a
mere feeling) has any meaning, any intellectual value; for this lies not
in what is actually thought, but in what this thought may be connected
with in representation by subsequent thoughts; so that the meaning of
a thought is altogether something virtual. It may be objected, that if
no thought has any meaning, all thought is without meaning. But this
is a fallacy similar to saying, that, if in no one of the successive spaces
which a body fills there is room for motion, there is no room for
motion throughout the whole. At no one instant in my state of mind
is there cognition or representation, but in the relation of my states of
mind at different instants there is.* In short, the Immediate (and there­
fore in itself unsusceptible of mediation— the Unanalyzable, the Inex­
plicable, the Unintellectual) runs in a continuous stream through our
lives; it is the sum total of consciousness, whose mediation, which is
the continuity of it, is brought about by a real effective force behind
consciousness.
Thus, we have in thought three elements: ist, the representative
function which makes it a representation; 2d, the pure denotative appli­
cation, or real connection, which brings one thought into relation with
another; and 3d, the material quality, or how it feels, which gives
thought its quality, t
That a sensation is not necessarily an intuition, or first impression
of sense, is very evident in the case of the sense of beauty; and has been
shown, upon page 15, in the case of sound. When the sensation beauti­
ful is determined by previous cognitions, it always arises as a predicate;
that is, we think that something is beautiful. Whenever a sensation
thus arises in consequence of others, induction shows that those others
are more or less complicated. Thus, the sensation of a particular kind
of sound arises in consequence of impressions upon the various nerves
of the ear being combined in a particular way, and following one
another with a certain rapidity. A sensation of color depends upon
impressions upon the eye following one another in a regular manner,
and with a certain rapidity. The sensation of beauty arises upon a
manifold of other impressions. And this will be found to hold good in
all cases. Secondly, all these sensations are in themselves simple, or
more so than the sensations which give rise to them. Accordingly, a
sensation is a simple predicate taken in place of a complex predicate;
in other words, it fulfils the function of an hypothesis. But the general
Accordingly, just as we say that a body is in motion, and not that motion is in a
body we ought to say that we are in thought, and not that thoughts are in us.
tOn quality, relation, and representation, see Proceedings of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, vol. 7, p. 293. [Item 1 above, pp. 1-10.]

[page 43]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 43
principle that every thing to which such and such a sensation belongs,
has such and such a complicated series of predicates, is not one deter­
mined by reason (as we have seen), but is of an arbitrary nature. Hence,
the class of hypothetic inferences which the arising of a sensation
resembles, is that of reasoning from definition to definitum, in which
the major premise is of an arbitrary nature. Only in this mode of
reasoning, this premise is determined by the conventions of language,
and expresses the occasion upon which a word is to be used; and in the
formation of a sensation, it is determined by the constitution of our
nature, and expresses the occasions upon which sensation, or a natural
mental sign, arises. Thus, the sensation, so far as it represents some­
thing, is determined, according to a logical law, by previous cogni­
tions; that is to say, these cognitions determine that there shall be a
sensation. But so far as the sensation is a mere feeling of a particular
sort, it is determined only by an inexplicable, occult power; and so
far, it is not a representation, but only the material quality of a repre­
sentation. For just as in reasoning from definition to definitum, it
is indifferent to the logician how the defined word shall sound, or how
many letters it shall contain, so in the case of this constitutional word,
it is not determined by an inward law how it shall feel in itself. A
feeling, therefore, as a feeling, is merely the material quality of a mental
sign.
But there is no feeling which is not also a representation, a predi­
cate of something determined logically by the feelings which precede
it. For if there are any such feelings not predicates, they are the emo­
tions. N ow every emotion has a subject. If a man is angry, he is saying
to himself that this or that is vile and outrageous. If he is in joy, he is
saying “ this is delicious.” If he is wondering, he is saying “ this is
strange.” In short, whenever a man feels, he is thinking of something.
Even those passions which have no definite object— as melancholy—
only come to consciousness through tinging the objects o f thought. That
which makes us look upon the emotions more as affections of self than
other cognitions, is that we have found them more dependent upon
our accidental situation at the moment than other cognitions; but that
is only to say that they are cognitions too narrow to be useful. The
emotions, as a little observation will show, arise when our attention
is strongly drawn to complex and inconceivable circumstances. Fear
arises when we cannot predict our fate; joy, in the case of certain
indescribable and peculiarly complex sensations. If there are some
indications that something greatly for my interest, and which I have
anticipated would happen, may not happen; and if, after weighing
probabilities, and inventing safeguards, and straining for further in­
formation, I find m yself unable to come to any fixed conclusion in
reference to the future, in the place of that intellectual hypothetic
inference which I seek, the feeling of anxiety arises. When something

[page 44]

44 I The Essential Peirce
happens for which I cannot account, I wonder. When I endeavor to
realize to m yself what I never can do, a pleasure in the future, I hope.
“ I do not understand you,” is the phrase of an angry man. The inde­
scribable, the ineffable, the incomprehensible, commonly excite emo­
tion; but nothing is so chilling as a scientific explanation. Thus an
emotion is always a simple predicate substituted by an operation of the
mind for a highly complicated predicate. N ow if we consider that a
very complex predicate demands explanation by means of an hypothe­
sis, that that hypothesis must be a simpler predicate substituted for
that complex one; and that when we have an emotion, an hypothesis,
strictly speaking, is hardly possible— the analogy of the parts played
by emotion and hypothesis is very striking. There is, it is true, this
difference between an emotion and an intellectual hypothesis, that we
have reason to say in the case of the latter, that to whatever the simple
hypothetic predicate can be applied, of that the complex predicate is
true; whereas, in the case of an emotion this is a proposition for which
no reason can be given, but which is determined merely by our emo­
tional constitution. But this corresponds precisely to the difference
between hypothesis and reasoning from definition to definitum, and
thus it would appear that emotion is nothing but sensation. There
appears to be a difference, however, between emotion and sensation,
and I would state it as follows:
There is some reason to think that, corresponding to every feeling
within us, some motion takes place in our bodies. This property of the
thought-sign, since it has no rational dependence upon the meaning of
the sign, may be compared with what I have called the material quality
of the sign; but it differs from the latter inasmuch as it is not essentially
necessary that it should be felt in order that there should be any
thought-sign. In the case of a sensation, the manifold of impressions
which precede and determine it are not of a kind, the bodily motion
corresponding to which comes from any large ganglion or from the
brain, and probably for this reason the sensation produces no great
commotion in the bodily organism; and the sensation itself is not a
thought which has a very strong influence upon the current of thought
except by virtue of the information it may serve to afford. An emotion,
on the other hand, comes much later in the development of thought— I
mean, further from the first beginning of the cognition of its object—
and the thoughts which determine it already have motions correspond­
ing to them in the brain, or the chief ganglion; consequently, it pro­
duces large movements in the body, and independently of its
representative value, strongly affects the current of thought. The ani­
mal motions to which I allude, are, in the first place and obviously,
blushing, blenching, staring, smiling, scowling, pouting, laughing,
weeping, sobbing, wriggling, flinching, trembling, being petrified,
sighing, sniffing, shrugging, groaning, heartsinking, trepidation,

[page 45]

Some Consequences o f Four Incapacities I 45
swelling of the heart, etc., etc. To these may, perhaps, be added, in the
second place, other more complicated actions, which nevertheless
spring from a direct impulse and not from deliberation.
That which distinguishes both sensations proper and emotions
from the feeling of a thought, is that in the case of the two former the
material quality is made prominent, because the thought has no rela­
tion of reason to the thoughts which determine it, which exists in the
last case and detracts from the attention given to the mere feeling. By
there being no relation of reason to the determining thoughts, I mean
that there is nothing in the content of the thought which explains why
it should arise only on occasion of these determining thoughts. If there
is such a relation of reason, if the thought is essentially limited in its
application to these objects, then the thought comprehends a thought
other than itself; in other words, it is then a complex thought. An
incomplex thought can, therefore, be nothing but a sensation or emo­
tion, having no rational character. This is very different from the
ordinary doctrine, according to which the very highest and most meta­
physical conceptions are absolutely simple. I shall be asked how such
a conception of a being is to be analyzed, or whether I can ever define
one, two, and three, without a diallele. N ow I shall admit at once that
neither of these conceptions can be separated into two others higher
than itself; and in that sense, therefore, I fully admit that certain very
metaphysical and eminently intellectual notions are absolutely simple.
But though these concepts cannot be defined by genus and difference,
there is another way in which they can be defined. All determination
is by negation; we can first recognize any character only by putting
an object which possesses it into comparison with an object which
possesses it not. A conception, therefore, which was quite universal in
every respect would be unrecognizable and impossible. We do not
obtain the conception of Being, in the sense implied in the copula, by
observing that all the things which we can think of have something in
common, for there is no such thing to be observed. We get it by
reflecting upon signs— words or thoughts;— we observe that different
predicates may be attached to the same subject, and that each makes
some conception applicable to the subject; then we imagine that a
subject has something true of it merely because a predicate (no matter
what) is attached to it,— and that we call Being. The conception of
being is, therefore, a conception about a sign— a thought, or word;—
and since it is not applicable to every sign, it is not primarily universal,
although it is so in its mediate application to things. Being, therefore,
may be defined; it may be defined, for example, as that which is com­
mon to the objects included in any class, and to the objects not in­
cluded in the same class. But it is nothing new to say that metaphysical
conceptions are prim arily and at bottom thoughts about words, or
thoughts about thoughts; it is the doctrine both of Aristotle (whose

[page 46]

46 I The Essential Peirce
categories are parts of speech) and of Kant (whose categories are the
characters of different kinds of propositions).
Sensation and the power of abstraction or attention may be re­
garded as, in one sense, the sole constituents of all thought. Having
considered the former, let us now attempt some analysis of the latter.
By the force of attention, an emphasis is put upon one of the objective
elements of consciousness. This emphasis is, therefore, not itself an
object of immediate consciousness; and in this respect it differs en­
tirely from a feeling. Therefore, since the emphasis, nevertheless, con­
sists in some effect upon consciousness, and so can exist only so far as
it affects our knowledge; and since an act cannot be supposed to deter­
mine that which precedes it in time, this act can consist only in the
capacity which the cognition emphasized has for producing an effect
upon memory, or otherwise influencing subsequent thought. This is
confirmed by the fact that attention is a matter of continuous quantity;
for continuous quantity, so far as we know it, reduces itself in the last
analysis to time. Accordingly, we find that attention does, in fact,
produce a very great effect upon subsequent thought. In the first place,
it strongly affects memory, a thought being remembered for a longer
time the greater the attention originally paid to it. In the second place,
the greater the attention, the closer the connection and the more accu­
rate the logical sequence of thought. In the third place, by attention
a thought may be recovered which has been forgotten. From these
facts, we gather that attention is the power by which thought at one
time is connected with and made to relate to thought at another time;
or, to apply the conception of thought as a sign, that it is the pure
demonstrative application of a thought-sign.
Attention is roused when the same phenomenon presents itself
repeatedly on different occasions, or the same predicate in different
subjects. We see that A has a certain character, that B has the same,
C has the same; and this excites our attention, so that we say, “ These
have this character.” Thus attention is an act of induction; but it is an
induction which does not increase our knowledge, because our “ these”
covers nothing but the instances experienced. It is, in short, an argu­
ment from enumeration.
Attention produces effects upon the nervous system. These effects
are habits, or nervous associations. A habit arises, when, having had
the sensation of performing a certain act, m, on several occasions a,
c, we come to do it upon every occurrence of the general event, /, of
which a, by and c are special cases. That is to say, by the cognition that
Every case of a, b, or c, is a case of m,
is determined the cognition that
Every case of / is a case of m.

[page 47]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 47
Thus the formation of a habit is an induction, and is therefore neces­
sarily connected with attention or abstraction. Voluntary actions re­
sult from the sensations produced by habits, as instinctive actions
result from our original nature.
We have thus seen that every sort of modification of conscious­
ness— Attention, Sensation, and Understanding—is an inference. But
the objection may be made that inference deals only with general
terms, and that an image, or absolutely singular representation, cannot
therefore be inferred.
“ Singular” and “ individual” are equivocal terms. A singular may
mean that which can be but in one place at one time. In this sense it
is not opposed to general. The sun is a singular in this sense, but, as is
explained in every good treatise on logic, it is a general term. I may
have a very general conception of Hermolaus Barbarus,10 but still I
conceive him only as able to be in one place at one time. When an
image is said to be singular, it is meant that it is absolutely determinate
in all respects. Every possible character, or the negative thereof, must
be true of such an image. In the words of the most eminent expounder
of the doctrine, the image of a man “ must be either of a white, or a
black, or a tawny; a straight, or a crooked; a tall, or a low, or a middle-
sized man.” 11 It must be of a man with his mouth open or his mouth
shut, whose hair is precisely of such and such a shade, and whose figure
has precisely such and such proportions. N o statement of Locke has
been so scouted by all friends of images as his denial that the “ idea”
of a triangle must be either of an obtuse-angled, right-angled, or acute-
angled triangle.12 In fact, the image of a triangle must be of one, each
of whose angles is of a certain number of degrees, minutes, and sec­
onds.
This being so, it is apparent that no man has a true image of the road
to his office, or of any other real thing. Indeed he has no image of it
at all unless he can not only recognize it, but imagines it (truly or
falsely) in all its infinite details. This being the case, it becomes very
doubtful whether we ever have any such thing as an image in our
imagination. Please, reader, to look at a bright red book, or other
brightly colored object, and then to shut your eyes and say whether
you see that color, whether brightly or faintly— whether, indeed, there
is anything like sight there. Hume and the other followers of Berkeley
maintain that there is no difference between the sight and the memory
of the red book except in “ their different degrees of force and vivac­
ity.” “ The colors which the memory employs,” says Hume, “ are faint
and dull compared with those in which our original perceptions are
clothed.” 13 If this were a correct statement of the difference, we should
remember the book as being less red than it is; whereas, in fact, we
remember the color with very great precision for a few moments
[please to test this point, reader], although we do not see any thing like

[page 48]

48 I The Essential Peirce
it. We carry away absolutely nothing of the color except the conscious­
ness that we could recognize it. As a further proof of this, I will request
the reader to try a little experiment. Let him call up, if he can, the
image of a horse— not of one which he has ever seen, but of an imagi­
nary one,— and before reading further let him by contemplation* fix
the image in his m em ory..........Has the reader done as requested? for
I protest that it is not fair play to read further without doing so.—
Now, the reader can say in general of what color that horse was,
whether grey, bay, or black. But he probably cannot say precisely of
what shade it was. He cannot state this as exactly as he could just after
having seen such a horse. But why, if he had an image in his mind
which no more had the general color than it had the particular shade,
has the latter vanished so instantaneously from his memory while the
former still remains? It may be replied, that we always forget the
details before we do the more general characters; but that this answer
is insufficient is, I think, shown by the extreme disproportion between
the length of time that the exact shade of something looked at is
remembered as compared with that instantaneous oblivion to the exact
shade of the thing imagined, and the but slightly superior vividness of
the memory of the thing seen as compared with the memory of the
thing imagined.
The nominalists, I suspect, confound together thinking a triangle
without thinking that it is either equilateral, isosceles, or scalene, and
thinking a triangle without thinking whether it is equilateral, isos­
celes, or scalene.
It is important to remember that we have no intuitive power of
*No person whose native tongue is English will need to be informed that contem­
plation is essentially (i) protracted (2) voluntary, and (3) an action, and that it is never
used for that which is set forth to the mind in this act. A foreigner can convince himself
of this by the proper study of English writers. Thus, Locke (Essay concerning Human
Understanding, Book II, chap. 19, §1) says, “ If it [an idea] be held there [in view] long under
attentive consideration, ‘tis Contemplation ”; and again {Ibid., Book II, chap. 10, §1), “ Keep­
ing the Idea, which is brought into it [the mind] for some time actually in view, which
is called Contemplation. ” This term is therefore unfitted to translate Anschauung; for this
latter does not imply an act which is necessarily protracted or voluntary, and denotes
most usually a mental presentation, sometimes a faculty, less often the reception of an
impression in the mind, and seldom, if ever, an action. To the translation of Anschauung
by intuition, there is, at least, no such insuperable objection. Etymologically the two
words precisely correspond. The original philosophical meaning of intuition was a
cognition of the present manifold in that character; and it is now commonly used, as
a modern writer says, “ to include all the products of the perceptive (external or internal)
and imaginative faculties; every act of consciousness, in short, of which the immediate
object is an individual, thing, act, or state of mind, presented under the condition of
distinct existence in space and time.” 14 Finally, we have the authority of Kant’s own
example for translating his Anschauung by Intuitus; 15 and, indeed, this is the common
usage of Germans writing Latin. Moreover, intuitiv frequently replaces anschauend or
anschaulich. If this constitutes a misunderstanding of Kant, it is one which is shared by
himself and nearly all his countrymen.

[page 49]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 49
distinguishing between one subjective mode of cognition and another;
and hence often think that something is presented to us as a picture,
while it is really constructed from slight data by the understanding.
This is the case with dreams, as is shown by the frequent impossibility
of giving an intelligible account of one without adding something
which we feel was not in the dream itself. M any dreams, of which the
waking memory makes elaborate and consistent stories, must probably
have been in fact mere jumbles of these feelings of the ability to
recognize this and that which I have just alluded to.
I will now go so far as to say that we have no images even in actual
perception. It will be sufficient to prove this in the case of vision; for
if no picture is seen when we look at an object, it w ill not be claimed
that hearing, touch, and the other senses, are superior to sight in this
respect. That the picture is not painted on the nerves of the retina is
absolutely certain, if, as physiologists inform us, these nerves are nee-
dle-points pointing to the light and at distances considerably greater
than the minimum visibile. 16 The same thing is shown by our not being
able to perceive that there is a large blind spot near the middle of the
retina. If, then, we have a picture before us when we see, it is one
constructed by the mind at the suggestion of previous sensations.
Supposing these sensations to be signs, the understanding by reason­
ing from them could attain all the knowledge of outward things which
we derive from sight, while the sensations are quite inadequate to
forming an image or representation absolutely determinate. If we have
such an image or picture, we must have in our minds a representation
of a surface which is only a part of every surface we see, and we must
see that each part, however small, has such and such a color. If we look
from some distance at a speckled surface, it seems as if we did not see
whether it were speckled or not; but if we have an image before us,
it must appear to us either as speckled, or as not speckled. Again, the
eye by education comes to distinguish minute differences of color; but
if we see only absolutely determinate images, we must, no less before
our eyes are trained than afterwards, see each color as particularly
such and such a shade. Thus to suppose that we have an image before
us when we see, is not only a hypothesis which explains nothing
whatever, but is one which actually creates difficulties which require
new hypotheses in order to explain them away.
One of these difficulties arises from the fact that the details are less
easily distinguished than, and forgotten before, the general circum­
stances. Upon this theory, the general features exist in the details: the
details are, in fact, the whole picture. It seems, then, very strange that
that which exists only secondarily in the picture should make more
impression than the picture itself. It is true that in an old painting the
details are not easily made out; but this is because we know that the

[page 50]

50 I The Essential Peirce
blackness is the result of time, and is no part of the picture itself. There
is no difficulty in making out the details of the picture as it looks at
present; the only difficulty is in guessing what it used to be. But if we
have a picture on the retina, the minutest details are there as much as,
nay, more than, the general outline and significancy of it. Yet that
which must actually be seen, it is extremely difficult to recognize;
while that which is only abstracted from what is seen is very obvious.
But the conclusive argument against our having any images, or
absolutely determinate representations in perception, is that in that
case we have the materials in each such representation for an infinite
amount of conscious cognition, which we yet never become aware of.
N ow there is no meaning in saying that we have something in our
minds which never has the least effect on what we are conscious of
knowing. The most that can be said is, that when we see we are put
in a condition in which we are able to get a very large and perhaps
indefinitely great amount of knowledge of the visible qualities of ob­
jects.
Moreover, that perceptions are not absolutely determinate and sin­
gular is obvious from the fact that each sense is an abstracting mecha­
nism. Sight by itself informs us only of colors and forms. No one can
pretend that the images of sight are determinate in reference to taste.
They are, therefore, so far general that they are neither sweet nor
non-sweet, bitter nor non-bitter, having savor or insipid.
The next question is whether we have any general conceptions
except in judgments. In perception, where we know a thing as exist­
ing, it is plain that there is a judgment that the thing exists, since a
mere general concept of a thing is in no case a cognition of it as
existing. It has usually been said, however, that we can call up any
concept without making any judgment; but it seems that in this case
we only arbitrarily suppose ourselves to have an experience. In order
to conceive the number 7, I suppose, that is, I arbitrarily make the
hypothesis or judgment, that there are certain points before my eyes,
and I judge that these are seven. This seems to be the most simple and
rational view of the matter, and I may add that it is the one which has
been adopted by the best logicians. If this be the case, what goes by the
name of the association of images is in reality an association of judg­
ments. The association of ideas is said to proceed according to three
principles—those of resemblance, of contiguity, and of causality. But
it would be equally true to say that signs denote what they do on the
three principles of resemblance, contiguity, and causality. There can
be no question that anything is a sign of whatever is associated with
it by resemblance, by contiguity, or by causality: nor can there be any
doubt that any sign recalls the thing signified. So, then, the association
of ideas consists in this, that a judgment occasions another judgment,

[page 51]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 51
of which it is the sign. N ow this is nothing less nor more than infer­
ence.
Everything in which we take the least interest creates in us its own
particular emotion, however slight this may be. This emotion is a sign
and a predicate of the thing. Now, when a thing resembling this thing
is presented to us, a similar emotion arises; hence, we immediately
infer that the latter is like the former. A formal logician of the old
school may say, that in logic no term can enter into the conclusion
which had not been contained in the premises, and that therefore the
suggestion of something new must be essentially different from infer­
ence. But I reply that that rule of logic applies only to those arguments
which are technically called completed. We can and do reason—
Elias was a man;
.*. He was mortal.
And this argument is just as valid as the full syllogism, although it is
so only because the major premise of the latter happens to be true. If
to pass from the judgment “ Elias was a man” to the judgment “ Elias
was mortal,” without actually saying to one’s self that “ All men are
mortal,” is not inference, then the term “ inference” is used in so
restricted a sense that inferences hardly occur outside of a logic-book.
What is here said of association by resemblance is true of all associa­
tion. All association is by signs. Everything has its subjective or emo­
tional qualities, which are attributed either absolutely or relatively, or
by conventional imputation to anything which is a sign of it. And so
we reason,
The sign is such and such;
The sign is that thing.
This conclusion receiving, however, a modification, owing to other
considerations, so as to become—
The sign is almost (is representative of) that thing.
We come now to the consideration of the last of the four principles
whose consequences we were to trace; namely, that the absolutely
incognizable is absolutely inconceivable. That upon Cartesian princi­
ples the very realities of things can never be known in the least, most
competent persons must long ago have been convinced. Hence the
breaking forth of idealism, which is essentially anti-Cartesian, in every
direction, whether among empiricists (Berkeley, Hume), or among
noologists (Hegel, Fichte). The principle now brought under discus­
sion is directly idealistic; for, since the meaning of a word is the
conception it conveys, the absolutely incognizable has no meaning

[page 52]

52 I The Essential Peirce
because no conception attaches to it. It is, therefore, a meaningless
word; and, consequently, whatever is meant by any term as “ the real”
is cognizable in some degree, and so is of the nature of a cognition, in
the objective sense of that term.
At any moment we are in possession of certain information, that
is, of cognitions which have been logically derived by induction and
hypothesis from previous cognitions which are less general, less dis­
tinct, and of which we have a less lively consciousness. These in their
turn have been derived from others still less general, less distinct, and
less vivid; and so on back to the ideal* first, which is quite singular,
and quite out of consciousness. This ideal first is the particular thing-
in-itself. It does not exist as such. That is, there is no thing which is
in-itself in the sense of not being relative to the mind, though things
which are relative to the mind doubtless are, apart from that relation.
The cognitions which thus reach us by this infinite series of inductions
and hypotheses (which though infinite a parte ante logice, is yet as one
continuous process not without a beginning in time) are of two kinds,
the true and the untrue, or cognitions whose objects are real and those
whose objects are unreal. And what do we mean by the real? It is a
conception which we must first have had when we discovered that
there was an unreal, an illusion; that is, when we first corrected our­
selves. N ow the distinction for which alone this fact logically called,
was between an ens relative to private inward determinations, to the
negations belonging to idiosyncrasy, and an ens such as would stand
in the long run. The real, then, is that which, sooner or later, informa­
tion and reasoning would finally result in, and which is therefore
independent of the vagaries of me and you. Thus, the very origin of
the conception of reality shows that this conception essentially in­
volves the notion of a C O M M U N IT Y , without definite limits, and
capable of an indefinite increase of knowledge. And so those two series
of cognitions— the real and the unreal— consist of those which, at a
time sufficiently future, the community will always continue to reaf­
firm; and of those which, under the same conditions, will ever after be
denied. Now, a proposition whose falsity can never be discovered, and
the error of which therefore is absolutely incognizable, contains, upon
our principle, absolutely no error. Consequently, that which is
thought in these cognitions is the real, as it really is. There is nothing,
then, to prevent our knowing outward things as they really are, and
it is most likely that we do thus know them in numberless cases,
although we can never be absolutely certain of doing so in any special
case.
*By an ideal, I mean the limit which the possible cannot attain.

[page 53]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 53
But it follows that since no cognition of ours is absolutely determi­
nate, generals must have a real existence. N ow this scholastic realism
is usually set down as a belief in metaphysical fictions. But, in fact, a
realist is simply one who knows no more recondite reality than that
which is represented in a true representation. Since, therefore, the
word “ man” is true of something, that which “ man” means is real. The
nominalist must admit that man is truly applicable to something; but
he believes that there is beneath this a thing in itself, an incognizable
reality. His is the metaphysical figment. Modern nominalists are
mostly superficial men, who do not know, as the more thorough Ros-
cellinus and Occam did, that a reality which has no representation is
one which has no relation and no quality. The great argument for
nominalism is that there is no man unless there is some particular man.
That, however, does not affect the realism of Scotus; for although there
is no man of whom all further determination can be denied, yet there
is a man, abstraction being made of all further determination. There
is a real difference between man irrespective of what the other deter­
minations may be, and man with this or that particular series of deter­
minations, although undoubtedly this difference is only relative to the
mind and not in re. Such is the position of Scotus.* Occam’s great
objection is, there can be no real distinction which is not in re, in the
thing-in-itself; but this begs the question, for it is itself based only on
the notion that reality is something independent of representative
relation.t
Such being the nature of reality in general, in what does the real­
ity of the mind consist? We have seen that the content of conscious­
ness, the entire phenomenal manifestation of mind, is a sign resulting
from inference. Upon our principle, therefore, that the absolutely
incognizable does not exist, so that the phenomenal manifestation of
a substance is the substance, we must conclude that the mind is a
sign developing according to the laws of inference. What distin­
guishes a man from a word? There is a distinction doubtless. The
material qualities, the forces which constitute the pure denotative
application, and the meaning of the human sign, are all exceedingly
complicated in comparison with those of the word. But these differ­
ences are only relative. What other is there? It may be said that man
is conscious, while a word is not. But consciousness is a very vague
term. It may mean that emotion which accompanies the reflection
that we have animal life. This is a consciousness which is dimmed
*“ Eadem natura est, quae in existentia per gradum singularitatis est determinata, et
in intellectu, hoc est ut habet relationem ad intellectum ut cognitum ad cognoscens, est
indeterminata.” — Quaestiones Subtillissimae, lib. 7, qu. 18.17
+See his argument Summa logices, part 1, cap. 16.18

[page 54]

54 I The Essential Peirce
when animal life is at its ebb in old age, or sleep, but which is not
dimmed when the spiritual life is at its ebb; which is the more lively
the better animal a man is, but which is not so, the better man he is.
We do not attribute this sensation to words, because we have reason
to believe that it is dependent upon the possession of an animal body.
But this consciousness, being a mere sensation, is only a part of the
material quality of the man-sign. Again, consciousness is sometimes
used to signify the I think, or unity in thought; but this unity is
nothing but consistency, or the recognition of it. Consistency be­
longs to every sign, so far as it is a sign; and therefore every sign,
since it signifies prim arily that it is a sign, signifies its own consist­
ency. The man-sign acquires information, and comes to mean more
than he did before. But so do words. Does not electricity mean more
now than it did in the days of Franklin? Man makes the word, and
the word means nothing which the man has not made it mean, and
that only to some man. But since man can think only by means of
words or other external symbols, these might turn round and say:
“ You mean nothing which we have not taught you, and then only so
far as you address some word as the interpretant of your thought.”
In fact, therefore, men and words reciprocally educate each other;
each increase of a man’s information involves and is involved by, a
corresponding increase of a word’s information.
Without fatiguing the reader by stretching this parallelism too far,
it is sufficient to say that there is no element whatever of man’s con­
sciousness which has not something corresponding to it in the word;
and the reason is obvious. It is that the word or sign which man uses
is the man himself. For, as the fact that every thought is a sign, taken
in conjunction with the fact that life is a train of thought, proves that
man is a sign; so, that every thought is an external sign, proves that man
is an external sign. That is to say, the man and the external sign are
identical, in the same sense in which the words homo and man are
identical. Thus my language is the sum total of myself; for the man is
the thought.
It is hard for man to understand this, because he persists in identi­
fying himself with his will, his power over the animal organism, with
brute force. N ow the organism is only an instrument of thought. But
the identity of a man consists in the consistency of what he does and
thinks, and consistency is the intellectual character of a thing; that is,
is its expressing something.
Finally, as what anything really is, is what it may finally come to
be known to be in the ideal state of complete information, so that
reality depends on the ultimate decision of the community; so thought
is what it is, only by virtue of its addressing a future thought which
is in its value as thought identical with it, though more developed. In
this way, the existence of thought now, depends on what is to be

[page 55]

Some Consequences of Four Incapacities I 55
hereafter; so that it has only a potential existence, dependent on the
future thought of the community.
The individual man, since his separate existence is manifested only
by ignorance and error, so far as he is anything apart from his fellows,
and from what he and they are to be, is only a negation. This is man,
proud man,
Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,
His glassy essence.19

[page 56]

4
Grounds of Validity ofthe Laws
ofLogic: Further Consequences
ofFour Incapacities
P 41: Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2 (i8dp):ipj-2o8.
[Also published in W2:242-72 and in CP5.318-57. Changes in
an offprint (MS jpj), prepared as essay 6 o f his i8pj “Search
fo r a Method, ” are recorded in the Notes.] In this article, the
culmination o f the Cognition Series, Peirce works out a ratio­
nale fo r the objective validity o f the laws of logic and, by
linking epistemology with a social theory of logic, grounds
induction in altruistic sentiments. He also discusses a version
o f the liar paradox and offers a solution based on the supposi­
tion that “every proposition asserts its own truth, ” and he
makes hisfirst published reference to De Morgan's work on
the logic of relations.
If, as I maintained in an article in the last number of this Journal,1
every judgment results from inference, to doubt every inference is to
doubt everything. It has often been argued that absolute scepticism is
self-contradictory; but this is a mistake: and even if it were not so, it
would be no argument against the absolute sceptic, inasmuch as he
does not admit that no contradictory propositions are true. Indeed, it
would be impossible to move such a man, for his scepticism consists
in considering every argument and never deciding upon its validity;
he would, therefore, act in this way in reference to the arguments
brought against him.
But then there are no such beings as absolute sceptics. Every exer­
cise of the mind consists in inference, and so, though there are inani­
mate objects without beliefs, there are2 no intelligent beings in that
condition.
Yet it is quite possible that a person should doubt every principle
of inference. He may not have studied logic, and though a logical
formula may sound very obviously true to him, he may feel a little
uncertain whether some subtile deception may not lurk in it. Indeed,

[page 57]

Grounds o f Validity of the Laws of Logic I 57
I certainly shall have, among the most cultivated and respected of my
readers, those who deny that those laws of logic which men generally
admit have universal validity. But I address myself, also, to those who
have no such doubts, for even to them it may be interesting to consider
how it is that these principles come to be true. Finally, having put
forth in former numbers of this Journal3 some rather heretical princi­
ples of philosophical research, one of which is that nothing can be
admitted to be absolutely inexplicable, it behooves me to take up a
challenge which has been given me to show how upon my principles
the validity of the laws of logic can be other than inexplicable.
I shall be arrested, at the outset, by a sweeping objection to my
whole undertaking. It will be said that my deduction of logical princi­
ples, being itself an argument, depends for its whole virtue upon the
truth of the very principles in question; so that whatever my proof
may be, it must take for granted the very things to be proved. But to
this I reply, that I am neither addressing absolute sceptics, nor men in
any state of fictitious doubt whatever. I require the reader to be candid;
and if he becomes convinced of a conclusion, to admit it. There is
nothing to prevent a man’s perceiving the force of certain special
arguments, although he does not yet know that a certain general law
of arguments holds good; for the general rule may hold good in some
cases and not in others. A man may reason well without understanding
the principles of reasoning, just as he may play billiards well without
understanding analytical mechanics. If you, the reader, actually find
that my arguments have a convincing force with you, it is a mere
pretence to call them illogical.
That if one sign denotes generally everything denoted by a second,
and this second denotes generally everything denoted by a third, then
the first denotes generally everything denoted by the third, is not
doubted by anybody who distinctly apprehends the meaning of these
words. The deduction of the general form of syllogism, therefore, will
consist only of an explanation of the suppositio communis. * N ow, what
*The word suppositio is one of the useful technical terms of the middle ages which
was condemned by the purists of the renaissance as incorrect. The early logicians made
a distinction between significatio and suppositio. Significatio is defined as “ rei per vocem
secundum placitum representatio.” 4 It is a mere affair of lexicography, and depends on
a special convention (secundum placitum)> and not on a general principle. Suppositio
belongs, not directly to the vox, but to the vox as having this or that significatio. “ Unde
significatio prior est suppositione et differunt in hoc, quia significatio est vocis, suppos­
itio vero est termini jam compositi ex voce et significatione.” The various suppositiones
which may belong to one word with one significatio are the different senses in which the
word may be taken, according to the general principles of the language or of logic. Thus,
the word table has different significations in the expressions “ table of logarithms” and
“ writing-table” ; but the word man has one and the same significatio, and only different
suppositiones, in the following sentences: “ A man is an animal,” “ a butcher is a man,”
“ man cooks his food,” “ man appeared upon the earth at such a date,” &c. Some later
writers have endeavored to make uacceptio ” do service for “suppositio but it seems to

[page 58]

58 I The Essential Peirce
the formal logician means by an expression of the form, “ Every M is
P\ ” is that anything of which M is predicable is P; thus, if S is M, that
S is P. The premise that “ Every M is P ” may, therefore, be denied; but
to admit it, unambiguously, in the sense intended, is to admit that the
inference is good that S is P if S is M. He, therefore, who does not deny
that S is P—Mf Sy Py being any terms such that S is M and every M
is P— denies nothing that the formal logician maintains in reference
to this matter; and he who does deny this, simply is deceived by an
ambiguity of language. How we come to make any judgments in the
sense of the above “ Every M is P, ” may be understood from the theory
of reality put forth in the article in the last number.5 It was there
shown that real things are of a cognitive and therefore significative
nature, so that the real is that which signifies something real. Conse­
quently, to predicate anything of anything real is to predicate it of that
of which that subject [the real] is itself predicated; for to predicate one
thing of another is to state that the former is a sign of the latter.
These considerations show the reason of the validity of the for­
mula,
S is M; M is P:
: . S is P
They hold good whatever S and P may be, provided that they be such
that any middle term between them can be found. That P should be
a negative term, therefore, or that S should be a particular term, would
not interfere at all with the validity of this formula. Hence, the follow­
ing formulas are also valid:
S is M; M is not P:
.'. S is not P.
Some S is M; M is P:
Some S is P.
Some S is M; M is not P:
. . Some S is not P.
Moreover, as all that class of inferences which depend upon the
introduction of relative terms can be reduced to the general form, they
also are shown to be valid. Thus, it is proved to be correct to reason
thus:
Every relation of a subject to its predicate is
a relation of the relative “ not X ’d, except
me better, now that scientific terminology is no longer forbidden, to revive supposition.
I should add that as the principles of logic and language for the different uses of the
different parts of speech are different, supposition must be restricted to the acceptation
of a substantive. The term copulatio was used for the acceptation of an adjective or verb.

[page 59]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic I 59
by the X of some,” to its correlate, where X
is any relative I please.
Every relation of “ man” to “ animal” is a
relation of a subject to its predicate.
Every relation of “ man” to “ animal” is a relation
of the relative “ not X ’d, except by the X of
some,” to its correlate, where X is any
relative I please.
Every relation of the relative “ not X ’d, except
by the X of some,” to its correlate, where X
is any relative I please, is a relation of the
relative “ not headed, except by the head of
some,” to its correlate.
Every relation of “ man” to “ animal” is a relation
of the relative “ not headed, except by the
head of some,” to its correlate.*
At the same time, as will be seen from this example, the proof of
the validity of these inferences depends upon the assumption of the
truth of certain general statements concerning relatives. These for­
mulas can all be deduced from the principle, that in a system of signs
in which no sign is taken in two different senses, two signs which differ
only in their manner of representing their object, but which are equiv­
alent in meaning, can always be substituted for one another. Any case
of the falsification of this principle would be a case of the dependence
of the mode of existence of the thing represented upon the mode of this
or that representation of it, which, as has been shown in the article in
the last number, is contrary to the nature of reality.
The next formula of syllogism to be considered is the following:
S is other than P; M is P:
. S is other than M.
The meaning of “ not” or “ other than” seems to have greatly perplexed
the German logicians, and it may be, therefore, that it is used in
different senses. If so, I propose to defend the validity of the above
formula only when other than is used in a particular sense. By saying
that one thing or class is other than a second, I mean that any third
whatever is identical with the class which is composed of that third
and of whatever is, at once, the first and second. For example, if I say
that rats are not mice, I mean that any third class as dogs is identical
*“ If any one will by ordinary syllogism prove that because every man is an animal,
therefore every head of a man is a head of an animal, I shall be ready to— set him another
question.” —De Morgan: “ On the Syllogism No. IV, and on the Logic of Relations.”

[page 60]

60 I The Essential Peirce
with dogs and6 rats-which-are-mice; that is to say, the addition of
rats-which-are-mice, to anything, leaves the latter just what it was
before. This being all that I mean by S is other than Py I mean abso­
lutely the same thing when I say that S is other than P> that I do when
I say that P is other than S; and the same when I say that S is other
than M, that I do when I say that M is other than S. Hence the above
formula is only another way of writing the following:
M is P; P is not S:
.’. M is not S.
But we have already seen that this is valid.
A very similar formula to the above is the following:
S is M; some S is P:
. Some M is P.
By saying that some of a class is of any character, I mean simply that
no statement which implies that none of that class is of that character
is true. But to say that none of that class is of that character, is, as I
take the word “ not,” to say that nothing of that character is of that
class. Consequently, to say that some of A is By is, as I understand
words and in the only sense in which I defend this formula, to say that
some B is A. In this way the formula is reduced to the following, which
has already been shown to be valid:
Some P is S; S is M:
. . Some P is M.
The only demonstrative syllogisms which are not included among
the above forms are the Theophrastean moods, which are all easily
reduced by means of simple conversions.
Let us now consider what can be said against all this, and let us take
up the objections which have actually been made to the syllogistic
formulas, beginning with those which are of a general nature and then
examining those sophisms which have been pronounced irresolvable
by the rules of ordinary logic.
It is a very ancient notion that no proof can be of any value, because
it rests on premises which themselves equally require proof, which
again must rest on other premises, and so back to infinity. This really
does show that nothing can be proved beyond the possibility7 of a
doubt; that no argument could be legitimately used against an absolute
sceptic; and that inference is only a transition from one cognition to
another, and not the creation of a cognition. But the objection is
intended to go much further than this, and to show (as it certainly
seems to do) that inference not only cannot produce infallible cogni­
tion, but that it cannot produce cognition at all. It is true, that since
some judgment precedes every judgment inferred, either the first

[page 61]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic I 61
premises were not inferred, or there have been no first premises. But
it does not follow that because there has been no first in a series,
therefore that series has had no beginning in time; for the series may
be continuous, 8 and may have begun gradually, as was shown in an
article in No. 3 of this volume,9 where this difficulty has already been
resolved.
A somewhat similar objection has been made by Locke10 and oth­
ers, to the effect that the ordinary demonstrative syllogism is a petitio
principii, inasmuch as the conclusion is already implicitly stated in the
major premise. Take, for example, the syllogism,
All men are mortal;
Socrates is a man:
Socrates is mortal.
This attempt to prove that Socrates is mortal begs the question, it is
said, since if the conclusion is denied by any one, he thereby denies
that all men are mortal. But what such considerations really prove is
that the syllogism is demonstrative. To call it apetitio principii is a mere
confusion of language. It is strange that philosophers, who are so
suspicious of the words virtual and potential, should have allowed this
“ implicit” to pass unchallenged. A petitio principii consists in reasoning
from the unknown to the unknown. Hence, a logician who is simply
engaged in stating what general forms of argument are valid, can, at
most, have nothing more to do with the consideration of this fallacy
than to note those cases in which from logical principles a premise of
a certain form cannot be better known than a conclusion of the corre­
sponding form. But it is plainly beyond the province of the logician,
who has only proposed to state what forms of facts involve what
others, to inquire whether man can have a knowledge of universal
propositions without a knowledge of every particular contained under
them, by means of natural insight, divine revelation, induction, or
testimony. The only petitio principii, therefore, which he can notice is
the assumption of the conclusion itself in the premise; and this, no
doubt, those who call the syllogism a petitio principii believe is done in
that formula. But the proposition “ All men are mortal” does not in
itself involve the statement that Socrates is mortal, but only that
“ whatever has man truly predicated of it is mortal.” In other words,
the conclusion is not involved in the meaning of the premise, but only
the validity o f the syllogism. So that this objection merely amounts to
arguing that the syllogism is not valid, because it is demonstrative.*
*Mr. Mill thinks the syllogism is merely a formula for recalling forgotten facts.11
Whether he means to deny, what all logicians since Kant have held, that the syllogism
serves to render confused thoughts distinct, or whether he does not know that this is
the usual doctrine, does not appear.

[page 62]

62 I The Essential Peirce
A much more interesting objection is that a syllogism is a purely
mechanical process. It proceeds according to a bare rule or formula;
and a machine might be constructed which would so transpose the
terms of premises. This being so (and it is so), it is argued that this
cannot be thought; that there is no life in it. Sw ift has ridiculed the
syllogism in the “ Voyage to Laputa,” by describing a machine for
making science:
By this contrivance, the most ignorant person, at a reasonable charge, and
with little bodily labor, might write books in philosophy, poetry, politics,
laws, mathematics, and theology, without the least assistance from genius or
study.12
The idea involved in this objection seems to be that it requires mind
to apply any formula or use any machine. If, then, this mind is itself
only another formula, it requires another mind behind it to set it into
operation, and so on ad infinitum. This objection fails in much the same
way that the first one which we considered failed. It is as though a man
should address a land surveyor as follows:— “ You do not make a true
representation of the land; you only measure lengths from point to
point— that is to say, lines. If you observe angles, it is only to solve
triangles and obtain the lengths of their sides. And when you come to
make your map, you use a pencil which can only make lines, again. So,
you have to do solely with lines. But the land is a surface; and no
number of lines, however great, will make any surface, however small.
You, therefore, fail entirely to represent the land.” The surveyor, I
think, would reply, “ Sir, you have proved that my lines cannot make
up the land, and that, therefore, my map is not the land. I never
pretended that it was. But that does not prevent it from truly repre­
senting the land, as far as it goes. It cannot, indeed, represent every
blade of grass; but it does not represent that there is not a blade of grass
where there is. To abstract from a circumstance is not to deny it.”
Suppose the objector were, at this point, to say, “ To abstract from a
circumstance is to deny it. Wherever your map does not represent a
blade of grass, it represents there is no blade of grass. Let us take things
on their own valuation.” Would not the surveyor reply: “ This map is
my description of the country. Its own valuation can be nothing but
what I say, and all the world understands, that I mean by it. Is it very
unreasonable that I should demand to be taken as I mean, especially
when I succeed in making m yself understood?” What the objector’s
reply to this question would be, I leave it to any one to say who thinks
his position well taken. N ow this line of objection is parallel to that
which is made against the syllogism. It is shown that no number of
syllogisms can constitute the sum total of any mental action, however

[page 63]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic I 63
restricted. This may be freely granted, and yet it will not follow that
the syllogism does not truly represent the mental action, as far as it
purports to represent it at all. There is reason to believe that the action
of the mind is, as it were, a continuous movement. N ow the doctrine
embodied in syllogistic formulas (so far as it applies to the mind at all)
is, that if two successive positions, occupied by the mind in this move­
ment, be taken, they will be found to have certain relations. It is true
that no number of successions of positions can make up a continuous
movement; and this, I suppose, is what is meant by saying that a
syllogism is a dead formula, while thinking is a living process. But the
reply is that the syllogism is not intended to represent the mind, as to
its life or deadness, but only as to the relation of its different judgments
concerning the same thing. And it should be added that the relation
between syllogism and thought does not spring from considerations of
formal logic, but from those of psychology. All that the formal logician
has to say is, that if facts capable of expression in such and such forms
of words are true, another fact whose expression is related in a certain
way to the expression of these others is also true.
Hegel taught that ordinary reasoning is “ one-sided.” 13 A part of
what he meant was that by such inference a part only of all that is true
of an object can be learned, owing to the generality or abstractedness
of the predicates inferred. This objection is, therefore, somewhat simi­
lar to the last; for the point of it is that no number of syllogisms would
give a complete knowledge of the object. This, however, presents a
difficulty which the other did not; namely, that if nothing incognizable
exists, and all knowledge is by mental action, by mental action every­
thing is cognizable. So that if by syllogism everything is not cogniza­
ble, syllogism does not exhaust the modes of mental action. But grant
the validity of this argument and it proves too much; for it makes, not
the syllogism particularly, but all finite knowledge to be worthless.
However much we know, more may come to be found out. Hence, all
can never be known. This seems to contradict the fact that nothing is
absolutely incognizable; and it would really do so i f our knowledge were
something absolutely limited. For, to say that all can never be known,
means that information may increase beyond any assignable point;
that is, that an absolute termination of all increase of knowledge is
absolutely incognizable, and therefore does not exist. In other words,
the proposition merely means that the sum of all that will be known
up to any time, however advanced, into the future, has a ratio less than
any assignable ratio to all that may be known at a time still more
advanced. This does not contradict the fact that everything is cogniza­
ble; it only contradicts a proposition, which no one can maintain, that
every thing will be known at some time some number of years into the
future.14 It may, however, very justly be said that the difficulty still

[page 64]

64 I The Essential Peirce
remains, how at every future time, however late, there can be some­
thing yet to happen. It is no longer a contradiction, but it is a difficulty;
that is to say, lengths of time are shown not to afford an adequate
conception of futurity in general; and the question arises, in what
other way we are to conceive of it. I might indeed, perhaps, fairly drop
the question here, and say that the difficulty had become so entirely
removed from the syllogism in particular, that the formal logician
need not feel himself specially called on to consider it. The solution,
however, is very simple. It is that we conceive of the future, as a whole,
by considering that this word, like any other general term, as “ inhabi­
tant of St. Louis,” may be taken distributively or collectively. We
conceive of the infinite, therefore, not directly or on the side of its
infinity, but by means of a consideration concerning words or a second
intention.
Another objection to the syllogism is that its “ therefore” is merely
subjective; that, because a certain conclusion syllogistically follows
from a premise, it does not follow that the fact denoted by the conclu­
sion really depends upon the fact denoted by the premise, so that the
syllogism does not represent things as they really are. But it has been
fully shown that if the facts are as the premises represent, they are also
as the conclusion represents. N ow this is a purely objective statement:
therefore, there is a real connection between the facts stated as prem­
ises and those stated as conclusion. It is true that there is often an
appearance of reasoning deductively from effects to causes. Thus we
may reason as follows:— “ There is smoke; there is never smoke with­
out fire: hence, there has been fire.” Yet smoke is not the cause of fire,
but the effect of it. Indeed, it is evident, that in many cases an event
is a demonstrative sign of a certain previous event having occurred.
Hence, we can reason deductively from relatively future to relatively
past, whereas causation15 really determines events in the direct order
of time. Nevertheless, if we can thus reason against the stream of time,
it is because there really are such facts as that “ If there is smoke, there
has been fire,” in which the following event is the antecedent. Indeed,
if we consider the manner in which such a proposition became known
to us, we shall find that what it really means is that “ If we find smoke,
we shall find evidence on the whole that there has been fire” ; and this,
if reality consists in the agreement that the whole community would
eventually come to, is the very same thing as to say that there really
has been fire. In short, the whole present difficulty is resolved instantly
by this theory of reality, because it makes all reality something which
is constituted by an event indefinitely future.
Another objection, for which I am quite willing to allow a great
German philosopher the whole credit, is that sometimes the conclu­
sion is false, although both the premises and the syllogistic form are

[page 65]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws o f Logic I 65
correct.* O f this he gives the following examples.16 From the middle
term that a wall has been painted blue, it may correctly be concluded
that it is blue; but notwithstanding this syllogism it may be green if
it has also received a coat of yellow, from which last circumstance by
itself it would follow that it is yellow. If from the middle term of the
sensuous faculty it be concluded that man is neither good nor bad,
since neither can be predicated of the sensuous, the syllogism is cor­
rect; but the conclusion is false, since of man in the concrete, spiritual­
ity is equally true, and may serve as middle term in an opposite syllo­
gism. From the middle term of the gravitation of the planets, satellites,
and comets, towards the sun, it follows correctly that these bodies fall
into the sun; but they do not fall into it, because (!) they equally
gravitate to their own centres, or, in other words (!!), they are sup­
ported by centrifugal force. N ow, does Hegel mean to say that these
syllogisms satisfy the rules for syllogism given by those who defend
syllogism? or does he mean to grant that they do not satisfy those rules,
but to set up some rules of his own for syllogism which shall insure
its yielding false conclusions from true premises? If the latter, he
ignores the real issue, which is whether the syllogism as defined by the
rules of formal logic is correct, and not whether the syllogism as
represented by Hegel is correct. But if he means that the above exam­
ples satisfy the usual definition of a true syllogism, he is mistaken. The
first, stated in form, is as follows:
Whatever has been painted blue is blue;
This wall has been painted blue:
This wall is blue.
N ow “ painted blue” may mean painted with blue paint, or painted so
as to be blue. If, in the example, the former were meant, the major
premise would be false. As he has stated that it is true, the latter
meaning of “ painted blue” must be the one intended. Again, “ blue”
may mean blue at some time, or blue at this time. If the latter be meant,
the major premise is plainly false; therefore, the former is meant. But
the conclusion is said to contradict the statement that the wall is
yellow. If blue were here taken in the more general sense, there would
be no such contradiction. Hence, he means in the conclusion that this
wall is now blue; that is to say, he reasons thus:
Whatever has been made blue has been blue;
This has been made blue:
.'. This is blue now.
*“ So zeight sich jener Schlussatz dadurch als falsch, obgleich für sich dessen Prä­
missen und ebenso dessen Consequenz ganz richtig sind.”— Hegel’s Werke, vol. v, p. 124.

[page 66]

66 I The Essential Peirce
N ow substituting letters for the subjects and predicates, we get the
form,
M is P;
S is M:
:. S is
This is not a syllogism in the ordinary sense of that term, or in any
sense in which anybody maintains that the syllogism is valid.
The second example given by Hegel, when written out in full, is
as follows:
Sensuality is neither good nor bad;
Man has (not is) sensuality:
Man is neither good nor bad.
Or, the same argument may be stated as follows:
The sensuous, as such, is neither good nor bad;
Man is sensuous:
Man is neither good nor bad.
When letters are substituted for subject and predicate in either of
these arguments, it takes the form,
M is P;
S is N:
.\ S is P.
This, again, bears but a very slight resemblance to a syllogism.
The third example, when stated at full length, is as follows:
Whatever tends towards the sun, on
the whole, falls into the sun;
The planets tend toward the sun:
The planets fall into the sun.
This is a fallacy similar to the last.
I wonder that this eminent logician did not add to his list of exam­
ples of correct syllogism the following:
It either rains, or it does not rain;
It does not rain:
It rains.
This is fully as deserving of serious consideration as any of those
which he has brought forward. The rainy day and the pleasant day

[page 67]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic I 67
are both, in the first place, day. Secondly, each is the negation of a
day. It is indifferent which be regarded as the positive. The pleasant
is Other to the rainy, and the rainy is in like manner Other to the
pleasant. Thus, both are equally Others. Both are Others of each
other, or each is Other for itself. So this day being other than rainy,
that to which it is Other is itself. But it is Other than itself. Hence,
it is itself Rainy.
Some sophisms have, however, been adduced, mostly by the Ele-
atics and Sophists, which really are extremely difficult to resolve by
syllogistic rules; and according to some modern authors this is actu­
ally impossible. These sophisms fall into three classes: ist, those
which relate to continuity; 2d, those which relate to consequences of
supposing things to be other than they are; jd, those which relate to
propositions which imply their own falsity. O f the first class, the
most celebrated are Zeno’s arguments concerning motion. One of
these is, that if Achilles overtakes a tortoise in any finite time, and
the tortoise has the start of him by a distance which may be called
a, then Achilles has to pass over the sum of distances represented by
the polynomial
\a \a \a + i6a + jja &c.
up to infinity. Every term of this polynomial is finite, and it has an
infinite number of terms; consequently, Achilles must in a finite time
pass over a distance equal to the sum of an infinite number of finite
distances. N ow this distance must be infinite, because no finite dis­
tance, however small, can be multiplied by an infinite number without
giving an infinite distance. So that even if none of these finite distances
were larger than the smallest (which is finite since all are finite), the
sum of the whole would be infinite. But Achilles cannot pass over an
infinite distance in a finite time; therefore, he cannot overtake the
tortoise in any time, however great.17
The solution of this fallacy is as follows: The conclusion is depen­
dent on the fact18 that Achilles cannot overtake the tortoise without
passing over an infinite number of terms of that series of finite dis­
tances. That is, no case of his overtaking the tortoise would be a case
of his not passing over a non-finite number of terms; that is (by simple
conversion), no case of his not passing over a non-finite number of
terms would be a case of his overtaking the tortoise. But if he does not
pass over a non-finite number of terms, he either passes over a finite
number, or he passes over none; and conversely. Consequently, noth­
ing more has been said than that every case of his passing over only
a finite number of terms, or of his not passing over any, is a case of his
not overtaking the tortoise. Consequently, nothing more can be con­
cluded than that he passes over a distance greater than the sum of any

[page 68]

68 I The Essential Peirce
finite number of the above series of terms. But because a quantity is
greater than any quantity of a certain series, it does not follow that it
is greater than any quantity.19
In fact, the reasoning in this sophism may be exhibited as fol­
lows:— We start with the series of numbers,
\a
\a + \a
\d + “h
\a -f- \a + + i6#
&c. &c. (¿rc.
Then, the implied argument is
Any number of this series is less than a;
But any number you please is less than the number of
terms of this series:
Hence, any number you please is less than a.
This involves an obvious confusion between the number of terms and
the value of the greatest term.
Another argument by Zeno against motion, is that a body fills a
space no larger than itself. In that place there is no room for motion.
Hence, while in the place where it is, it does not move. But it never
is other than in the place where it is. Hence, it never moves. Putting
this into form, it will read:
No body in a place no larger than itself is moving;
But every body is a body in a place no larger than itself:
N o body is moving.
The error of this consists in the fact that the minor premise is only
true in the sense that during a time sufficiently short the space occu­
pied by a body is as little larger than itself as you please. All that can
be inferred from this is, that during no time a body will move no
distance.
All the arguments of Zeno depend on supposing that a continuum
has ultimate parts. But a continuum is precisely that, every part of
which has parts, in the same sense. Hence, he makes out his contra­
dictions only by making a self-contradictory supposition. In ordinary
and mathematical language, we allow ourselves to speak of such
parts—points— and whenever we are led into contradiction thereby,
we have simply to express ourselves more accurately to resolve the
difficulty.
Suppose a piece of glass to be laid on a sheet of paper so as to cover
half of it. Then, every part of the paper is covered, or not covered; for

[page 69]

“ not” means merely outside of, or other than. But is the line under the
edge of the glass covered or not? It is no more on one side of the edge
than it is on the other. Therefore, it is either on both sides, or neither
side. It is not on neither side; for if it were it would be not on either
side, therefore not on the covered side, therefore not covered, therefore
on the uncovered side. It is not partly on one side and partly on the
other, because it has no width. Hence, it is wholly on both sides, or
both covered and not covered.
The solution of this is, that we have supposed a part too narrow to
be partly uncovered and partly covered; that is to say, a part which has
no parts in a continuous surface, which by definition has no such parts.
The reasoning, therefore, simply serves to reduce this supposition to
an absurdity.
It may be said that there really is such a thing as a line. If a shadow
falls on a surface, there really is a division between the light and the
darkness. That is true. But it does not follow that because we attach
a definite meaning to the part of a surface being covered, therefore we
know what we mean when we say that a line is covered. We may define
a covered line as one which separates two surfaces both of which are
covered, or as one which separates two surfaces either of which is
covered. In the former case, the line under the edge is uncovered; in
the latter case, it is covered.
In the sophisms thus far considered, the appearance of contradic­
tion depends mostly upon an ambiguity; in those which we are now
to consider, two true propositions really do in form conflict with one
another. We are apt to think that formal logic forbids this, whereas a
familiar argument, the reductio ad absurdum, depends on showing that
contrary predicates are true of a subject, and that therefore that subject
does not exist. Many logicians, it is true, make affirmative propositions
assert the existence of their subjects.* The objection to this is that it
cannot be extended to hypotheticals. The proposition
If A then B
may conveniently be regarded as equivalent to
Every case of the truth of A is a case of the truth of B.
But this cannot be done if the latter proposition asserts the existence
of its subject; that is, asserts that A really happens. If, however, a
categorical affirmative be regarded as asserting the existence of its
subject, the principle of the reductio ad absurdum is that two proposi­
tions of the forms,
Grounds of Validity o f the Laws o f Logic I 69
*The usage of ordinary language has no relevancy in the matter.

[page 70]

70 I The Essential Peirce
If A were true, B would not be true,
and
If A were true, B would be true,
may both be true at once; and that if they are so, A is not true. It will
be well, perhaps, to illustrate this point. N o man of common sense
would deliberately upset his inkstand if there were ink in it; that is,
if any ink would run out. Hence, by simple conversion,
If he were deliberately to upset his inkstand,
no ink would be spilt.
But suppose there is ink in it. Then, it is also true, that
If he were deliberately to upset his inkstand,
the ink would be spilt.
These propositions are both true, and the law of contradiction is not
violated which asserts only that nothing has contradictory predicates:
only, it follows from these propositions that the man will not deliber­
ately overturn his inkstand.
There are two ways in which deceptive sophisms may result from
this circumstance. In the first place, contradictory propositions are
never both true. Now, as a universal proposition may be true when the
subject does not exist, it follows that the contradictory of a universal—
that is, a particular—cannot be taken in such a sense as to be true when
the subject does not exist. But a particular simply asserts a part of what
is asserted in the universal over it; therefore, the universal over it
asserts the subject to exist. Consequently, there are two kinds of uni­
versal, those which do not assert the subject to exist, and these have
no particular propositions under them, and those which do assert that
the subject exists, and these strictly speaking have no contradictories.
For example, there is no use of such a form of proposition as “ Some
griffins would be dreadful animals,” as particular under the useful
form “ The griffin would be a dreadful animal” ; and the apparent
contradictories “ All of John Smith’s family are ill,” and “ Some of John
Smith’s family are not ill,” are both false at once if John Smith has no
family. Here, though an inference from a universal to the particular
under it is always valid, yet a procedure which greatly resembles this
would be sophistical if the universal were one of those propositions
which does not assert the existence of its subject. The following soph­
ism depends upon this; I call it the True Gorgias:
Gorgias. What say you, Socrates, of black? Is any black, white?
Socrates. No, by Zeus!

[page 71]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic I 71
Gor. Do you say, then, that no black is white? Soc. None at all.
Gor. But is everything either black or non-black? Soc. O f course.
Gor. And everything either white or non-white? Soc. Yes.
Gor. And everything either rough or smooth? Soc. Yes.
Gor. And everything either real or unreal? Soc. Oh, bother! yes.
Gor. Do you say, then, that all black is either rough black or smooth
black? Soc. Yes.
Gor. And that all white is either real white or unreal white? Soc.
Yes.
Gor. And yet is no black, white? Soc. None at all.
Gor. N or no white, black? Soc. By no means.
Gor. What? Is no smooth black, white? Soc. No; you cannot prove
that, Gorgias.
Gor. N or no rough black, white? Soc. Neither.
Gor. N or no real white, black? Soc. No.
Gor. N or no unreal white, black? Soc. No, I say. No white at all is
black.
Gor. What if black is smooth, is it not white? Soc. Not in the least.
Gor. And if the last is false, is the first false? Soc. It follows.
Gor. If, then, black is white, does it follow, that black is not smooth?
Soc. It does.
Gor. Black-white is not smooth? Soc. What do you mean?
Gor. Can any dead man speak? Soc. No, indeed.
Gor. And is any speaking man dead? Soc. I say, no.
Gor. And is any good king tyrannical? Soc. No.
Gor. And is any tyrannical king good? Soc. I just said no.
Gor. And you said, too, that no rough black is white, did you not?
Soc. Yes.
Gor. Then, is any black-white, rough? Soc. No.
Gor. And is any unreal black, white? Soc. No.
Gor. Then, is any black-white unreal? Soc. No.
Gor. N o black-white is rough? Soc. None.
Gor. All black-white, then, is non-rough? Soc. Yes.
Gor. And all black-white, non-unreal? Soc. Yes.
Gor. All black-white is then smooth? Soc. Yes.
Gor. And all real? Soc. Yes.
Gor. Some smooth, then, is black-white? Soc. O f course.
Gor. And some real is black-white? Soc. So it seems.
Gor. Some black-white smooth is black-white? Soc. Yes.
Gor. Some black smooth is black-white? Soc. Yes.
Gor. Some black smooth is white. Soc. Yes.
Gor. Some black real is black-white? Soc. Yes.
Gor. Some black real is white? Soc. Yes.
Gor. Some real black is white? Soc. Yes.

[page 72]

72 I The Essential Peirce
Gor. And some smooth black is white? Soc. Yes.
Gor. Then, some black is white? Soc. I think so myself.
The principle of the reductio ad absurdum also occasions deceptions
in another way, owing to the fact that we have many words, such as
can, may, must, &c., which imply more or less vaguely an otherwise
unexpressed condition, so that these propositions are in fact hypotheti-
cals. Accordingly, if the unexpressed condition is some state of things
which does not actually come to pass, the two propositions may appear
to be contrary to one another. Thus, the moralist says, “ You ought to
do this, and you can do it.” This “ You can do it” is principally horta­
tory in its force: so far as it is a statement of fact, it means merely, “ If
you try, you will do it.” Now, if the act is an outward one and the act
is not performed, the scientific man, in view of the fact that every event
in the physical world depends exclusively on physical antecedents,
says that in this case the laws of nature prevented the thing from being
done, and that therefore, “ Even if you had tried, you would not have
done it.” Yet the reproachful conscience still says you might have done
it; that is, that “ If you had tried, you would have done it.” This is called
the paradox of freedom and fate; and it is usually supposed that one
of these propositions must be true and the other false. But since, in
fact, you have not tried, there is no reason why the supposition that
you have tried should not be reduced to an absurdity. In the same way,
if you had tried and had performed the action, the conscience might
say, “ If you had not tried, you would not have done it” ; while the
understanding would say, “ Even if you had not tried, you would have
done it.” These propositions are perfectly consistent, and only serve
to reduce the supposition that you did not try tc an absurdity.*
*This seems to me to be the main difficulty of freedom and fate. But the question
is overlaid with many others. The Necessitarians seem now to maintain less that every
physical event is completely determined by physical causes (which seems20to me irrefra­
gable), than that every act of will is determined by the strongest motive. This has never
been proved. Its advocates seem to think that it follows from universal causation, but
why need the cause of an act lie within the consciousness at all? If I act from a reason
at all, I act voluntarily; but which of two reasons shall appear strongest to me on a
particular occasion may be owing to what I have eaten for dinner. Unless there is a
perfect regularity as to what is the strongest motive with me, to say that I act from the
strongest motive is mere tautology. If there is no calculating how a man will act except
by taking into account external facts, the character of his motives does not determine
how he acts. Mill and others have, therefore, not shown that a man always acts from
the strongest motive. Hobbes maintained that a man always acts from a reflection upon
what will please him most.21 This is a very crude opinion. Men are not always thinking
of themselves.
Self-control seems to be the capacity for rising to an extended view of a practical
subject instead of seeing only temporary urgency. This is the only freedom of which
man has any reason to be proud; and it is because love of what is good for all on the
whole, which is the widest possible consideration, is the essence of Christianity, that it
is said that the service of Christ is perfect freedom.

[page 73]

Grounds o f Validity o f the Laws o f Logic I 73
The third class of sophisms consists of the so-called Insolubilia.
Here is an example of one of them with its resolution:
T H IS PR O PO SIT IO N IS N O T T R U E .
IS IT T R U E O R N O T?
Suppose it true.
Then,
The proposition is true;
But, that it is not true is the
proposition:
.'. That it is not true is true;
. . It is not true.
Besides,
It is true.
It is true that it is true,
It is not true that it is not true;
But, the proposition is that it is
not true,
The proposition is not true.
Suppose it not true.
Then,
It is not true.
\ It is true that it is not true.
But, the proposition is that it is
not true.
\ The proposition is true.
Besides,
The proposition is not true.
But that it is not true is the
proposition.
That it is not true, is not true.
That it is true, is true.
It is çrue.
.'. Whether it is true or not, it is both true and not.
It is both true and not,
which is absurd.
Since the conclusion is false, the reasoning is bad, or the premises
are not all true. But the reasoning is a dilemma; either, then, the
disjunctive principle that it is either true or not is false, or the reason­
ing under one or the other branch is bad, or the reasoning is altogether
valid. If the principle that it is either true or not is false, it is other than
true and other than not true; that is, not true and not not true; that
is, not true and true. But this is absurd. Hence, the disjunctive princi­
ple is valid. There are two arguments under each horn of the dilemma;
both the arguments under one or the other branch must be false. But,
in each case, the second argument involves all the premises and forms
of inference involved in the first; hence, if the first is false, the second
necessarily is so. We may, therefore, confine our attention to the first
arguments in the two branches. The forms of argument contained in
these are two: first, the simple syllogism in Barbara, and, second, the
consequence from the truth of a proposition to the proposition itself.
These are both correct. Hence, the whole form of reasoning is correct,
and nothing remains to be false but a premise. But since the repetition
of an alternative supposition is not a premise, there is, properly speak­
ing, but one premise in the whole. This is that the proposition is the
same as that that proposition is not true. This, then, must be false.
Hence the proposition signifies either less or more than this. If it does

[page 74]

74 I The Essential Peirce
not signify as much as this, it signifies nothing, and hence it is not true,
and hence another proposition which says of it what it says of itself
is true. But if the proposition in question signifies something more
than that it is itself not true, then the premise that
Whatever is said in the proposition is that it is not true,
is not true. And as a proposition is true only if whatever is said in it
is true, but is false if anything said in it is false, the first argument on
the second side of the dilemma contains a false premise, and the second
an undistributed middle. But the first argument on the first side re­
mains good. Hence, if the proposition means more than that it is not
true, it is not true, and another proposition which repeats this of it is
true. Hence, whether the proposition does or does not mean that it is
not true, it is not true, and a proposition which repeats this of it is true.
Since this repeating proposition is true, it has a meaning. Now, a
proposition has a meaning if any part of it has a meaning. Hence the
original proposition (a part of which repeated has a meaning) has itself
a meaning. Hence, it must imply something besides that which it
explicitly states. But it has no particular determination to any further
implication. Hence, what more it signifies it must signify by virtue of
being a proposition at all. That is to say, every proposition must imply
something analogous to what this implies. Now, the repetition of this
proposition does not contain this implication, for otherwise it could
not be true; hence, what every proposition implies must be something
concerning itself. What every proposition implies concerning itself
must be something which is false of the proposition now under discus­
sion, for the whole falsity of this proposition lies therein, since all that
it explicitly lays down is true. It must be something which would not
be false if the proposition were true, for in that case some true proposi­
tion would be false. Hence, it must be that it is itself true. That is, every
proposition asserts its own truth.
The proposition in question, therefore, is true in all other respects
but its implication of its own truth.*
The difficulty of showing how the law of deductive reasoning is
*This is the principle which was most usually made the basis of the resolution of
the Insolubilia. See, for example, Pauli Veneti Sophismata Aurea. Sophisma 50. The author­
ity of Aristotle is claimed for this mode of solution. Sophistici Elenchi, cap. 25. The
principal objection which was made to this mode of solution, viz., that the principle that
every proposition implies its own truth, cannot be proved, I believe that I have removed.
The only arguments against the truth of this principle were based on the imperfect
doctrines of modales and obligationes. Other methods of solution suppose that a part of
a proposition cannot denote the whole proposition, or that no intellection is a formal
cognition of itself. A solution of this sort will be found in Occam’s Summa Totius Logices,
3d part of 3d part, cap. 38. Such modern authors as think the solution “ very easy” do not
understand its difficulties. See Mansel’s Aldrich, p. 145.

[page 75]

Grounds o f Validity of the Laws of Logic I 75
true depends upon our inability to conceive of its not being true. In
the case of probable reasoning the difficulty is of quite another kind;
here, where we see precisely what the procedure is, we wonder how
such a process can have any validity at all. How magical it is that by
examining a part of a class we can know what is true of the whole of
the class, and by study of the past can know the future; in short, that
we can know what we have not experienced!
Is not this an intellectual intuition! Is it not that besides ordinary
experience which is dependent on there being a certain physical con­
nection between our organs and the thing experienced, there is a
second avenue of truth dependent only on there being a certain intel­
lectual connection between our previous knowledge and what we
learn in that way? Yes, this is true. Man has this faculty, just as opium
has a somnific virtue;22 but some further questions may be asked,
nevertheless. How is the existence of this faculty accounted for? In one
sense, no doubt, by natural selection. Since it is absolutely essential to
the preservation of so delicate an organism as man’s, no race which had
it not has been able to sustain itself. This accounts for the prevalence
of this faculty, provided it was only a possible one. But how can it be
possible? What could enable the mind to know physical things which
do not physically influence it and which it does not influence? The
question cannot be answered by any statement concerning the human
mind, for it is equivalent to asking what makes the facts usually to be,
as inductive and hypothetic conclusions from true premises represent
them to be? Facts of a certain kind are usually true when facts having
certain relations to them are true; what is the cause of this? That is the
question.
The usual reply is that nature is everywhere regular; as things have
been, so they will be; as one part of nature is, so is every other. But
this explanation will not do. Nature is not regular. N o disorder would
be less orderly than the existing arrangement. It is true that the special
laws and regularities are innumerable; but nobody thinks of the ir­
regularities, which are infinitely more frequent. Every fact true of any
one thing in the universe is related to every fact true of every other.
But the immense majority of these relations are fortuitous and irregu­
lar. A man in China bought a cow three days and five minutes after
a Greenlander had sneezed. Is that abstract circumstance connected
with any regularity whatever? And are not such relations infinitely
more frequent than those which are regular? But if a very large num­
ber of qualities were to be distributed among a very large number of
things in almost any way, there would chance to be some few regulari­
ties. If, for example, upon a checker-board of an enormous number of
squares, painted all sorts of colors, myriads of dice were to be thrown,
it could hardly fail to happen, that upon some color, or shade of color,

[page 76]

76 I The Essential Peirce
out of so many, some one of the six numbers should not be uppermost
on any die. This would be a regularity; for, the universal proposition
would be true that upon that color that number is never turned up.
But suppose this regularity abolished, then a far more remarkable
regularity would be created, namely, that on every color every number
is turned up. Either way, therefore, a regularity must occur. Indeed,
a little reflection will show that although we have here only variations
of color and of the numbers of the dice, many regularities must occur.
And the greater the number of objects, the more respects in which
they vary, and the greater the number of varieties in each respect, the
greater will be the number of regularities. Now, in the universe, all
these numbers are infinite. Therefore, however disorderly the chaos,
the number of regularities must be infinite. The orderliness of the
universe, therefore, if it exists, must consist in the large proportion of
relations which present a regularity to those which are quite irregular.
But this proportion in the actual universe is, as we have seen, as small
as it can be; and, therefore, the orderliness of the universe is as little
as that of any arrangement whatever.
But even if there were such an orderliness in things, it never could
be discovered. For it would belong to things either collectively or
distributively. If it belonged to things collectively, that is to say, if
things formed a system the difficulty would be that a system can only
be known by seeing some considerable proportion of the whole. N ow
we never can know how great a part of the whole of nature we have
discovered. If the order were distributive, that is, belonged to all things
only by belonging to each thing, the difficulty would be that a charac­
ter can only be known by comparing something which has it with
something which has it not. Being, quality, relation, and other universals
are not known except as characters of words or other signs, attributed
by a figure of speech to things. Thus, in neither case could the order
of things be known. But the order of things would not help the validity
of our reasoning— that is, would not help us to reason correctly—
unless we knew what the order of things required the relation between
the known reasoned from to the unknown reasoned to, to be.
But even if this order both existed and were known, the knowledge
would be of no use except as a general principle, from which things
could be deduced. It would not explain how knowledge could be
increased (in contradistinction to being rendered more distinct), and
so it would not explain how it could itself have been acquired.
Finally, if the validity of induction and hypothesis were dependent
on a particular constitution of the universe, we could imagine a uni­
verse in which these modes of inference should not be valid, just as we
can imagine a universe in which there would be no attraction, but
things should merely drift about. Accordingly, J. S. Mill, who explains

[page 77]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws o f Logic I 77
the validity of induction by the uniformity of nature,* maintains that
he can imagine a universe without any regularity, so that no probable
inference would be valid in it.t In the universe as it is, probable
arguments sometimes fail, nor can any definite proportion of cases be
stated in which they hold good; all that can be said is that in the long
run they prove approximately correct. Can a universe be imagined in
which this would not be the case? It must be a universe where probable
argument can. have some application, in order that it may fail half the
time. It must, therefore, be a universe experienced. O f the finite num­
ber of propositions true of a finite amount of experience of such a
universe, no one would be universal in form, unless the subject of it
were an individual. For if there were a plural universal proposition,
inferences by analogy from one particular to another would hold good
invariably in reference to that subject. So that these arguments might
be no better than guesses in reference to other parts of the universe,
but they would invariably hold good in a finite proportion of it, and
so would on the whole be somewhat better than guesses. There could,
also, be no individuals in that universe, for there must be some general
class—that is, there must be some things more or less alike— or proba­
ble argument would find no premises there; therefore, there must be
two mutually exclusive classes, since every class has a residue outside
of it; hence, if there were any individual, that individual would be
wholly excluded from one or other of these classes. Hence, the univer­
sal plural proposition would be true, that no one of a certain class was
that individual. Hence, no universal proposition would be true. Ac­
cordingly, every combination of characters would occur in such a
universe. But this would not be disorder, but the simplest order; it
would not be unintelligible, but, on the contrary, everything conceiv­
able would be found in it with equal frequency. The notion, therefore,
of a universe in which probable arguments should fail as often as hold
true, is absurd. We can suppose it in general terms, but we cannot
specify how it should be other than self-contradictory. +
*Logic, Book 3, chap. 3, sec. 1.
tIbid. Book 3, chap. 21, sec. 1. “ I am convinced that any one accustomed to abstraction
and analysis, who will fairly exert his faculties for the purpose, will, when his imagina­
tion has once learnt to entertain the notion, find no difficulty in conceiving that in some
one, for instance, of the many firmaments into which sidereal astronomy divides the
universe, events may succeed one another at random, without any fixed law; nor can
anything in our experience or mental nature constitute a sufficient, or indeed any,
reason for believing that this is nowhere the case.
“ Were we to suppose (what it is perfectly possible to imagine) that the present order
of the universe were brought to an end, and that a chaos succeeded, in which there was
no fixed succession of events, and the past gave no assurance of the future,” &c.
♦Boole (Laws of Thought, p. 370) has shown, in a very simple and elegant manner, that
an infinite number of balls may have characters distributed in such a way, that from the
characters of the balls already drawn, we could infer nothing in regard to that of the

[page 78]

78 I The Essential Peirce
Since we cannot conceive of probable inferences as not generally
holding good, and since no special supposition will serve to explain
their validity, many logicians have sought to base this validity on that
of deduction, and that in a variety of ways. The only attempt of this
sort, however, which deserves to be noticed is that which seeks to
determine the probability of a future event by the theory of probabili­
ties, from the fact that a certain number of similar events have been
observed. Whether this can be done or not depends on the meaning
assigned to the word probability. But if this word is to be taken in such
a sense that a form of conclusion which is probable is valid; since the
validity of an inference (or its correspondence with facts) consists
solely in this, that when such premises are true, such a conclusion is
generally true, then probability can mean nothing but the ratio of the
frequency of occurrence of a specific event to a general one over it. In
this sense of the term, it is plain that the probability of an inductive
conclusion cannot be deduced from the premises; for from the inductive
premises
S', 5", S mare M,
S', S ", S'", are P,
nothing follows deductively, except that any M, which is S', or S ", or
S'" is P; or, less explicitly, that some M is P.
Thus, we seem to be driven to this point. On the one hand, no
determination of things, no fact, can result in the validity of probable
argument; nor, on the other hand, is such argument reducible to that
form which holds good, however the facts may be. This seems very
much like a reduction to absurdity of the validity of such reasoning;
and a paradox of the greatest difficulty is presented for solution.
There can be no doubt of the importance of this problem. Accord­
ing to Kant, the central question of philosophy is “ How are synthetical
judgments a priori possible?” 23 But antecedently to this comes the
question how synthetical judgments in general, and still more gener­
ally, how synthetical reasoning is possible at all. When the answer to
the general problem has been obtained, the particular one will be
comparatively simple. This is the lock upon the door of philosophy.
All probable inference, whether induction or hypothesis, is infer­
ence from the parts to the whole. It is essentially the same, therefore,
as statistical inference. Out of a bag of black and white beans I take a
few handfuls, and from this sample I can judge approximately the
proportions of black and white in the whole. This is identical with
induction. N ow we know upon what the validity of this inference
characters of the next one. The same is true of some arrangements of a finite number
of balls, provided the inference takes place after a fixed number of drawings. But this
does not invalidate the reasoning above, although it is an important fact without doubt.

[page 79]

Grounds of Validity of the Laws o f Logic I 79
depends. It depends upon the fact that in the long run, any one bean
would be taken out as often as any other. For were this not so, the mean
of a large number of results of such testings of the contents of the bag
would not be precisely the ratio of the numbers of the two colors of
beans in the bag. N ow we may divide the question of the validity of
induction into two parts: ist, why of all inductions, premises for which
occur, the generality should hold good, and 2d, why men are not fated
always to light upon the small proportion of worthless inductions.
Then, the first of these two questions is readily answered. For since
all the members of any class are the same as all that are to be known;
and since from any part of those which are to be known an induction
is competent to the rest, in the long run any one member of a class will
occur as the subject of a premise of a possible induction as often as any
other, and, therefore, the validity of induction depends simply upon
the fact that the parts make up and constitute the whole. This in its
turn depends simply upon there being such a state of things that any
general terms are possible. But it has been shown, p. 52, that being at
all is being in general. And thus this part of the validity of induction
depends merely on there being any reality.
From this it appears that we cannot say that the generality of
inductions are true, but only that in the long run they approximate to
the truth. This is the truth of the statement, that the universality of
an inference from induction is only the analogue of true universality.
Hence, also, it cannot be said that we know an inductive conclusion
to be true, however loosely we state it; we only know that by accepting
inductive conclusions, in the long run our errors balance one another.
In fact, insurance companies proceed upon induction;— they do not
know what will happen to this or that policy-holder; they only know
that they are secure in the long run.
The other question relative to the validity of induction, is why men
are not fated always to light upon those inductions which are highly
deceptive. The explanation of the former branch of the problem we
have seen to be that there is something real. N ow, since if there is
anything real, then (on account of this reality consisting in the ulti­
mate agreement of all men, and on account of the fact that reasoning
from parts to whole, is the only kind of synthetic reasoning which men
possess) it follows necessarily that a sufficiently long succession of
inferences from parts to whole will lead men to a knowledge of it, so
that in that case they cannot be fated on the whole to be thoroughly
unlucky in their inductions. This second branch of the problem is in
fact equivalent to asking why there is anything real, and thus its
solution will carry the solution of the former branch one step further.
The answer to this question may be put into a general and abstract,
or a special detailed form. If men were not to be able to learn from
induction, it must be because as a general rule, when they had made

[page 80]

80 I The Essential Peirce
an induction, the order of things (as they appear in experience), would
then undergo a revolution. Just herein would the unreality of such a
universe consist; namely, that the order of the universe should depend
on how much men should know of it. But this general rule would be
capable of being itself discovered by induction; and so it must be a law
of such a universe, that when this was discovered it would cease to
operate. But this second law would itself be capable of discovery. And
so in such a universe there would be nothing which would not sooner
or later be known; and it would have an order capable of discovery by
a sufficiently long course of reasoning. But this is contrary to the
hypothesis, and therefore that hypothesis is absurd. This is the particu­
lar answer. But we may also say, in general, that if nothing real exists,
then, since every question supposes that something exists— for it main­
tains its own urgency— it supposes only illusions to exist. But the
existence even of an illusion is a reality; for an illusion affects all men,
or it does not. In the former case, it is a reality according to our theory
of reality; in the latter case, it is independent of the state of mind of
any individuals except those whom it happens to affect. So that the
answer to the question, Why is anything real? is this: That question
means, “ supposing anything to exist, why is something real?” The
answer is, that that very existence is reality by definition.
A ll that has here been said, particularly of induction, applies to all
inference from parts to whole, and therefore to hypothesis, and so to
all probable inference.
Thus, I claim to have shown, in the first place, that it is possible
to hold a consistent theory of the validity of the laws of ordinary logic.
But now let us suppose the idealistic theory of reality, which I have
in this paper taken for granted to be false. In that case, inductions
would not be true unless the world were so constituted that every
object should be presented in experience as often as any other; and
further, unless we were so constituted that we had no more tendency
to make bad inductions than good ones. These facts might be explained
by the benevolence of the Creator; but, as has already been argued,
they could not explain, but are absolutely refuted by the fact that no
state of things can be conceived in which probable arguments should
not lead to the truth. This affords a most important argument in favor
of that theory of reality, and thus of those denials of certain faculties
from which it was deduced, as well as of the general style of philoso­
phizing by which those denials were reached.
Upon our theory of reality and of logic, it can be shown that no
inference of any individual can be thoroughly logical without certain
determinations of his mind which do not concern any one inference
immediately; for we have seen that that mode of inference which alone
can teach us anything, or carry us at all beyond what was implied in
our premises— in fact, does not give us to know any more than we

[page 81]

Grounds of Validity o f the Laws of Logic I 81
knew before; only, we know that, by faithfully adhering to that mode
of inference, we shall, on the whole, approximate to the truth. Each
of us is an insurance company, in short. But, now, suppose that an
insurance company, among its risks, should take one exceeding in
amount the sum of all the others. Plainly, it would then have no
security whatever. Now, has not every single man such a risk? What
shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own
soul?24 If a man has a transcendent personal interest infinitely out­
weighing all others, then, upon the theory of validity of inference just
developed, he is devoid of all security, and can make no valid inference
whatever. What follows? That logic rigidly requires, before all else,
that no determinate fact, nothing which can happen to a man’s self,
should be of more consequence to him than everything else. He who
would not sacrifice his own soul to save the whole world, is illogical
in all his inferences, collectively. So the social principle is rooted
intrinsically in logic.
That being the case, it becomes interesting to inquire how it is with
men as a matter of fact. There is a psychological theory that man
cannot act without a view to his own pleasure.25 This theory is based
on a falsely assumed subjectivism. Upon our principles of the objectiv­
ity of knowledge, it could not be based, and if they are correct it is
reduced to an absurdity. It seems to me that the usual opinion of the
selfishness of man is based in large measure upon this false theory. I
do not think that the facts bear out the usual opinion. The immense
self-sacrifices which the most wilful men often make, show that w ilful­
ness is a very different thing from selfishness. The care that men have
for what is to happen after they are dead, cannot be selfish. And finally
and chiefly, the constant use of the word ‘W ”— as when we speak of
our possessions on the Pacific—our destiny as a republic— in cases in
which no personal interests at all are involved, show conclusively that
men do not make their personal interests their only ones, and therefore
may, at least, subordinate them to the interests of the community.
But just the revelation of the possibility of this complete self-sacri­
fice in man, and the belief in its saving power, will serve to redeem the
logicality of all men. For he who recognizes the logical necessity of
complete self-identification of one’s own interests with those of the
community, and its potential existence in man, even if he has it not
himself, will perceive that only the inferences of that man who has it
are logical, and so views his own inferences as being valid only so far
as they would be accepted by that man. But so far as he has this belief,
he becomes identified with that man. And that ideal perfection of
knowledge by which we have seen that reality is constituted must thus
belong to a community in which this identification is complete.
This would serve as a complete establishment of private logicality,
were it not that the assumption that man or the community (which

[page 82]

82 I The Essential Peirce
may be wider than man) shall ever arrive at a state of information
greater than some definite finite information, is entirely unsupported
by reasons. There cannot be a scintilla of evidence to show that at some
time all living beings shall not be annihilated at once, and that forever
after there shall be throughout the universe any intelligence whatever.
Indeed, this very assumption involves itself a transcendent and su­
preme interest, and therefore from its very nature is unsusceptible of
any support from reasons. This infinite hope which we all have (for
even the atheist will constantly betray his calm expectation that what
is Best will come about) is something so august and momentous, that
all reasoning in reference to it is a trifling impertinence. We do not
want to know what are the weights of reasons pro and con— that is,
how much odds we should wish to receive on such a venture in the long
run— because there is no long run in the case; the question is single
and supreme, and a l l is at stake upon it. We are in the condition of
a man in a life and death struggle; if he have not sufficient strength,
it is wholly indifferent to him how he acts, so that the only assumption
upon which he can act rationally is the hope of success. So this senti­
ment is rigidly demanded by logic. If its object were any determinate
fact, any private interest, it might conflict with the results of knowl­
edge and so with itself; but when its object is of a nature as wide as
the community can turn out to be, it is always a hypothesis uncon­
tradicted by facts and justified by its indispensibleness for making any
action rational.

[page 83]

5
Frasers The Works of
George Berkeley
P 60: North American Review u j (October i8yi):^.^-y2.
[Alsopublished in W'2:462-87 (with Chauncey Wright's criti­
cism and Peirce's response [pp. 487-90]) and in CP 8.7-38.]
In what may be the most important of all his reviews, Peirce
discusses the realist-nominalist controversy (which he believed
to be offundamental significance for philosophy as well as
life) and gives a detailed account of his already slightly
modified scholastic realism. Peirce's common-sense account of
truth and reality contains important elements ofhis develop­
ing pragmatism.
The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly Bishop o f Cloyne: including
many ofhis Writings hitherto unpublished. With Prefaces, Annotations, his
Life and Letters, and an Account of his Philosophy. By Alexander
Campbell Fraser, M.A., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the
University of Edinburgh. In Four Volumes. Oxford: At the Clarendon
Press. 8vo. 1871.
This new edition of Berkeley’s works is much superior to any of
the former ones. It contains some writings not in any of the other
editions, and the rest are given with a more carefully edited text. The
editor has done his work well. The introductions to the several pieces
contain analyses of their contents which will be found of the greatest
service to the reader. On the other hand, the explanatory notes which
disfigure every page seem to us altogether unnecessary and useless.
Berkeley’s metaphysical theories have at first sight an air of para­
dox and levity very unbecoming to a bishop. He denies the existence
of matter, our ability to see distance, and the possibility of forming the
simplest general conception; while he admits the existence of Platonic
ideas; and argues the whole with a cleverness which every reader
admits, but which few are convinced by. His disciples seem to think
the present moment a favorable one for obtaining for their philosophy
a more patient hearing than it has yet got. It is true that we of this day

[page 84]

84 I The Essential Peirce
are sceptical and not given to metaphysics, but so, say they, was the
generation which Berkeley addressed, and for which his style was
chosen; while it is hoped that the spirit of calm and thorough inquiry
which is now, for once, almost the fashion, will save the theory from
the perverse misrepresentations which form erly assailed it, and lead
to a fair examination of the arguments which, in the minds of his
sectators, put the truth of it beyond all doubt. But above all it is
anticipated that the Berkeleyan treatment of that question of the valid­
ity of human knowledge and of the inductive process of science, which
is now so much studied, is such as to command the attention of scien­
tific men to the idealistic system. To us these hopes seem vain. The
truth is that the minds from whom the spirit of the age emanates have
now no interest in the only problems that metaphysics ever pretended
to solve. The abstract acknowledgment of God, Freedom, and Immor­
tality, apart from those other religious beliefs (which cannot possibly
rest on metaphysical grounds) which alone may animate this, is now
seen to have no practical consequence whatever. The world is getting
to think of these creatures of metaphysics, as Aristotle of the Platonic
ideas: T e p e ric rja a r a yap kern , Kai ei '¿cttiv, o\)8ev irpdq r o v \o y o v
ecrriv.1 The question of the grounds of the validity of induction has,
it is true, excited an interest, and may continue to do so (though the
argument is now become too difficult for popular apprehension); but
whatever interest it has had has been due to a hope that the solution
of it would afford the basis for sure and useful maxims concerning the
logic of induction,— a hope which would be destroyed so soon as it
were shown that the question was a purely metaphysical one. This is
the prevalent feeling, among advanced minds. It may not be just; but
it exists. And its existence is an effectual bar (if there were no other)
to the general acceptance of Berkeley’s system. The few who do now
care for metaphysics are not of that bold order of minds who delight
to hold a position so unsheltered by the prejudices of common sense
as that of the good bishop.
As a matter of history, however, philosophy must always be inter­
esting. It is the best representative of the mental development of each
age. It is so even of ours, if we think what really is our philosophy.
Metaphysical history is one of the chief branches of history, and ought
to be expounded side by side with the history of society, of govern­
ment, and of war; for in its relations with these we trace the signifi­
cance of events for the human mind. The history of philosophy in the
British Isles is a subject possessing more unity and entirety within
itself than has usually been recognized in it. The influence of Descartes
was never so great in England as that of traditional conceptions, and
we can trace a continuity between modern and mediaeval thought
there, which is wanting in the history of France, and still more, if
possible, in that of Germany.

[page 85]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 85
From very early times, it has been the chief intellectual characteris­
tic of the English to wish to effect everything by the plainest and
directest means, without unnecessary contrivance. In war, for exam­
ple, they rely more than any other people in Europe upon sheer hardi­
hood, and rather despise military science. The main peculiarities of
their system of law arise from the fact that every evil has been rectified
as it became intolerable, without any thoroughgoing measure. The bill
for legalizing marriage with a deceased w ife’s sister is yearly pressed
because it supplies a remedy for an inconvenience actually felt; but
nobody has proposed a bill to legalize marriage with a deceased hus­
band’s brother. In philosophy, this national tendency appears as a
strong preference for the simplest theories, and a resistance to any
complication of the theory as long as there is the least possibility that
the facts can be explained in the simpler way. And, accordingly, Brit­
ish philosophers have always desired to weed out of philosophy all
conceptions which could not be made perfectly definite and easily
intelligible, and have shown strong nominalistic tendencies since the
time of Edward I, or even earlier.2Berkeley is an admirable illustration
of this national character, as well as of that strange union of nominal­
ism with Platonism, which has repeatedly appeared in history, and has
been such a stumbling-block to the historians of philosophy.
The mediaeval metaphysic is so entirely forgotten, and has so close
a historic connection with modern English philosophy, and so much
bearing upon the truth of Berkeley’s doctrine, that we may perhaps be
pardoned a few pages on the nature of the celebrated controversy
concerning universals. And first let us set down a few dates. It was at
the very end of the eleventh century that the dispute concerning
nominalism and realism, which had existed in a vague way before,
began to attain extraordinary proportions. During the twelfth century
it was the matter of niost interest to logicians, when William of Cham-
peaux, Abélard, John of Salisbury, Gilbert de la Porrée, and many
others, defended as many different opinions. But there was no historic
connection between this controversy and those of scholasticism
proper, the scholasticism of Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockam. For about
the end of the twelfth century a great revolution of thought took place
in Europe. What the influences were which produced it requires new
historical researches to say. N o doubt, it was partly due to the Cru­
sades. But a great awakening of intelligence did take place at that time.
It requires, it is true, some examination to distinguish this particular
movement from a general awakening which had begun a century
earlier, and had been growing stronger ever since. But now there was
an accelerated impulse. Commerce was attaining new importance, and
was inventing some of her chief conveniences and safeguards. Law,
which had hitherto been utterly barbaric, began to be a profession.
The civil law was adopted in Europe, the canon law was digested; the

[page 86]

86 I The Essential Peirce
common law took some form. The Church, under Innocent III, was
assuming the sublime functions of a moderator over kings. And those
orders of mendicant friars were established, two of which did so much
for the development of the scholastic philosophy. Art felt the spirit of
a new age, and there could hardly be a greater change than from the
highly ornate round-arched architecture of the twelfth century to the
comparatively simple Gothic of the thirteenth. Indeed, if any one
wishes to know what a scholastic commentary is like, and what the
tone of thought in it is, he has only to contemplate a Gothic cathedral.
The first quality of either is a religious devotion, truly heroic. One
feels that the men who did these works did really believe in religion
as we believe in nothing. We cannot easily understand how Thomas
Aquinas can speculate so much on the nature of angels, and whether
ten thousand of them could dance on a needle’s point. But it was
simply because he held them for real. If they are real, why are they not
more interesting than the bewildering varieties of insects which natu­
ralists study; or why should the orbits of double stars attract more
attention than spiritual intelligences? It will be said that we have no
means of knowing anything about them. But that is on a par with
censuring the schoolmen for referring questions to the authority of the
Bible and of the Church. If they really believed in their religion, as
they did, what better could they do? And if they found in these author­
ities testimony concerning angels, how could they avoid admitting it.
Indeed, objections of this sort only make it appear still more clearly
how much those were the ages of faith. And if the spirit was not
altogether admirable, it is only because faith itself has its faults as a
foundation for the intellectual character. The men of that time did
fully believe and did think that, for the sake of giving themselves up
absolutely to their great task of building or of writing, it was well
worth while to resign all the joys of life. Think of the spirit in which
Duns Scotus must have worked, who wrote his thirteen volumes in
folio, in a style as condensed as the most condensed parts of Aristotle,
before the age of thirty-four. Nothing is more striking in either of the
great intellectual products of that age, than the complete absence of
self-conceit on the part of the artist or philosopher. That anything of
value can be added to his sacred and catholic work by its having the
smack of individuality about it, is what he has never conceived. His
work is not designed to embody his ideas, but the universal truth; there
will not be one thing in it however minute, for which you will not find
that he has his authority; and whatever originality emerges is of that
inborn kind which so saturates a man that he cannot himself perceive
it. The individual feels his own worthlessness in comparison with his
task, and does not dare to introduce his vanity into the doing of it.
Then there is no machine-work, no unthinking repetition about the
thing. Every part is worked out for itself as a separate problem, no

[page 87]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 87
matter how analogous it may be in general to another part. And no
matter how small and hidden a detail may be, it has been conscien­
tiously studied, as though it were intended for the eye of God. Allied
to this character is a detestation of antithesis or the studied balancing
of one thing against another, and of a too geometrical grouping,—a
hatred of posing which is as much a moral trait as the others. Finally,
there is nothing in which the scholastic philosophy and the Gothic
architecture resemble one another more than in the gradually increas­
ing sense of immensity which impresses the mind of the student as he
learns to appreciate the real dimensions and cost of each. It is very
unfortunate that the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries
should, under the name of Middle Ages, be confounded with others,
which they are in every respect as unlike as the Renaissance is from
modern times. In the history of logic, the break between the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries is so great that only one author of the former
age is ever quoted in the latter. If this is to be attributed to the fuller
acquaintance with the works of Aristotle, to what, we would ask, is
this profounder study itself to be attributed, since it is now known that
the knowledge of those works was not imported from the Arabs? The
thirteenth century was realistic, but the question concerning univer­
s a l was not as much agitated as several others. Until about the end of
the century, scholasticism was somewhat vague, immature, and uncon­
scious of its own power. Its greatest glory was in the first half of the
fourteenth century. Then Duns Scotus,* a Briton (for whether Scotch,
Irish, or English is disputed), first stated the realistic position consist­
ently, and developed it with great fulness and applied it to all the
different questions which depend upon it. His theory of “ formalities”
was the subtlest, except perhaps Hegel’s logic, ever broached, and he
was separated from nominalism only by the division of a hair. It is not
therefore surprising that the nominalistic position was soon adopted
by several writers, especially by the celebrated William of Ockam, who
took the lead of this party by the thoroughgoing and masterly way in
which he treated the theory and combined it with a then rather recent
but now forgotten addition to the doctrine of logical terms. With
Ockam, who died in 1347, scholasticism may be said to have culminated.
After him the scholastic philosophy showed a tendency to separate
itself from the religious element which alone could dignify it, and sunk
first into extreme formalism and fancifulness, and then into the mer­
ited contempt of all men; just as the Gothic architecture had a very
similar fate, at about the same time, and for much the same reasons.
The current explanations of the realist-nominalist controversy are
equally false and unintelligible. They are said to be derived ultimately
*Died 1308.

[page 88]

88 I The Essential Peirce
from Bayle’s Dictionary; at any rate, they are not based on a study of
the authors. “ Few, very few, for a hundred years past,” says Hallam,
with truth, “ have broken the repose of the immense works of the
schoolmen.” 3 Yet it is perfectly possible so to state the matter that no
one shall fail to comprehend what the question was, and how there
might be two opinions about it. Are universals real? We have only to
stop and consider a moment what was meant by the word real, when
the whole issue soon becomes apparent. Objects are divided into fig­
ments, dreams, etc., on the one hand, and realities on the other. The
former are those which exist only inasmuch as you or I or some man
imagines them; the latter are those which have an existence indepen­
dent of your mind or mine or that of any number of persons. The real
is that which is not whatever we happen to think it, but is unaffected
by what we may think of it. The question, therefore, is whether man,
horse, and other names of natural classes, correspond with anything
which all men, or all horses, really have in common, independent of
our thought, or whether these classes are constituted simply by a
likeness in the way in which our minds are affected by individual
objects which have in themselves no resemblance or relationship what­
soever. N ow that this is a real question which different minds will
naturally answer in opposite ways, becomes clear when we think that
there are two widely separated points of view, from which reality, as
just defined, may be regarded. Where is the real, the thing independent
of how we think it, to be found? There must be such a thing, for we
find our opinions constrained; there is something, therefore, which
influences our thoughts, and is not created by them. We have, it is true,
nothing immediately present to us but thoughts. Those thoughts, how­
ever, have been caused by sensations, and those sensations are con­
strained by something out of the mind. This thing out of the mind,
which directly influences sensation, and through sensation thought,
because it is out of the mind, is independent of how we think it, and
is, in short, the real. Here is one view of reality, a very familiar one.
And from this point of view it is clear that the nominalistic answer
must be given to the question concerning universals. For, while from
this standpoint it may be admitted to be true as a rough statement that
one man is like another, the exact sense being that the realities external
to the mind produce sensations which may be embraced under one
conception, yet it can by no means be admitted that the two real men
have really anything in common, for to say that they are both men is
only to say that the one mental term or thought-sign “ man” stands
indifferently for either of the sensible objects caused by the two exter­
nal realities; so that not even the two sensations have in themselves
anything in common, and far less is it to be inferred that the external
realities have. This conception of reality is so familiar, that it is un­
necessary to dwell upon it; but the other, or realist conception, if less

[page 89]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 89
familiar, is even more natural and obvious. All human thought and
opinion contains an arbitrary, accidental element, dependent on the
limitations in circumstances, power, and bent of the individual; an
element of error, in short. But human opinion universally tends in the
long run to a definite form, which is the truth. Let any human being
have enough information and exert enough thought upon any ques­
tion, and the result will be that he will arrive at a certain definite
conclusion, which is the same that any other mind will reach under
sufficiently favorable circumstances. Suppose two men, one deaf, the
other blind. One hears a man declare he means to kill another, hears
the report of the pistol, and hears the victim cry; the other sees the
murder done. Their sensations are affected in the highest degree with
their individual peculiarities. The first information that their sensa­
tions will give them, their first inferences, will be more nearly alike,
but still different; the one having, for example, the idea of a man
shouting, the other of a man with a threatening aspect; but their final
conclusions, the thought the remotest from sense, will be identical and
free from the one-sidedness of their idiosyncrasies. There is, then, to
every question a true answer, a final conclusion, to which the opinion
of every man is constantly gravitating. He may for a time recede from
it, but give him more experience and time for consideration, and he
will finally approach it. The individual may not live to reach the truth;
there is a residuum of error in every individual’s opinions. N o matter;
it remains that there is a definite opinion to which the mind of man
is, on the whole and in the long run, tending. On many questions the
final agreement is already reached, on all it will be reached if time
enough is given. The arbitrary w ill or other individual peculiarities of
a sufficiently large number of minds may postpone the general agree­
ment in that opinion indefinitely; but it cannot affect what the charac­
ter of that opinion shall be when it is reached. This final opinion, then,
is independent, not indeed of thought in general, but of all that is
arbitrary and individual in thought; is quite independent of how you,
or I, or any number of men think. Everything, therefore, which will
be thought to exist in the final opinion is real, and nothing else. What
is the p o w e r of external things, to affect the senses? To say that people
sleep after taking opium because it has a soporific power, 4is that to say
anything in the world but that people sleep after taking opium because
they sleep after taking opium? To assert the existence of a power or
potency, is it to assert the existence of anything actual? Or to say that
a thing has a potential existence, is it to say that it has an actual
existence? In other words, is the present existence of a power anything
in the world but a regularity in future events relating to a certain thing
regarded as an element which is to be taken account of beforehand, in
the conception of that thing? If not, to assert that there are external
things which can be known only as exerting a power on our sense, is

[page 90]

90 I The Essential Peirce
nothing different from asserting that there is a general drift in the
history of human thought which will lead it to one general agreement,
one catholic consent. And any truth more perfect than this destined
conclusion, any reality more absolute than what is thought in it, is a
fiction of metaphysics. It is obvious how this way of thinking harmo­
nizes with a belief in an infallible Church, and how much more natural
it would be in the Middle Ages than in Protestant or positivist times.
This theory of reality is instantly fatal to the idea of a thing in
itself,— a thing existing independent of all relation to the mind’s con­
ception of it. Yet it would by no means forbid, but rather encourage
us, to regard the appearances of sense as only signs of the realities.
Only, the realities which they represent would not be the unknowable
cause of sensation, but noumena, or intelligible conceptions which are
the last products of the mental action which is set in motion by sensa­
tion. The matter of sensation is altogether accidental; precisely the
same information, practically, being capable of communication
through different senses. And the catholic consent which constitutes
the truth is by no means to be limited to men in this earthly life or to
the human race, but extends to the whole communion of minds to
which we belong, including some probably whose senses are very
different from ours, so that in that consent no predication of a sensible
quality can enter, except as an admission that so certain sorts of senses
are affected. This theory is also highly favorable to a belief in external
realities. It will, to be sure, deny that there is any reality which is
absolutely incognizable in itself, so that it cannot be taken into the
mind. But observing that “ the external” means simply that which is
independent of what phenomenon is immediately present, that is of
how we may think or feel; just as “ the real” means that which is
independent of how we may think or feel about it; it must be granted
that there are many objects of true science which are external, because
there are many objects of thought which, if they are independent of
that thinking whereby they are thought (that is, if they are real), are
indisputably independent of all other thoughts and feelings.
It is plain that this view of reality is inevitably realistic; because
general conceptions enter into all judgments, and therefore into true
opinions. Consequently a thing in the general is as real as in the
concrete. It is perfectly true that all white things have whiteness in
them, for that is only saying, in another form of words, that all white
things are white; but since it is true that real things possess whiteness,
whiteness is real. It is a real which only exists by virtue of an act of
thought knowing it, but that thought is not an arbitrary or accidental
one dependent on any idiosyncrasies, but one which will hold in the
final opinion.
This theory involves a phenomenalism. But it is the phenomenal­
ism of Kant, and not that of Hume. Indeed, what Kant called his

[page 91]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 91
Copernican step5 was precisely the passage from the nominalistic to
the realistic view of reality. It was the essence of his philosophy to
regard the real object as determined by the mind. That was nothing
else than to consider every conception and intuition which enters
necessarily into the experience of an object, and which is not transi­
tory and accidental, as having objective validity. In short, it was to
regard the reality as the normal product of mental action, and not as
the incognizable cause of it.
This realistic theory is thus a highly practical and common-sense
position. Wherever universal agreement prevails, the realist will not
be the one to disturb the general belief by idle and fictitious doubts.
For according to him it is a consensus or common confession which
constitutes reality. What he wants, therefore, is to see questions put to
rest. And if a general belief, which is perfectly stable and immovable,
can in any way be produced, though it be by the fagot and the rack,
to talk of any error in such belief is utterly absurd. The realist will hold
that the very same objects which are immediately present in our minds
in experience really exist just as they are experienced out of the mind;
that is, he will maintain a doctrine of immediate perception. He will
not, therefore, sunder existence out of the mind and being in the mind
as two wholly improportionable modes. When a thing is in such rela­
tion to the individual mind that that mind cognizes it, it is in the mind;
and its being so in the mind w ill not in the least diminish its external
existence. For he does not think of the mind as a receptacle, which if
a thing is in, it ceases to be out of. T o make a distinction between the
true conception of a thing and the thing itself is, he will say, only to
regard one and the same thing from two different points of view; for
the immediate object of thought in a true judgment is the reality. The
realist will, therefore, believe in the objectivity of all necessary concep­
tions, space, time, relation, cause, and the like.
N o realist or nominalist ever expressed so definitely, perhaps, as is
here done, his conception of reality. It is difficult to give a clear notion
of an opinion of a past age, without exaggerating its distinctness. But
careful examination of the works of the schoolmen will show that the
distinction between these two views of the real—one as the fountain
of the current of human thought, the other as the unmoving form to
which it is flowing— is what really occasions their disagreement on the
question concerning universals. The gist of all the nominalist’s argu­
ments will be found to relate to a res extra animam, while the realist
defends his position only by assuming that the immediate object of
thought in a true judgment is real. The notion that the controversy
between realism and nominalism had anything to do with Platonic
ideas is a mere product of the imagination, which the slightest exami­
nation of the books would suffice to disprove. But to prove that the
statement here given of the essence of these positions is historically

[page 92]

92 I The Essential Peirce
true and not a fancy sketch, it will be well to add a brief analysis of
the opinions of Scotus and Ockam.
Scotus sees several questions confounded together under the usual
utrum universale est aliquid in rebus. In the first place, there is the ques­
tion concerning the Platonic forms. But putting Platonism aside as at
least incapable of proof, and as a self-contradictory opinion if the
archetypes are supposed to be strictly universal, there is the celebrated
dispute among Aristotelians as to whether the universal is really in
things or only derives its existence from the mind. Universality is a
relation of a predicate to the subjects of which it is predicated. That
can exist only in the mind, wherein alone the coupling of subject and
predicate takes place. But the word universal is also used to denote
what are named by such terms as a man or a horse; these are called
universals, because a man is not necessarily this man, nor a horse this
horse. In such a sense it is plain universals are real; there really is a
man and there really is a horse. The whole difficulty is with the
actually indeterminate universal, that which not only is not necessar­
ily this, but which, being one single object of thought, is predicable of
many things. In regard to this it may be asked, first, is it necessary to
its existence that it should be in the mind; and, second, does it exist
in re? There are two ways in which a thing may be in the mind,—
habitualiter and actualiter. A notion is in the mind actualiter when it is
actually conceived; it is in the mind habitualiter when it can directly
produce a conception. It is by virtue of mental association (we moderns
should say), that things are in the mind habitualiter. In the Aristotelian
philosophy, the intellect is regarded as being to the soul what the eye
is to the body. The mind perceives likenesses and other relations in the
objects of sense, and thus just as sense affords sensible images of things,
so the intellect affords intelligible images of them. It is as such a species
intelligibilis that Scotus supposes that a conception exists which is in
the mind habitualiter, not actualiter. This species is in the mind, in the
sense of being the immediate object of knowledge, but its existence in
the mind is independent of consciousness. N ow that the actual cognition
of the universal is necessary to its existence, Scotus denies. The subject
of science is universal; and if the existence of universal were dependent
upon what we happened to be thinking, science would not relate to
anything real. On the other hand, he admits that the universal must
be in the mind habitualiter, so that if a thing be considered as it is
independent of its being cognized, there is no universality in it. For
there is in re extra no one intelligible object attributed to different
things. He holds, therefore, that such natures (i.e. sorts of things) as
a man and a horse, which are real, and are not of themselves necessarily
this man or this horse, though they cannot exist in re without being
some particular man or horse, are in the species intelligibilis always

[page 93]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 93
represented positively indeterminate, it being the nature of the mind
so to represent things. Accordingly any such nature is to be regarded
as something which is of itself neither universal nor singular, but is
universal in the mind, singular in things out of the mind. If there were
nothing in the different men or horses which was not of itself singular,
there would be no real unity except the numerical unity of the singu­
lars; which would involve such absurd consequences as that the only
real difference would be a numerical difference, and that there would
be no real likenesses among things. If, therefore, it is asked whether
the universal is in things, the answer is, that the nature which in the
mind is universal, and is not in itself singular, exists in things. It is the
very same nature which in the mind is universal and in re is singular;
for if it were not, in knowing anything of a universal we should be
knowing nothing of things, but only of our own thoughts, and our
opinion would not be converted from true to false by a change in
things. This nature is actually indeterminate only so far as it is in the
mind. But to say that an object is in the mind is only a metaphorical
way of saying that it stands to the intellect in the relation of known
to knower. The truth is, therefore, that that real nature which exists
in rey apart from all action of the intellect, though in itself, apart from
its relations, it be singular, yet is actually universal as it exists in
relation to the mind. But this universal only differs from the singular
in the manner of its being conceived (formaliter), but not in the manner
of its existence (realiter).6
Though this is the slightest possible sketch of the realism of Scotus,
and leaves a number of important points unnoticed, yet it is sufficient
to show the general manner of his thought and how subtle and difficult
his doctrine is. That about one and the same nature being in the grade
of singularity in existence, and in the grade of universality in the mind,
gave rise to an extensive doctrine concerning the various kinds of
identity and difference, called the doctrine of theformalitates; and this
is the point against which Ockam directed his attack.
Ockam’s nominalism may be said to be the next stage in English
opinion. As Scotus’s mind is always running on forms, so Ockam’s is
on logical terms; and all the subtle distinctions which Scotus effects by
his formalitates, Ockam explains by implied syncategorematics (or ad­
verbial expressions, such as per se, etc.) in terms. Ockam always thinks
of a mental conception as a logical term, which, instead of existing on
paper, or in the voice, is in the mind, but is of the same general nature,
namely, a sign. The conception and the word differ in two respects:
first, a word is arbitrarily imposed, while a conception is a natural sign;
second, a word signifies whatever it signifies only indirectly, through
the conception which signifies the same thing directly. Ockam enunci­
ates his nominalism as follows:

[page 94]

94 I The Essential Peirce
It should be known that singular may be taken in two senses. In one sense,
it signifies that which is one and not many; and in this sense those who hold
that the universal is a quality of mind predicable of many, standing however
in this predication, not for itself, but for those many (i.e. the nominalists), have
to say that every universal is truly and really singular; because as every word,
however general we may agree to consider it, is truly and really singular and
one in number, because it is one and not many, so every universal is singular.
In another sense, the name singular is used to denote whatever is one and not
many, is a sign of something which is singular in the first sense, and is not fit
to be the sign of many. Whence, using the word universal for that which is not
one in number,—an acceptation many attribute to it,—I say that there is no
universal; unless perchance you abuse the word and say that people is not one
in number and is universal. But that would be puerile. It is to be maintained,
therefore, that every universal is one singular thing, and therefore there is no
universal except by signification, that is, by its being the sign of many.7
The arguments by which he supports this position present nothing of
interest.* Against Scotus’s doctrine that universals are without the
mind in individuals, but are not really distinct from the individuals,
but only formally so, he objects that it is impossible there should be
any distinction existing out of the mind except between things really
distinct. Yet he does not think of denying that an individual consists
of matter and form, for these, though inseparable, are really distinct
things; though a modern nominalist might ask in what sense things
could be said to be distinct independently of any action of the mind,
which are so inseparable as matter and form. But as to relation, he most
emphatically and clearly denies that it exists as anything different
from the things related; and this denial he expressly extends to rela­
tions of agreement and likeness as well as to those of opposition. While,
therefore, he admits the real existence of qualities, he denies that these
real qualities are respects in which things agree or differ; but things
which agree or differ agree or differ in themselves and in no respect
extra animam. He allows that things without the mind are similar, but
this similarity consists merely in the fact that the mind can abstract
one notion from the contemplation of them. A resemblance, therefore,
consists solely in the property of the mind by which it naturally
imposes one mental sign upon the resembling things. Yet he allows
there is something in the things to which this mental sign corresponds.
This is the nominalism of Ockam so far as it can be sketched in a
single paragraph, and without entering into the complexities of the
Aristotelian psychology nor of the parva logicalia. He is not so thor­
*The entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem is the argument of Durand de St.
Pour^ain. But any given piece of popular information about scholasticism may be safely
assumed to be wrong.

[page 95]

oughgoing as he might be, yet compared with Durandus and other
contemporary nominalists he seems very radical and profound. He is
truly the venerabilis inceptor of a new way of philosophizing which has
now broadened, perhaps deepened also, into English empiricism.
England never forgot these teachings. During that Renaissance
period when men could think that human knowledge was to be ad-
vanced by the use of Cicero’s Commonplaces, we naturally see little
effect from them; but one of the earliest prominent figures in modern
philosophy is a man who carried the nominalistic spirit into every­
thing,— religion, ethics, psychology, and physics, the plusquam nomi-
nalis, Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury. His razor cuts off, not merely
substantial forms, but every incorporeal substance. As for universals,
he not only denies their real existence, but even that there are any
universal conceptions except so far as we conceive names. In every
part of his logic, names and speech play an extraordinarily important
part. Truth and falsity, he says, have no place but among such crea­
tures as use speech, for a true proposition is simply one whose predi­
cate is the name of everything of which the subject is the name. “ From
hence, also, this may be deduced, that the first truths were arbitrarily
made by those that first of all imposed names upon things, or received
them from the imposition of others. For it is true (for example), that
man is a living creature, but it is for this reason that it pleased men to
impose both those names on the same thing.” 8The difference between
true religion and superstition is simply that the state recognizes the
former and not the latter.
The nominalistic love of simple theories is seen also in his opinion,
that every event is a movement, and that the sensible qualities exist
only in sensible beings, and in his doctrine that man is at bottom
purely selfish in his actions.
His views concerning matter are worthy of notice, because Berke­
ley is known to have been a student of Hobbes, as Hobbes confesses
himself to have been of Ockam. The following paragraph gives his
opinion:—
And as for that matter which is common to all things, and which philoso­
phers, following Aristotle, usually call materia prima, that is,first matter, it is
not a body distinct from all other bodies, nor is it one of them. What then is
it? A mere name; yet a name which is not of vain use; for it signifies a
conception of body without the consideration of any form or other accident
except only magnitude or extension, and aptness to receive form and other
accident. So that whensoever we have use of the name body in general, if we
use that of materia prima, we do well. For when a man, not knowing which
was first, water or ice, would find out which of the two were the matter of
both, he would be fain to suppose some third matter which were neither of
these two; so he that would find out what is the matter of all things ought to
Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 95

[page 96]

96 I The Essential Peirce
suppose such as is not the matter of anything that exists. Wherefore materia
prima is nothing; and therefore they do not attribute to it form or any other
accident, besides quantity; whereas all singular things have their forms and
accidents certain.
Materiaprima therefore is body in general, that is, body considered univer­
sally, not as having neither form nor any accident, but in which no form nor
any other accident but quantity are at all considered, that is, they are not
drawn into argumentation, (p. 118)9
The next great name in English philosophy is Locke’s. His philoso­
phy is nominalistic, but does not regard things from a logical point of
view at all. Nominalism, however, appears in psychology as sensation­
alism; for nominalism arises from taking that view of reality which
regards whatever is in thought as caused by something in sense, and
whatever is in sense as caused by something without the mind. But
everybody knows that this is the character of Locke’s philosophy. He
believed that every idea springs from sensation and from his (vaguely
explained) reflection.
Berkeley is undoubtedly more the offspring of Locke than of any
other philosopher. Yet the influence of Hobbes with him is very evi­
dent and great; and Malebranche doubtless contributed to his thought.
But he was by nature a radical and a nominalist. His whole philosophy
rests upon an extreme nominalism of a sensationalistic type. He sets
out with the proposition (supposed to have been already proved by
Locke), that all the ideas in our minds are simply reproductions of
sensations, external and internal. He maintains, moreover, that sensa­
tions can only be thus reproduced in such combinations as might have
been given in immediate perception. We can conceive a man without
a head, because there is nothing in the nature of sense to prevent our
seeing such a thing; but we cannot conceive a sound without any pitch,
because the two things are necessarily united in perception. On this
principle he denies that we can have any abstract general ideas, that
is, that universals can exist in the mind; if I think of a man it must be
either of a short or a long or a middle-sized man, because if I see a man
he must be one or the other of these. In the first draft of the Introduc­
tion of the Principles o f Human Knowledge, which is now for the first
time printed, he even goes so far as to censure Ockam for admitting
that we can have general terms in our mind; Ockam’s opinion being
that we have in our minds conceptions, which are singular themselves,
but are signs of many things.* But Berkeley probably knew only of
*The sole difference between Ockam and Hobbes is that the former admits the
universal signs in the mind to be natural, while the latter thinks they only follow
instituted language. The consequence of this difference is that, while Ockam regards all
truth as depending on the mind’s naturally imposing the same sign on two things,
Hobbes will have it that the first truths were established by convention. But both would

[page 97]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 97
Ockam from hearsay, and perhaps thought he occupied a position like
that of Locke. Locke had a very singular opinion on the subject of
general conceptions. He says:—
If we nicely reflect upon them, we shall find that general ideas are fictions,
and contrivances of the mind, that carry difficulty with them, and do not so
easily offer themselves as we are apt to imagine. For example, does it not
require some pains and skill to form the general idea of a triangle (which is
none of the most abstract, comprehensive, and difficult); for it must be neither
oblique nor rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenon, but all and
none of these at once? In effect, is something imperfect that cannot exist, an
idea wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent ideas are put
together.10
T o this Berkeley replies:—
Much is here said of the difficulty that abstract ideas carry with them, and
the pains and skill requisite in forming them. And it is on all hands agreed that
there is need of great toil and labor of the mind to emancipate our thoughts
from particular objects, and raise them to those sublime speculations that are
conversant about abstract ideas. From all which the natural consequence
should seem to be, that so difficult a thing as the forming of abstract ideas was
not necessary to communication, which is so easy and familiar to all sort of
men. But we are told, if they seem obvious and easy to grown men, it is only
because by constant and familiar use they are made so. Now, I would fain
know at what time it is men are employed in surmounting that difficulty. It
cannot be when they are grown up, for then it seems they are not conscious
of such painstaking; it remains, therefore, to be the business of their childhood.
And surely the great and multiplied labor of framing abstract notions will be
found a hard task at that tender age. Is it not a hard thing to imagine that a
couple of children cannot prate together of their sugar-plums and rattles, and
the rest of their little trinkets, till they have first tacked together numberless
inconsistencies, and so formed in their minds abstract general ideas, and an­
nexed them to every common name they make use of?11
In his private note-book Berkeley has the following:— “Mem. To
bring the killing blow at the last, e.g. in the matter of abstraction to
bring Locke’s general triangle in the last.” 12
There was certainly an opportunity for a splendid blow here, and
he gave it.
From this nominalism he deduces his idealistic doctrine. And he
puts it beyond any doubt that, if this principle be admitted, the exis­
doubtless allow that there is something in re to which such truths corresponded. But the
sense of Berkeley’s implication would be that there are no universal thought-signs at all.
Whence it would follow that there is no truth and no judgments but propositions spoken
or on paper.

[page 98]

98 I The Essential Peirce
tence of matter must be denied. Nothing that we can know or even
think can exist without the mind, for we can only think reproductions
of sensations, and the esse of these is percipi. To put it another way, we
cannot think of a thing as existing unperceived, for we cannot separate
in thought what cannot be separated in perception. It is true, I can
think of a tree in a park without anybody by to see it; but I cannot
think of it without anybody to imagine it; for I am aware that I am
imagining it all the time. Syllogistically: trees, mountains, rivers, and
all sensible things are perceived; and anything which is perceived is
a sensation; now for a sensation to exist without being perceived is
impossible; therefore, for any sensible thing to exist out of perception
is impossible. N or can there be anything out of the mind which resem­
bles a sensible object, for the conception of likeness cannot be separated
from likeness between ideas, because that is the only likeness which
can be given in perception. An idea can be nothing but an idea, and
it is absurd to say that anything inaudible can resemble a sound, or that
anything invisible can resemble a color. But what exists without the
mind can neither be heard nor seen; for we perceive only sensations
within the mind. It is said that Matter exists without the mind. But
what is meant by matter? It is acknowledged to be known only as
supporting the accidents of bodies; and this word ‘supporting’ in this
connection is a word without meaning. N or is there any necessity for
the hypothesis of external bodies. What we observe is that we have
ideas. Were there any use in supposing external things it would be to
account for this fact. But grant that bodies exist, and no one can say
how they can possibly affect the mind; so that instead of removing a
difficulty, the hypothesis only makes a new one.
But though Berkeley thinks we know nothing out of the mind, he
by no means holds that all our experience is of a merely phantasma­
goric character. It is not all a dream; for there are two things which
distinguish experience from imagination: one is the superior vividness
of experience; the other and most important is its connected character.
Its parts hang together in the most intimate and intricate conjunction,
in consequence of which we can infer the future from the past. “ These
two things it is,” says Berkeley, in effect, “ which constitute reality. I
do not, therefore, deny the reality of common experience, although I
deny its externality.” Here we seem to have a third new conception
of reality, different from either of those which we have insisted are
characteristic of the nominalist and realist respectively, or if this is to
be identified with either of those, it is with the realist view. Is not this
something quite unexpected from so extreme a nominalist? To us, at
least, it seems that this conception is indeed required to give an air of
common sense to Berkeley’s theory, but that it is of a totally different
complexion from the rest. It seems to be something imported into his
philosophy from without. We shall glance at this point again pres­

[page 99]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 99
ently. He goes on to say that ideas are perfectly inert and passive. One
idea does not make another and there is no power or agency in it.
Hence, as there must be some cause of the succession of ideas, it must
be Spirit. There is no idea of a spirit. But I have a consciousness of the
operations of my spirit, what he calls a notion of my activity in calling
up ideas at pleasure, and so have a relative knowledge of m yself as an
active being. But there is a succession of ideas not dependent on my
will, the ideas of perception. Real things do not depend on my thought,
but have an existence distinct from being perceived by me; but the esse
of everything is percipi; therefore, there must be some other mind wherein
they exist. “ As sure, therefore, as the sensible world really exists, so sure
do there an infinite omnipotent Spirit who contains and supports it.” 13
This puts the keystone into the arch of Berkeleyan idealism, and gives
a theory of the relation of the mind to external nature which, com­
pared with the Cartesian Divine Assistance, is very satisfactory. It has
been well remarked that, if the Cartesian dualism be admitted, no
divine assistance can enable things to affect the mind or the mind
things, but divine power must do the whole work. Berkeley’s philoso­
phy, like so many others, has partly originated in an attempt to escape
the inconveniences of the Cartesian dualism. God, who has created our
spirits, has the power immediately to raise ideas in them; and out of
his wisdom and benevolence, he does this with such regularity that
these ideas may serve as signs of one another. Hence, the laws of
nature. Berkeley does not explain how our wills act on our bodies, but
perhaps he would say that to a certain limited extent we can produce
ideas in the mind of God as he does in ours. But a material thing being
only an idea, exists only so long as it is in some mind. Should every
mind cease to think it for a while, for so long it ceases to exist. Its
permanent existence is kept up by its being an idea in the mind of God.
Here we see how superficially the just-mentioned theory of reality is
laid over the body of his thought. If the reality of a thing consists in
its harmony with the body of realities, it is a quite needless extrava­
gance to say that it ceases to exist as soon as it is no longer thought of.
For the coherence of an idea with experience in general does not
depend at all upon its being actually present to the mind all the time.
But it is clear that when Berkeley says that reality consists in the
connection of experience, he is simply using the word reality in a sense
of his own. That an object's independence of our thought about it is con­
stituted by its connection with experience in general, he has never
conceived. On the contrary, that, according to him, is effected by its
being in the mind of God. In the usual sense of the word reality,
therefore, Berkeley’s doctrine is that the reality of sensible things
resides only in their archetypes in the divine mind. This is Platonistic,
but it is not realistic. On the contrary, since it places reality wholly
out of the mind in the cause of sensations, and since it denies reality

[page 100]

100 I The Essential Peirce
(in the true sense of the word) to sensible things in so far as they are
sensible, it is distinctly nominalistic. Historically there have been
prominent examples of an alliance between nominalism and Plato­
nism. Abelard and John of Salisbury, the only two defenders of nomi­
nalism of the time of the great controversy whose works remain to us,
are both Platonists; and Roscellin, the famous author of the sententia
deflatu vocis, the first man in the Middle Ages who carried attention
to nominalism, is said and believed (all his writings are lost) to have
been a follower of Scotus Erigena, the great Platonist of the ninth
century. The reason of this odd conjunction of doctrines may perhaps
be guessed at. The nominalist, by isolating his reality so entirely from
mental influence as he has done, has made it something which the
mind cannot conceive; he has created the so often talked of “ impropor-
tion between the mind and the thing in itself.” And it is to overcome
the various difficulties to which this gives rise, that he supposes this
noumenon, which, being totally unknown, the imagination can play
about as it pleases, to be the emanation of archetypal ideas. The reality
thus receives an intelligible nature again, and the peculiar inconve­
niences of nominalism are to some degree avoided.14
It does not seem to us strange that Berkeley’s idealistic writings
have not been received with much favor. They contain a great deal of
argumentation of doubtful soundness, the dazzling character of which
puts us more on our guard against it. They appear to be the produc­
tions of a most brilliant, original, powerful, but not thoroughly disci­
plined mind. He is apt to set out with wildly radical propositions,
which he qualifies when they lead him to consequences he is not
prepared to accept, without seeing how great the importance of his
admissions is. He plainly begins his principles of human knowledge
with the assumption that we have nothing in our minds but sensations,
external and internal, and reproductions of them in the imagination.
This goes far beyond Locke; it can be maintained only by the help of
that “ mental chemistry” started by H artley.15 But soon we find him
admitting various notions which are not ideas, or reproductions of
sensations, the most striking of which is the notion of a cause, which
he leaves himself no way of accounting for experientially. Again, he
lays down the principle that we can have no ideas in which the sensa­
tions are reproduced in an order or combination different from what
could have occurred in experience; and that therefore we have no
abstract conceptions. But he very soon grants that we can consider a
triangle, without attending to whether it is equilateral, isosceles, or
scalene; and does not reflect that such exclusive attention constitutes
a species of abstraction. His want of profound study is also shown in
his so wholly mistaking, as he does, the function of the hypothesis of
matter. He thinks its only purpose is to account for the production of
ideas in our minds, so occupied is he with the Cartesian problem. But

[page 101]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 101
the real part that material substance has to play is to account for (or
formulate) the constant connection between the accidents. In his the­
ory, this office is performed by the wisdom and benevolence of God
in exciting ideas with such regularity that we can know what to ex­
pect. This makes the unity of accidents a rational unity, the material
theory makes it a unity not of a directly intellectual origin. The ques­
tion is, then, which does experience, which does science decide for?
Does it appear that in nature all regularities are directly rational, all
causes final causes; or does it appear that regularities extend beyond
the requirement of a rational purpose, and are brought about by me­
chanical causes? N ow science, as we all know, is generally hostile to
the final causes, the operation of which it would restrict within certain
spheres, and it finds decidedly an other than directly intellectual regu­
larity in the universe. Accordingly the claim which Mr. Collyns
Simon, Professor Fraser, and Mr. Archer Butler make for Berkeleyan-
ism, that it is especially fit to harmonize with scientific thought, is as
far as possible from the truth. The sort of science that his idealism
would foster would be one which should consist in saying what each
natural production was made for. Berkeley’s own remarks about natu­
ral philosophy show how little he sympathized with physicists. They
should all be read; we have only room to quote a detached sentence
or two:—
To endeavor to explain the production of colors or sound by figure, mo­
tion, magnitude, and the like, must needs be labor in vain. . . . In the business
of gravitation or mutual attraction, because it appears in many instances, some
are straightway for pronouncing it universal; and that to attract and be at­
tracted by every body is an essential quality inherent in all bodies whatever.
. . . There is nothing necessary or essential in the case, but it depends entirely
on the will of the Governing Spirit, who causes certain bodies to cleave
together or tend towards each other according to various laws, whilst he keeps
others at a fixed distance; and to some he gives a quite contrary tendency, to
fly asunder just as he sees convenient. . . . First, it is plain philosophers amuse
themselves in vain, when they inquire for any natural efficient cause, distinct
from mind or spirit. Secondly, considering the whole creation is the workman­
ship of a wise andgood Agent, it should seem to become philosophers to employ
their thoughts (contrary to what some hold) about the final causes of things;
and I must confess I see no reason why pointing out the various ends to which
natural things are adapted, and for which they were originally with unspeak­
able wisdom contrived, should not be thought one good way of accounting for
them, and altogether worthy of a philosopher. (Vol. I, p. 466)16
After this how can his disciples say “that the true logic ofphysics is the
first conclusion from his system/” 17
As for that argument which is so much used by Berkeley and
others, that such and such a thing cannot exist because we cannot so

[page 102]

102 I The Essential Peirce
much as frame the idea of such a thing,—that matter, for example, is
impossible because it is an abstract idea, and we have no abstract
ideas,—it appears to us to be a mode of reasoning which is to be used
with extreme caution. Are the facts such, that if we could have an idea
of the thing in question, we should infer its existence, or are they not?
If not, no argument is necessary against its existence, until something
is found out to make us suspect it exists. But if we ought to infer that
it exists, if we only could frame the idea of it, why should we allow
our mental incapacity to prevent us from adopting the proposition
which logic requires? If such arguments had prevailed in mathematics
(and Berkeley was equally strenuous in advocating them there), and if
everything about negative quantities, the square root of minus, and
infinitesimals, had been excluded from the subject on the ground that
we can form no idea of such things, the science would have been
simplified no doubt, simplified by never advancing to the more diffi­
cult matters. A better rule for avoiding the deceits of language is this:
Do things fulfil the same function practically? Then let them be signi­
fied by the same word. Do they not? Then let them be distinguished.
If I have learned a formula in gibberish which in any way jogs my
memory so as to enable me in each single case to act as though I had
a general idea, what possible utility is there in distinguishing between
such a gibberish and formula and an idea? Why use the term a general
idea in such a sense as to separate things which, for all experiential
purposes, are the same?
The great inconsistency of the Berkeleyan theory, which prevents
his nominalistic principles from appearing in their true colors, is that
he has not treated mind and matter in the same way. All that he has
said against the existence of matter might be said against the existence
of mind; and the only thing which prevented his seeing that, was the
vagueness of the Lockian reflection, or faculty of internal perception.
It was not until after he had published his systematic exposition of his
doctrine, that this objection ever occurred to him. He alludes to it in
one of his dialogues, but his answer to it is very lame. Hume seized
upon this point, and, developing it, equally denied the existence of
mind and matter, maintaining that only appearances exist. Hume’s
philosophy is nothing but Berkeley’s, with this change made in it, and
written by a mind of a more sceptical tendency. The innocent bishop
generated Hume; and as no one disputes that Hume gave rise to all
modern philosophy of every kind, Berkeley ought to have a far more
important place in the history of philosophy than has usually been
assigned to him. His doctrine was the half-way station, or necessary
resting-place between Locke’s and Hum e’s.
Hum e’s greatness consists in the fact that he was the man who had
the courage to carry out his principles to their utmost consequences,
without regard to the character of the conclusions he reached. But

[page 103]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 103
neither he nor any other one has set forth nominalism in an absolutely
thoroughgoing manner; and it is safe to say that no one ever will,
unless it be to reduce it to absurdity.
We ought to say one word about Berkeley’s theory of vision. It was
undoubtedly an extraordinary piece of reasoning, and might have
served for the basis of the modern science. Historically it has not had
that fortune, because the modern science has been chiefly created in
Germany, where Berkeley is little known and greatly misunderstood.
We may fairly say that Berkeley taught the English some of the most
essential principles of that hypothesis of sight which is now getting to
prevail, more than a century before they were known to the rest of the
world. This is much; but what is claimed by some of his advocates is
astounding. One writer says that Berkeley’s theory has been accepted
by the leaders of all schools of thought! Professor Fraser admits that
it has attracted no attention in Germany, but thinks the German mind
too a priori to like Berkeley’s reasoning.18 But Helmholtz, who has
done more than any other man to bring the empiricist theory into
favor, says: “ Our knowledge of the phenomena of vision is not so
complete as to allow only one theory and exclude every other. It seems
to me that the choice which different savans make between different
theories of vision has thus far been governed more by their metaphysi­
cal inclinations than by any constraining power which the facts have
had.” 19 The best authorities, however, prefer the empiricist hypothe­
sis; the fundamental proposition of which, as it is of Berkeley’s, is that
the sensations which we have in seeing are signs of the relations of
things whose interpretation has to be discovered inductively. In the
enumeration of the signs and of their uses, Berkeley shows considera­
ble power in that sort of investigation, though there is naturally no
very close resemblance between his and the modern accounts of the
matter. There is no modern physiologist who would not think that
Berkeley had greatly exaggerated the part that the muscular sense
plays in vision.
Berkeley’s theory of vision was an important step in the develop­
ment of the associationalist psychology. He thought all our concep­
tions of body and of space were simply reproductions in the imagina­
tion of sensations of touch (including the muscular sense). This, if it
were true, would be a most surprising case of mental chemistry, that
is of a sensation being felt and yet so mixed with others that we cannot
by an act of simple attention recognize it. Doubtless this theory had
its influence in the production of H artley’s system.
Hum e’s phenomenalism and H artley’s associationalism were put
forth almost contemporaneously about 1750. They contain the funda­
mental positions of the current English “ positivism.” From 1750 down
to 1830— eighty years— nothing of particular importance was added to
the nominalistic doctrine. At the beginning of this period Hume was

[page 104]

104 I The Essential Peirce
toning down his earlier radicalism, and Smith’s theory of Moral Senti­
ments appeared. Later came Priestley’s materialism, but there was
nothing new in that; and just at the end of the period, Brow n’s Lectures
on the Human Mind. The great body of the philosophy of those eighty
years is of the Scotch common-sense school. It is a weak sort of realistic
reaction, for which there is no adequate explanation within the sphere
of the history of philosophy. It would be curious to inquire whether
anything in the history of society could account for it. In 1829 appeared
James M ill’s Analysis of the Human Mind, a really great nominalistic
book again. This was followed by Stuart M ill’s Logic in 1843. Since
then, the school has produced nothing of the first importance; and it
will very likely lose its distinctive character now for a time, by being
merged in an empiricism of a less metaphysical and more working
kind. Already in Stuart Mill the nominalism is less salient than in the
classical writers; though it is quite unmistakable.
Thus we see how large a part of the metaphysical ideas of to-day
have come to us by inheritance from very early times, Berkeley being
one of the intellectual ancestors whose labors did as much as any one’s
to enhance the value of the bequest. The realistic philosophy of the last
century has now lost all its popularity, except with the most conserva­
tive minds. And science as well as philosophy is nominalistic. The
doctrine of the correlation of forces, the discoveries of Helmholtz, and
the hypotheses of Liebig and of Darwin, have all that character of
explaining familiar phenomena apparently of a peculiar kind by ex­
tending the operation of simple mechanical principles, which belongs
to nominalism. Or if the nominalistic character of these doctrines
themselves cannot be detected, it will at least be admitted that they are
observed to carry along with them those daughters of nominalism,—
sensationalism, phenomenalism, individualism, and materialism. That
physical science is necessarily connected with doctrines of a debasing
moral tendency will be believed by few. But if we hold that such an
effect will not be produced by these doctrines on a mind which really
understands them, we are accepting this belief, not on experience,
which is rather against it, but on the strength of our general faith that
what is really true it is good to believe and evil to reject. On the other
hand, it is allowable to suppose that science has no essential affinity
with the philosophical views with which it seems to be every year
more associated. History cannot be held to exclude this supposition;
and science as it exists is certainly much less nominalistic than the
nominalists think it should be. Whewell represents it quite as well as
Mill. Yet a man who enters into the scientific thought of the day and
has not materialistic tendencies, is getting to be an impossibility. So
long as there is a dispute between nominalism and realism, so long as
the position we hold on the question is not determined by any proof
indisputable, but is more or less a matter of inclination, a man as he

[page 105]

Fraser's The Works of George Berkeley I 105
gradually comes to feel the profound hostility of the two tendencies
will, if he is not less than man, become engaged with one or other and
can no more obey both than he can serve God and Mammon. If the
two impulses are neutralized within him, the result simply is that he
is left without any great intellectual motive. There is, indeed, no
reason to suppose the logical question is in its own nature unsuscepti­
ble of solution. But that path out of the difficulty lies through the
thorniest mazes of a science as dry as mathematics. N ow there is a
demand for mathematics; it helps to build bridges and drive engines,
and therefore it becomes somebody’s business to study it severely. But
to have a philosophy is a matter of luxury; the only use of that is to
make us feel comfortable and easy. It is a study for leisure hours; and
we want it supplied in an elegant, an agreeable, an interesting form.
The law of natural selection, which is the precise analogue in another
realm of the law of supply and demand, has the most immediate effect
in fostering the other faculties of the understanding, for the men of
mental power succeed in the struggle for life; but the faculty of philos­
ophizing, except in the literary way, is not called for; and therefore a
difficult question cannot be expected to reach solution until it takes
some practical form. If anybody should have the good luck to find out
the solution, nobody else would take the trouble to understand it. But
though the question of realism and nominalism has its roots in the
technicalities of logic, its branches reach about our life. The question
whether the genus homo has any existence except as individuals, is the
question whether there is anything of any more dignity, worth, and
importance than individual happiness, individual aspirations, and in­
dividual life. Whether men really have anything in common, so that
the community is to be considered as an end in itself, and if so, what
the relative value of the two factors is, is the most fundamental practi­
cal question in regard to every public institution the constitution of
which we have it in our power to influence.

[page 106]

6
On a New Class of
Observations, Suggested by
the Principles ofLogic
M S 1104. [Firstpublished, as MS jzz, z
V
z W j:2jj-j7.J Written
in the summer o f 1877, apparently for presentation, fj&ij ¿nV/'
recommends the observational study of sensations (as
Peirce recommendedfor all sciences, evew mathematics). Op­
posed to the “ordinary ” view that “there are ultimate sensa­
tions without any general relations between them, ” Peirce
argues that, although we can never completely capture in
general descriptions the differences between different sensa­
tions, w 6'#« “make an indefinite progress toward such a
result. ” But i f that is unconvincing, Peirce goes on to say,
perhaps we should try a phenomenological approach. Whether
there are pure and completely determinate individual sensa­
tions is a question that can be dealt with by observational
science; “here then, "he concludes, “w # whole world o f obser­
vation, to which we have been systematically blind, simply
because of a wrong metaphysical prejudice. ”
It is usually admitted that there are two classes of mental represen­
tations, Immediate Representations or Sensations and Mediate Repre­
sentations or Conceptions. The former are completely determinate or
individual objects of thought; the latter are partially indeterminate or
general objects. Granting that both these classes of objects exist, the
question of the principle of Individuation or of the respect in which
the individual differs from the general becomes one of extreme diffi­
culty. Duns Scotus after a masterly criticism of all the attempts at
answering it, puts forward the theory that the distinction is a peculiar
one without any general character, and therefore itself presenting this
peculiar aspect of individuality. Occam denies that any general objects
of thought exist, which implies that no objects of thought have any
resemblances, differences, or relations of any kind.1 1 on the other hand
have undertaken to show that just the reverse of this is the case. That

[page 107]

On a New Class of Observations I 107
no object is individual but that the things the most concrete have still
a certain amount of indeterminacy. Take, Phillip of Macedón for ex­
ample. This object is logically divisible into Phillip drunk and Phillip
sober; and so on; and you do not get down to anything completely
determinate till you specify an indivisible instant of time, which is an
ideal limit not attained in thought or in re.
It follows from this doctrine that we have no pure sensations, but
only sensational elements of thought. Thus, the difference between
blue and red, since it contains a sensational element, cannot be fully
represented by any general description. As the sensational element is
in this case very large, the failure of any attempt to describe the
difference between blue & red in general terms is very striking. But,
according to my theory of logic, since no pure sensations or individual
objects exist, it follows that there must be some relation between blue
& red & some general respect in which they differ, & therefore a step
can be made towards a general description of their difference and if
that general description is unsatisfactory, as it must be, then another
relation must exist between the two colors, & an addition based on it
may be made to the general description, & so on ad infinitum.
Here, then, are two metaphysical theories; the ordinary one and
mine. According to the former, there are ultimate sensations without
any general relations between them; according to the latter, although
the differences between different sensations can never be completely
covered by a general description, yet we may make an indefinite prog­
ress toward such a result. Which is true? I have no need to make any
special observations to determine that, any more than I would in a
question of a Perpetual Motion. I rest upon general principles which
are deduced by irrefragable reasoning, from facts so general as to be
admitted by all the world. But, for those who cannot understand this
reasoning, I point to some facts which are not far to seek.
Different sensations resemble one another. That is sufficiently pa­
tent, & there is already a relation between sensations which at once
totally & irretrievably overthrows the ordinary theory. Different sen­
sations also differ in intensity. There is another class of relations be­
tween them, irreconcileable with their individual character. But it is
commonly said that of relations of kind between different elementary
sensations there are none. What none? When our ordinary language
classifies them according to their kinds into colors, sounds, tastes,
smells, feelings? This is not commonly noticed, but it is commonly said
(I mean by physicists) that there is no meaning in the comparison of
the intensity of a red and green light. Here I have 74 pieces of different
coloured ribbons each one numbered upon which I have made fre­
quent photometric experiments extending over a period of 12 months.2
N ow / say that a red and green can be compared in intensity with a
considerable degree of accuracy. On another occasion, when the fig­

[page 108]

108 I The Essential Peirce
ures are relevant, I will give them. They are not so now, because you
can all see that that red is darker than that blue & that that blue is
darker than that red. There is an uncertainty in the judgment, a proba­
ble error. But that probable error is only another fact, another numeri­
cally determinate relation between the two sensations. So with a light
& a sound. They can also be compared in intensity. Consider with
equal attention the sound of a cannon or the appearance of a sixth
magnitude star. Which is most intense? Can there be any doubt. Con­
sider the light of the sun, & the sound of a falling pin. In the laws of
these relations of intensity between different sensations there is an
immense research, a branch of science. These are not the only relations
between sensations but they are the most tangible and the natural
starting point.
Here then is a whole world of observation, to which we have been
systematically blind, simply because of a wrong metaphysical preju­
dice. One of the most accomplished men of science in the country went
so far as to say to me the other day, that there was no reason to suppose
that the sensations of color of one person had any resemblance to those
of another! Violently as this flies in the face of the principles of induc­
tive reasoning, I was not surprized to hear it said, because as Aristotle
says etre 4>iXocro<\>r]Teov (¡>cXocro4>rjTeov tire ¡Jirj (j>iXocro(j>7)Teou
<\)i\ocro<f)7)T€ov, iravTox; de <
f>cXocro(j)7]Teov. 3 Whether we have an
antimetaphysical metaphysics or a pro-metaphysical metaphysics, a
metaphysics we are sure to have. And the less pains we take with it
the more crudely metaphysical it w ill be.

[page 109]

7
The Fixation ofBelief
P 107: Popular Science Monthly 12 (November 1877)11-13.
[Also published in W
3:242-57 (with parts of earlier versions,
M SS 187-189 [pp. 22-28]) and in CP5*358-87. Peirce intended
to use thispaper as essay 8 o f his 1893 “Searchfo r a Method, ”
as chapter 5 o f his 1894 “How to Reason ” (MS1407), ¿zj
the first essay in his 1909/10 “Essays on the Reasoning o f
Science” (MS 334). Substantive changes in these two are re­
corded in the Notes; fo r the handwritten sections in MS 407
and the changes taken from an offprint that is no longer
extant, see the CP.] This is thefirst of a series o f six papers,
collectively titled “Illustrations of the Logic of Science ¿zi
least one more paper was projected, they were once listed
as a forthcoming book in Appleton 5
r International Scientific
Series. The objective of the “Illustrations ” is “to describe the
method o f scientific investigation, ” they contain, #
5*
Peirce later recalled, “the earliestformulation ofa method of
logical analysis that [I] had had the habit of alluding to as
[my] \pragmatism, ’ ” or “the tiny seed that under the culture
of richer minds, grew into thegoodly tree of that same appel­
lation that already begins to afford a comfortable and whole­
some lodge for many a soul. ” In thefirst paper, Ae develops
his thesis that thought is a form of inquiry, belief the
cessation of doubt, he emphasizes the self-corrective na­
ture o fthe scientific method. Hefurther discussesfour methods
o f fixing belief (those of tenacity and of authority, a
priori method, the method of science) and argues that
only thefourth, which alone appeals to an “external perma­
nency, ” to success in the long run.
I
Few persons care to study logic, because everybody conceives him­
self to be proficient enough in the art of reasoning already. But I
observe that this satisfaction is limited to one’s own ratiocination, and
does not extend to that of other men.

[page 110]

110 I The Essential Peirce
We come to the full possession of our power of drawing inferences
the last of all our faculties, for it is not so much a natural gift as a long
and difficult art. The history of its practice would make a grand subject
for a book. The mediaeval schoolmen, following the Romans, made
logic the earliest of a boy’s studies after grammar, as being very easy.
So it was, as they understood it. Its fundamental principle, according
to them, was, that all knowledge rests on either authority or reason;
but that whatever is deduced by reason depends ultimately on a prem­
ise derived from authority. Accordingly, as soon as a boy was perfect
in the syllogistic procedure, his intellectual kit of tools was held to be
complete.
T o Roger Bacon, that remarkable mind who in the middle of the
thirteenth century was almost a scientific man, the schoolmen’s con­
ception of reasoning appeared only an obstacle to truth. He saw that
experience alone teaches anything— a proposition which to us seems
easy to understand, because a distinct conception of experience has
been handed down to us from former generations; which to him also
seemed perfectly clear, because its difficulties had not yet unfolded
themselves. O f all kinds of experience, the best, he thought, was inte­
rior illumination, which teaches many things about Nature which the
external senses could never discover, such as the transubstantiation of
bread.1
Four centuries later, the more celebrated Bacon, in the first book
of his Novum Organum, gave his clear account of experience as some­
thing which must be open to verification and reexamination. But,
superior as Lord Bacon’s conception is to earlier notions, a modern
reader who is not in awe of his grandiloquence is chiefly struck by the
inadequacy of his view of scientific procedure. That we have only to
make some crude experiments, to draw up briefs of the results in
certain blank forms, to go through these by rule, checking off every­
thing disproved and setting down the alternatives, and that thus in a
few years physical science would be finished up— what an idea! “ He
wrote on science like a Lord Chancellor,” indeed.2
The early scientists, Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, Kepler, Galileo,
and G ilbert,3 had methods more like those of their modern brethren.
Kepler undertook to draw a curve through the places of Mars;* and4
his greatest service to science was in impressing on men’s minds that
this was the thing to be done if they wished to improve astronomy; that
they were not to content themselves with inquiring whether one sys­
tem of epicycles was better than another, but that they were to sit
down to the figures and find out what the curve, in truth, was. He
accomplished this by his incomparable energy and courage, blunder­
ing along in the most inconceivable way (to us),5 from one irrational
*Not quite so, but as nearly so as can be told in a few words.

[page 111]

The Fixation of Belief I 111
hypothesis to another, until, after trying twenty-two of these, he fell,
by the mere exhaustion of his invention, upon the orbit which a mind
well furnished with the weapons of modern logic would have tried
almost at the outset.
In the same way, every work of science great enough to be remem­
bered for a few generations affords some exemplification of the defec­
tive state of the art of reasoning of the time when it was written; and
each6 chief step in science has been a lesson in logic. It was so when
Lavoisier and his contemporaries took up the study of chemistry. The
old chemist’s maxim had been, “Lege, lege, lege, labora, ora, et relege. ” 7
Lavoisier’s method was not to read and pray, not to dream that some
long and complicated chemical process would have a certain effect, to
put it into practice with dull patience, after its inevitable failure to
dream that with some modification it would have another result, and
to end by publishing the last dream as a fact: his way was to carry his
mind into his laboratory, and to make of his alembics and cucurbits
instruments8 of thought, giving a new conception of reasoning, as
something which was to be done with one’s eyes open, by manipulat­
ing real things instead of words and fancies.
The Darwinian controversy is, in large part, a question of logic.
Mr. Darwin proposed to apply the statistical method to biology. The
same thing had been done in a widely different branch of science, the
theory of gases.9 Though unable to say what the movements of any
particular molecule of a gas would be on a certain hypothesis regard­
ing the constitution of this class of bodies, Clausius and M axwell were
yet able,10 by the application of the doctrine of probabilities, to predict
that in the long run such and such a proportion of the molecules
would, under given circumstances, acquire such and such velocities;
that there would take place, every second, such and such a number11
of collisions, etc.; and from these propositions were able to deduce
certain properties of gases, especially in regard to their heat-relations.
In like manner, Darwin, while unable to say what the operation of
variation and natural selection in any individual case will be, demon­
strates that in the long run they will adapt animals to their circum­
stances. Whether or not existing animal forms are due to such action,
or what position the theory ought to take, forms the subject of a
discussion in which questions of fact and questions of logic are curi­
ously interlaced.
II
The object of reasoning is to find out, from the consideration of
what we already know, something else which we do not know. Conse­
quently, reasoning is good if it be such as to give a true conclusion from
true premises, and not otherwise. Thus, the question of its validity is

[page 112]

112 I The Essential Peirce
purely one of fact and not of thinking. A being the premises and B the
conclusion/2 the question is, whether these facts are really so related
that if A is B is. If so, the inference is valid; if not, not. It is not in the
least the question whether, when the premises are accepted by the
mind, we feel an impulse to accept the conclusion also. It is true that
we do generally reason correctly by nature. But that is an accident; the
true conclusion would remain true if we had no impulse to accept it;
and the false one would remain false, though we could not resist the
tendency to believe in it.
We are, doubtless, in the main logical animals, but we are not
perfectly so. Most of us, for example, are naturally more sanguine and
hopeful than logic would justify. We seem to be so constituted that in
the absence of any facts to go upon we are happy and self-satisfied; so
that the effect of experience is continually to contract our hopes and
aspirations. Yet a lifetime of the application of this corrective does not
usually eradicate our sanguine disposition. Where hope is unchecked
by any experience, it is likely that our optimism is extravagant. Logi­
cality in regard to practical matters13 is the most useful quality an
animal can possess, and might, therefore, result from the action of
natural selection; but outside of these it is probably of more advantage
to the animal to have his mind filled with pleasing and encouraging
visions, independently of their truth; and thus, upon unpractical sub­
jects, natural selection might occasion a fallacious tendency of
thought.
That which determines us, from given premises, to draw one infer­
ence rather than another, is some habit of mind, whether it be constitu­
tional or acquired. The habit is good or otherwise, according as it
produces true conclusions from true premises or not; and an inference
is regarded as valid or not, without reference to the truth or falsity of
its conclusion specially, but according as the habit which determines
it is such as to produce true conclusions in general or not. The particu­
lar habit of mind which governs this or that inference may be formu­
lated in a proposition whose truth depends on the validity of the
inferences which the habit determines; and such a formula is called a
guiding principle of inference. Suppose, for example, that we observe
that a rotating disk of copper quickly comes to rest when placed
between the poles of a magnet, and we infer that this will happen with
every disk of copper. The guiding principle is, that what is true of one
piece of copper is true of another. Such a guiding principle with regard
to copper would be much safer than with regard to many other sub­
stances— brass, for example.
A book might be written to signalize all the most important of these
guiding principles of reasoning. It would probably be, we must con­
fess, of no service to a person whose thought is directed wholly to
practical subjects, and whose activity moves along thoroughly-beaten

[page 113]

The Fixation of Belief I 113
paths. The problems which present themselves to such a mind are
matters of routine which he has learned once for all to handle in
learning his business. But let a man venture into an unfamiliar field,
or where his results are not continually checked by experience, and all
history shows that the most masculine intellect will ofttimes lose his
orientation and waste his efforts in directions which bring him no
nearer to his goal, or even carry him entirely astray. He is like a ship
in the open sea, with no one on board who understands the rules of
navigation. And in such a case some general study of the guiding
principles of reasoning would be sure to be found useful.
The subject could hardly be treated, however, without being first
limited; since almost any fact may serve as a guiding principle. But it
so happens that there exists a division among facts, such that in one
class are all those which are absolutely essential as guiding principles,
while in the others are all which have any other interest as objects of
research. This division is between those which are necessarily taken
for granted in asking whether a certain conclusion follows14 from
certain premises, and those which are not implied in that question. A
moment’s thought will show that a variety of facts are already assumed
when the logical question is first asked. It is implied, for instance, that
there are such states of mind as doubt and belief—that a passage from
one to the other is possible, the object of thought remaining the same,
and that this transition is subject to some rules which all minds are
alike bound by. As these are facts which we must already know before
we can have any clear conception of reasoning at all, it cannot be
supposed to be any longer of much interest to inquire into their truth
or falsity. On the other hand, it is easy to believe that those rules of
reasoning which are deduced from the very idea of the process are the
ones which are the most essential; and, indeed, that so long as it
conforms to these it will, at least, not lead to false conclusions from
true premises. In point of fact, the importance of what may be deduced
from the assumptions involved in the logical question turns out to be
greater than might be supposed, and this for reasons which it is diffi­
cult to exhibit at the outset. The only one which I shall here mention
is, that conceptions which are really products of logical reflection,
without being readily seen to be so, mingle with our ordinary
thoughts, and are frequently the causes of great confusion. This is the
case, for example, with the conception of quality. A quality as such is
never an object of observation. We can see that a thing is blue or green,
but the quality of being blue and the quality of being green are not
things which we see; they are products of logical reflection. The truth
is, that common-sense, or thought as it first emerges above the level of
the narrowly practical, is deeply imbued with that bad logical quality
to which the epithet metaphysical is commonly applied; and nothing
can clear it up but a severe course of logic.

[page 114]

114 I The Essential Peirce
III
We generally know when we wish to ask a question and when we
wish to pronounce a judgment, for there is a dissimilarity between the
sensation of doubting and that of believing.
But this is not all which distinguishes doubt from belief. There is
a practical difference. Our beliefs guide our desires and shape our
actions. The Assassins, or followers of the Old Man of the Mountain,15
used to rush into death at his least command, because they believed
that obedience to him would insure everlasting felicity. Had they
doubted this, they would not have acted as they did. So it is with every
belief, according to its degree. The feeling of believing is a more or less
sure indication of there being established in our nature some habit
which will determine our actions. Doubt never has such an effect.
N or must we overlook a third point of difference. Doubt is an
uneasy and dissatisfied state from which we struggle to free ourselves
and pass into the state of belief; while the latter is a calm and satisfac­
tory state which we do not wish to avoid, or to change to a belief in
anything else.* On the contrary, we cling tenaciously, not merely to
believing, but to believing just what we do believe.
Thus, both doubt and belief have positive effects upon us, though
very different ones. Belief does not make us act at once, but puts us into
such a condition that we shall behave in a certain way, when the
occasion arises. Doubt has not the least effect of this sort, but stimu­
lates us to action16 until it is destroyed. This reminds us of the irrita­
tion of a nerve and the reflex action produced thereby; while for the
analogue of belief, in the nervous system, we must look to what are
called nervous associations— for example, to that habit of the nerves in
consequence of which the smell of a peach will make the mouth water.
IV
The irritation of doubt causes a struggle to attain a state of belief.
I shall term this struggle inquiry, though it must be admitted that this
is sometimes not a very apt designation.
The irritation of doubt is the only immediate motive for the strug­
gle to attain belief. It is certainly best for us that our beliefs should be
such as may truly guide our actions so as to satisfy our desires; and this
reflection will make us reject any belief which does not seem to have
been so formed as to insure this result. But it will only do so by
creating a doubt in the place of that belief. With the doubt, therefore,
the struggle begins, and with the cessation of doubt it ends. Hence, the
*1 am not speaking of secondary effects occasionally produced by the interference
of other impulses.17

[page 115]

The Fixation o f Belief I 115
sole object of inquiry is the settlement of opinion. We may fancy that
this is not enough for us, and that we seek, not merely an opinion, but
a true opinion. But put this fancy to the test, and it proves groundless;
for as soon as a firm belief is reached we are entirely satisfied, whether
the belief be true or false. And it is clear that nothing out of the sphere
of our knowledge can be our object, for nothing which does not affect
the mind can be the motive for a mental effort. The most that can be
maintained is, that we seek for a belief that we shall think to be true.
But we think each one of our beliefs to be true, and, indeed, it is mere
tautology to say so.
That the settlement of opinion is the sole end of inquiry is a very
important proposition. It sweeps away, at once, various vague and
erroneous conceptions of proof. A few of these may be noticed here.
1. Some philosophers have imagined that to start an inquiry it was
only necessary to utter a question or set it down upon paper, and have
even recommended us to begin our studies with questioning every­
thing! But the mere putting of a proposition into the interrogative
form does not stimulate the mind to any struggle after belief. There
must be a real and living doubt, and without this all discussion is idle.
2. It is a very common idea that a demonstration must rest on some
ultimate and absolutely indubitable propositions. These, according to
one school, are first principles of a general nature; according to an­
other, are first sensations. But, in point of fact, an inquiry, to have that
completely satisfactory result called demonstration, has only to start
with propositions perfectly free from all actual doubt. If the premises
are not in fact doubted at all, they cannot be more satisfactory than
they are.
3. Some people seem to love to argue a point after all the world is
fully convinced of it. But no further advance can be made. When doubt
ceases, mental action on the subject comes to an end; and, if it did go
on, it would be without a purpose.
V
If the settlement of opinion is the sole object of inquiry, and if
belief is of the nature of a habit, why should we not attain the desired
end, by taking any answer to a question which we may fancy, and18
constantly reiterating it to ourselves, dwelling on all which may con­
duce to that belief, and learning to turn with contempt and hatred
from anything which might disturb it? This simple and direct method
is really pursued by many men. I remember once being entreated not
to read a certain newspaper lest it might change my opinion upon
free-trade. “ Lest I might be entrapped by its fallacies and misstate­
ments,” was the form of expression. “ You are not,” my friend said, “ a
special student of political economy. You might, therefore, easily be

[page 116]

116 I The Essential Peirce
deceived by fallacious arguments upon the subject. You might, then,
if you read this paper, be led to believe in protection. But you admit
that free-trade is the true doctrine; and you do not wish to believe what
is not true.” I have often known this system to be deliberately adopted.
Still oftener, the instinctive dislike of an undecided state of mind,
exaggerated into a vague dread of doubt, makes men cling spasmodi­
cally to the views they already take. The man feels that, if he only holds
to his belief without wavering, it will be entirely satisfactory. N or can
it be denied that a steady and immovable faith yields great peace of
mind. It may, indeed, give rise to inconveniences, as if a man should
resolutely continue to believe that fire would not burn him, or that he
would be eternally damned if he received his ingesta otherwise than
through a stomach-pump. But then the man who adopts this method
will not allow that its inconveniences are greater than its advantages.
He will say, “ I hold steadfastly to the truth, and the truth is always
wholesome.” And in many cases it may very well be that the pleasure
he derives from his calm faith overbalances any inconveniences result­
ing from its deceptive character. Thus, if it be true that death is
annihilation, then the man who believes that he will certainly go
straight to heaven when he dies, provided he have fulfilled certain
simple observances in this life, has a cheap pleasure which will not be
followed by the least disappointment. A similar consideration seems
to have weight with many persons in religious topics, for we fre­
quently hear it said, “ Oh, I could not believe so-and-so, because I
should be wretched if I did.” When an ostrich buries its head in the
sand as danger approaches, it very likely takes the happiest course. It
hides the danger, and then calmly says there is no danger; and, if it
feels perfectly sure there is none, why should it raise its head to see?
A man may go through life, systematically keeping out of view all that
might cause a change in his opinions, and if he only succeeds— basing
his method, as he does, on two fundamental psychological laws— I do
not see what can be said against his doing so. It would be an egotistical
impertinence to object that his procedure is irrational, for that only
amounts to saying that his method of settling belief is not ours. He
does not propose to himself to be rational, and, indeed, will often talk
with scorn of man’s weak and illusive reason. So let him think as he
pleases.
But this method of fixing belief, which may be called the method
of tenacity, will be unable to hold its ground in practice. The social
impulse is against it. The man who adopts it will find that other men
think differently from him, and it w ill be apt to occur to him, in some
saner moment, that their opinions are quite as good as his own, and
this w ill shake his confidence in his belief. This conception, that an­
other man’s thought or sentiment may be equivalent to one’s own, is
a distinctly new step, and a highly important one. It arises from an

[page 117]

The Fixation of Belief I 117
impulse too strong in man to be suppressed, without danger of de­
stroying the human species. Unless we make ourselves hermits, we
shall necessarily influence each other’s opinions; so that the problem
becomes how to fix belief, not in the individual merely, but in the
community.
Let the will of the state act, then, instead of that of the individual.
Let an institution be created which shall have for its object to keep
correct doctrines before the attention of the people, to reiterate them
perpetually, and to teach them to the young; having at the same time
power to prevent contrary doctrines from being taught, advocated, or
expressed. Let all possible causes of a change of mind be removed from
men’s apprehensions. Let them be kept ignorant, lest they should learn
of some reason to think otherwise than they do. Let their passions be
enlisted, so that they may regard private and unusual opinions with
hatred and horror. Then, let all men who reject the established belief
be terrified into silence. Let the people turn out and tar-and-feather
such men, or let inquisitions be made into the manner of thinking of
suspected persons, and, when they are found guilty of forbidden be­
liefs, let them be subjected to some signal punishment. When complete
agreement could not otherwise be reached, a general massacre of all
who have not thought in a certain way has proved a very effective
means of settling opinion in a country. If the power to do this be
wanting, let a list of opinions be drawn up, to which no man of the
least independence of thought can assent, and let the faithful be re­
quired to accept all these propositions, in order to segregate them as
radically as possible from the influence of the rest of the world.
This method has, from the earliest times, been one o f the chief
means of upholding correct theological and political doctrines, and of
preserving their universal or catholic character. In Rome, especially,
it has been practised from the days of Numa Pompilius to those of Pius
N onus.19 This is the most perfect example in history; but wherever
there is a priesthood—and no religion has been without one—this
method has been more or less made use of. W herever there is an
aristocracy, or a guild, or any association of a class of men whose
interests depend or are supposed to depend on certain propositions,
there w ill be inevitably found some traces of this natural product of
social feeling. Cruelties always accompany this system; and when it is
consistently carried out, they become atrocities of the most horrible
kind in the eyes of any rational man. N or should this occasion surprise,
for the officer of a society does not feel justified in surrendering the
interests of that society for the sake of mercy, as he might his own
private interests. It is natural, therefore, that sympathy and fellowship
should thus produce a most ruthless power.
In judging this method of fixing belief, which may be called the
method of authority, we must, in the first place, allow its immeasura-

[page 118]

118 I The Essential Peirce
ble mental and moral superiority to the method of tenacity. Its success
is proportionately greater; and, in fact, it has over and over again
worked the most majestic results. The mere structures of stone which
it has caused to be put together— in Siam, for example, in Egypt, and
in Europe— have many of them a sublimity hardly more than rivaled
by the greatest works of Nature. And, except the geological epochs,
there are no periods of time so vast as those which are measured by
some of these organized faiths. If we scrutinize the matter closely, we
shall find that there has not been one of their creeds which has re­
mained always the same; yet the change is so slow as to be impercepti­
ble during one person’s life, so that individual belief remains sensibly
fixed. For the mass of mankind, then, there is perhaps no better
method than this. If it is their highest impulse to be intellectual slaves,
then slaves they ought to remain.
But no institution can undertake to regulate opinions upon every
subject. Only the most important ones can be attended to, and on the
rest men’s minds must be left to the action of natural causes. This
imperfection will be no source of weakness so long as men are in such
a state of culture that one opinion does not influence another— that is,
so long as they cannot put two and two together. But in the most
priestridden states some individuals will be found who are raised
above that condition. These men possess a wider sort of social feeling;
they see that men in other countries and in other ages have held to very
different doctrines from those which they themselves have been
brought up to believe; and they cannot help seeing that it is the mere
accident of their having been taught as they have, and of their having
been surrounded with the manners and associations they have, that has
caused them to believe as they do and not far differently. And their
candor cannot resist the reflection that there is no reason to rate their
own views at a higher value than those of other nations and other
centuries; and this gives rise to doubts in their minds.
They will further perceive that such doubts as these must exist in
their minds with reference to every belief which seems to be deter­
mined by the caprice either of themselves or of those who originated
the popular opinions. The willful adherence to a belief, and the arbi­
trary forcing of it upon others, must, therefore, both be given up, and
a new method of settling opinions must be adopted, which shall not
only produce an impulse to believe, but shall also decide what proposi­
tion it is which is to be believed. Let the action of natural preferences
be unimpeded, then, and under their influence let men, conversing
together and regarding matters in different lights, gradually develop
beliefs in harmony with natural causes. This method resembles that
by which conceptions of art have been brought to maturity. The most
perfect example of it is to be found in the history of metaphysical
philosophy. Systems of this sort have not usually rested upon any

[page 119]

The Fixation of Belief I 119
observed facts, at least not in any great degree. They have been chiefly
adopted because their fundamental propositions seemed “ agreeable to
reason.” This is an apt expression; it does not mean that which agrees
with experience, but that which we find ourselves inclined to believe.
Plato, for example, finds it agreeable to reason that the distances of the
celestial spheres from one another should be proportional to the dif­
ferent lengths of strings which produce harmonious chords.20 M any
philosophers have been led to their main conclusions by considera­
tions like this; but this is the lowest and least developed form which
the method takes, for it is clear that another man might find Kepler’s
theory, that the celestial spheres are proportional to the inscribed and
circumscribed spheres of the different regular solids, more agreeable
to his reason. But the shock of opinions will soon lead men to rest on
preferences of a far more universal nature. Take, for example, the
doctrine that man only acts selfishly—that is, from the consideration
that acting in one way will afford him more pleasure than acting in
another.21 This rests on no fact in the world, but it has had a wide
acceptance as being the only reasonable theory.
This method is far more intellectual and respectable from the point
of view of reason than either of the others which we have noticed.22
But its failure has been the most manifest. It makes of inquiry some­
thing similar to the development of taste; but taste, unfortunately, is
always more or less a matter of fashion, and accordingly metaphysi­
cians have never come to any fixed agreement, but the pendulum has
swung backward and forward between a more material and a more
spiritual philosophy, from the earliest times to the latest. And so from
this, which has been called the a priori method, we are driven, in Lord
Bacon’s phrase, to a true induction.23 We have examined into this a
priori method as something which promised to deliver our opinions
from their accidental and capricious element. But development, while
it is a process which eliminates the effect of some casual circumstances,
only magnifies that of others. This method, therefore, does not differ
in a very essential way from that of authority. The government may
not have lifted its finger to influence my convictions; I may have been
left outwardly quite free to choose, we w ill say, between monogamy
and polygamy, and, appealing to my conscience only, I may have
cuiiuilmfetf1 riba* rthf* Ar iluwntinu,« *Rii* vVih^r J
come to see that the chief obstacle to the spread of Christianity among
a people of as high culture as the Hindoos has been a conviction of the
immorality of our way of treating women, I cannot help seeing that,
though governments do not interfere, sentiments in their development
will be very greatly determined by accidental causes. N ow , there are
some people, among whom I must suppose that my reader is to be
found, who, when they see that any belief of theirs is determined by
any circumstance extraneous to the facts, will from that moment not

[page 120]

120 I The Essential Peirce
merely admit in words that that belief is doubtful, but will experience
a real doubt of it, so that it ceases to be a belief.24
To satisfy our doubts, therefore, it is necessary that a method
should be found by which our beliefs may be caused by nothing
human, but by some external permanency— by something upon which
our thinking has no effect. Some mystics imagine that they have such
a method in a private inspiration from on high. But that is only a form
of the method of tenacity, in which the conception of truth as some­
thing public is not yet developed. Our external permanency would not
be external, in our sense, if it was restricted in its influence to one
individual. It must be something which affects, or might affect, every
man. And, though these affections are necessarily as various as are
individual conditions, yet the method must be such that the ultimate
conclusion of every man shall be the same. Such is the method of
science. Its fundamental hypothesis, restated in more familiar lan­
guage, is this: There are real things, whose characters are entirely
independent of our opinions about them; those realities affect our
senses according to regular laws, and, though our sensations are as
different as our relations to the objects, yet, by taking advantage of the
laws of perception, we can ascertain by reasoning how things really
are, and any man, if he have sufficient experience and reason enough
about it, will be led to the one true conclusion. The new conception
here involved is that of reality. It may be asked how I know that there
are any realities. If this hypothesis is the sole support of my method
of inquiry, my method of inquiry must not be used to support my
hypothesis. The reply is this: i. If investigation cannot be regarded as
proving that there are real things, it at least does not lead to a contrary
conclusion; but the method and the conception on which it is based
remain ever in harmony. No doubts of the method, therefore, neces­
sarily arise from its practice, as is the case with all the others. 2. The
feeling which gives rise to any method of fixing belief is a dissatisfac­
tion at two repugnant propositions. But here already is a vague conces­
sion that there is some one thing to which a proposition should con­
form. Nobody, therefore, can really doubt that there are realities, or,25
if he did, doubt would not be a source of dissatisfaction. The hypothe­
sis, therefore, is one which every mind admits. So that the social
impulse does not cause me to doubt it. 3. Everybody uses26the scientific
method about a great many things, and only ceases to use it when he
does not know how to apply it. 4. Experience of the method has not
led me27 to doubt it, but, on the contrary, scientific investigation has
had the most wonderful triumphs in the way of settling opinion.
These afford the explanation of my not doubting the method or the
hypothesis which it supposes; and not having any doubt, nor believing
that anybody else whom I could influence has, it would be the merest

[page 121]

The Fixation o f Belief I 121
babble for me to say more about it. If there be anybody with a living
doubt upon the subject, let him consider it.
To describe the method of scientific investigation is the object of
this series of papers. At present I have only room to notice some points
of contrast between it and other methods of fixing belief.
This is the only one of the four methods which presents any dis­
tinction of a right and a wrong way. If I adopt the method of tenacity
and shut m yself out from all influences, whatever I think necessary to
doing this is necessary according to that method. So with the method
of authority: the state may try to put down heresy by means which,
from a scientific point of view, seem very ill-calculated to accomplish
its purposes; but the only test on that method is what the state thinks,
so that it cannot pursue the method wrongly. So with the a priori
method. The very essence of it is to think as one is inclined to think.
All metaphysicians will be sure to do that, however they may be
inclined to judge each other to be perversely wrong. The Hegelian
system recognizes every natural tendency of thought as logical, al­
though it be certain to be abolished by counter-tendencies. Hegel
thinks there is a regular system in the succession of these tendencies,
in consequence of which, after drifting one way and the other for a
long time, opinion will at last go right. And it is true that metaphysi­
cians get the right ideas at last; Hegel’s system of Nature represents
tolerably the science of that28 day; and one may be sure that whatever
scientific investigation has put out of doubt will presently receive a
priori demonstration on the part of the metaphysicians. But with the
scientific method the case is different. I may start with known and
observed facts to proceed to the unknown; and yet the rules which I
follow in doing so may not be such as investigation would approve.
The test of whether I am truly following the method is not an immedi­
ate appeal to my feelings and purposes, but, on the contrary, itself
involves the application of the method. Hence it is that bad reasoning
as well as good reasoning is possible; and this fact is the foundation of
the practical side of logic.
It is not to be supposed that the first three methods of settling
opinion present no advantage whatever over the scientific method.29
On the contrary, each has some peculiar convenience of its own. The
a priori method is distinguished for its comfortable conclusions. It is
the nature of the process to adopt whatever belief we are inclined to,
and there are certain flatteries to the vanity of man which we all
believe by nature, until we are awakened from our pleasing dream by
some rough facts. The method of authority will always govern the
mass of mankind; and those who wield the various forms of organized
force in the state will never be convinced that dangerous reasoning
ought not to be suppressed in some way. If liberty of speech is to be

[page 122]

122 I The Essential Peirce
untrammeled from the grosser forms of constraint, then uniformity of
opinion will be secured by a moral terrorism to which the respectabil­
ity of society will give its thorough approval. Following the method
of authority is the path of peace. Certain non-conformities are permit­
ted; certain others (considered unsafe) are forbidden. These are differ­
ent in different countries and in different ages; but, wherever you are,
let it be known that you seriously hold a tabooed belief, and you may
be perfectly sure of being treated with a cruelty less brutal but more
refined than hunting you like a wolf. Thus, the greatest intellectual
benefactors of mankind have never dared, and dare not now, to utter
the whole of their thought; and thus a shade ofprimafacie doubt is cast
upon every proposition which is considered essential to the security
of society. Singularly enough, the persecution does not all come from
without; but a man torments himself and is oftentimes most distressed
at finding himself believing propositions which he has been brought
up to regard with aversion. The peaceful and sympathetic man will,
therefore, find it hard to resist the temptation to submit his opinions
to authority. But most of all I admire the method of tenacity for its
strength, simplicity, and directness. Men who pursue it are distin­
guished for their decision of character, which becomes very easy with
such a mental rule. They do not waste time in trying to make up their
minds what they want, but, fastening like lightning upon whatever
alternative comes first, they hold to it to the end, whatever happens,
without an instant’s irresolution. This is one of the splendid qualities
which generally accompany brilliant, unlasting success. It is impossi­
ble not to envy the man who can dismiss reason, although we know
how it must turn out at last.
Such are the advantages which the other methods of settling opin­
ion have over scientific investigation. A man should consider well of
them; and then he should consider that, after all, he wishes his opin­
ions to coincide with the fact, and that there is no reason why the
results of these three methods should do so. To bring about this effect
is the prerogative of the method of science. Upon such considerations
he has to make his choice— a choice which is far more than the adop­
tion of any intellectual opinion, which is one of the ruling decisions
of his life, to which, when once made, he is bound to adhere. The force
of habit will sometimes cause a man to hold on to old beliefs, after he
is in a condition to see that they have no sound basis. But reflection
upon the state of the case will overcome these habits, and he ought to
allow reflection its full weight. People sometimes shrink from doing
this, having an idea that beliefs are wholesome which they cannot help
feeling rest on nothing. But let such persons suppose an analogous
though different case from their own. Let them ask themselves what
they would say to a reformed Mussulman who should hesitate to give
up his old notions in regard to the relations of the sexes; or to a

[page 123]

The Fixation of Belief I 123
reformed Catholic who should still shrink from reading the Bible.
Would they not say that these persons ought to consider the matter
fully, and clearly understand the new doctrine, and then ought to
embrace it, in its entirety? But, above all, let it be considered that what
is more wholesome than any particular belief is integrity of belief, and
that to avoid looking into the support of any belief from a fear that it
may turn out rotten is quite as immoral as it is disadvantageous. The
person who confesses that there is such a thing as truth, which is
distinguished from falsehood simply by this, that if acted on it will
carry us to the point we aim at and not astray, and then, though
convinced of this, dares not know the truth and seeks to avoid it, is in
a sorry state of mind indeed.
Yes, the other methods do have their merits: a clear logical con­
science does cost something—just as any virtue, just as all that we
cherish, costs us dear. But we should not desire it to be otherwise. The
genius of a man’s logical method should be loved and reverenced as his
bride, whom he has chosen from all the world. He need not contemn
the others; on the contrary, he may honor them deeply, and in doing
so he only honors her the more. But she is the one that he has chosen,
and he knows that he was right in making that choice. And having
made it, he will work and fight for her, and will not complain that
there are blows to take, hoping that there may be as many and as hard
to give, and will strive to be the worthy knight and champion of her
from the blaze of whose splendors he draws his inspiration and his
courage.

[page 124]

8
How to Make Our Ideas Clear
P up: Popular Science Monthly 12 (January 1878)^86-
302. [Also published in W
3:257-76 and in CP5.388-410. Peirce
intended to use this paper as essay 9 of his 1893 “Search for
a Method ” and as chapter 16 of his 1894 “How to Reason ”
(MS 422); the changes in MS 422 are recorded in the Notes.]
Written between 13 and 24 September 1877, while Peirce was
sailing to Plymouth, England, thispaper criticizes Descartes'
doctrine of the clearness of ideas and goes on to develop
Peirce Vown theory, according to which there are three levels
or grades of clearness. The theory of meaning associated with
the third grade of clearness is represented in the pragmatic
maxim (and is sometimes thought o f as an operationalist
theory). Peirce ends the paper by applying the pragmatic
maxim in his examination of the meaning o f several concep­
tions, including ‘realism \ (He later thought that his early
pragmatism was too nominalistic.)
I
Whoever has looked into a modern treatise on logic of the common
sort, will doubtless remember the two distinctions between clear and
obscure conceptions, and between distinct and confused conceptions.
They have lain in the books now for nigh two centuries, unimproved
and unmodified, and are generally reckoned by logicians as among the
gems of their doctrine.
A clear idea is defined as one which is so apprehended that it will
be recognized wherever it is met with, and so that no other will be
mistaken for it. If it fails of this clearness, it is said to be obscure.
This is rather a neat bit of philosophical terminology; yet, since it
is clearness that they were defining, I wish the logicians had made their
definition a little more plain. N ever to fail to recognize an idea, and
under no circumstances to mistake another for it, let it come in how
recondite a form it may, would indeed imply such prodigious force
and clearness of intellect as is seldom met with in this world. On the
other hand, merely to have such an acquaintance with the idea as to

[page 125]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 125
have become familiar with it, and to have lost all hesitancy in recogniz­
ing it in ordinary cases, hardly seems to deserve the name of clearness
of apprehension, since after all it only amounts to a subjective feeling
of mastery which may be entirely mistaken. I take it, however, that
when the logicians speak of “ clearness,” they mean nothing more than
such a familiarity with an idea, since they regard the quality as but a
small merit, which needs to be supplemented by another, which they
call distinctness.
A distinct idea is defined as one which contains nothing which is
not clear. This is technical language; by the contents of an idea logicians
understand whatever is contained in its definition. So that an idea is
distinctly apprehended, according to them, when we can give a precise
definition of it, in abstract terms. Here the professional logicians leave
the subject; and I would not have troubled the reader with what they
have to say, if it were not such a striking example of how they have
been slumbering through ages of intellectual activity, listlessly disre­
garding the enginery of modern thought, and never dreaming of ap­
plying its lessons to the improvement of logic. It is easy to show that
the doctrine that familiar use and abstract distinctness make the per­
fection of apprehension has its only true place in philosophies which
have long been extinct; and it is now time to formulate the method of
attaining to a more perfect clearness of thought, such as we see and
admire in the thinkers of our own time.
When Descartes set about the reconstruction of philosophy, his
first step was to (theoretically) permit skepticism and to discard the
practice of the schoolmen of looking to authority as the ultimate source
of truth. That done, he sought a more natural fountain of true princi­
ples, and professed to find it in the human mind; thus passing, in the
directest way, from the method of authority to that of apriority, as
described in my first paper. Self-consciousness was to furnish us with
our fundamental truths, and to decide what was agreeable to reason.
But since, evidently, not all ideas are true, he was led to note, as the
first condition of infallibility, that they must be clear. The distinction
between an idea seeming clear and really being so, never occurred to
him. Trusting to introspection, as he did, even for a knowledge of
external things, why should he question its testimony in respect to the
contents of our own minds? But then, I suppose, seeing men, who
seemed to be quite clear and positive, holding opposite opinions upon
fundamental principles, he was further led to say that clearness of
ideas is not sufficient, but that they need also to be distinct, i.e., to have
nothing unclear about them. What he probably meant by this (for he
did not explain himself with precision) was, that they must sustain the
test of dialectical examination; that they must not only seem clear at
the outset, but that discussion must never be able to bring to light
points of obscurity connected with them.

[page 126]

126 I The Essential Peirce
Such was the distinction of Descartes, and one sees that it was
precisely on the level of his philosophy.1 It was somewhat developed
by Leibnitz. This great and singular genius was as remarkable for
what he failed to see as for what he saw. That a piece of mechanism
could not do work perpetually without being fed with power in some
form, was a thing perfectly apparent to him; yet he did not understand
that the machinery of the mind can only transform knowledge, but
never originate it, unless it be fed with facts of observation. He thus
missed the most essential point of the Cartesian philosophy, which is,
that to accept propositions which seem perfectly evident to us is a
thing which, whether it be logical or illogical, we cannot help doing.2
Instead of regarding the matter in this way, he sought to reduce the
first principles of science to formulas which cannot be denied without
self-contradiction, and was apparently unaware of the great difference
between his position and that of Descartes. So he reverted to the old
formalities of logic, and, above all, abstract definitions played a great
part in his philosophy. It was quite natural, therefore, that on observ­
ing that the method of Descartes labored under the difficulty that we
may seem to ourselves to have clear apprehensions of ideas which in
truth are very hazy, no better remedy occurred to him than to require
an abstract definition of every important term. Accordingly, in adopt­
ing the distinction of clear and distinct notions,3 he described the latter
quality as the clear apprehension of everything contained in the defi­
nition; and the books have ever since copied his words. There is no
danger that his chimerical scheme will ever again be over-valued.
Nothing new can ever be learned by analyzing definitions. Neverthe­
less, our existing beliefs can be set in order by this process, and order
is an essential element of intellectual economy, as of every other. It
may be acknowledged, therefore, that the books are right in making
familiarity with a notion the first step toward clearness of apprehen­
sion, and the defining of it the second. But in omitting all mention of
any higher perspicuity of thought, they simply mirror a philosophy
which was exploded a hundred years ago. That much-admired “ orna­
ment of logic”— the doctrine of clearness and distinctness— may be
pretty enough, but it is high time to relegate to our cabinet of curiosi­
ties the antique bijou, and to wear about us something better adapted
to modern uses.
The very first lesson that we have a right to demand that logic shall
teach us is, how to make our ideas clear; and a most important one it
is, depreciated only by minds who stand in need of it. To know what
we think, to be masters of our own meaning, will make a solid founda­
tion for great and weighty thought. It is most easily learned by those
whose ideas are meagre and restricted; and far happier they than such
as wallow helplessly in a rich mud of conceptions. A nation, it is true,
may, in the course of generations, overcome the disadvantage of an

[page 127]

excessive wealth of language and its natural concomitant, a vast, un­
fathomable deep of ideas. We may see it in history, slowly perfecting
its literary forms, sloughing at length its metaphysics, and, by virtue
of the untirable patience which is often a compensation, attaining
great excellence in every branch of mental acquirement. The page of
history is not yet unrolled which is to tell us whether such a people
w ill or will not in the long-run prevail over one whose ideas (like the
words of their language) are few, but which possesses a wonderful
mastery over those which it has. For an individual, however, there can
be no question that a few clear ideas are worth more than many
confused ones. A young man would hardly be persuaded to sacrifice
the greater part of his thoughts to save the rest; and the muddled head
is the least apt to see the necessity of such a sacrifice. Him we can
usually only commiserate, as a person with a congenital defect. Tim e
will help him, but intellectual maturity with regard to clearness comes
rather late, an unfortunate arrangement of Nature, inasmuch as clear­
ness is of less use to a man settled in life, whose errors have in great
measure had their effect, than it would be to one whose path lies before
him. It is terrible to see how a single unclear idea, a single formula
without meaning, lurking in a young man’s head, will sometimes act
like an obstruction of inert matter in an artery, hindering the nutrition
of the brain, and condemning its victim to pine away in the fullness
of his intellectual vigor and in the midst of intellectual plenty. Many
a man has cherished for years as his hobby some vague shadow of an
idea, too meaningless to be positively false; he has, nevertheless, pas­
sionately loved it, has made it his companion by day and by night, and
has given to it his strength and his life, leaving all other occupations
for its sake, and in short has lived with it and for it, until it has become,
as it were, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone; and then he has waked
up some bright morning to find it gone, clean vanished away like the
beautiful Melusina of the fable,4 and the essence of his life gone with
it. I have myself known such a man; and who can tell how many
histories of circle-squarers, metaphysicians, astrologers, and what not,
may not be told in the old German story?
11
The principles set forth in the first of these papers5 lead, at once,
to a method of reaching a clearness of thought of a far higher grade
than the “ distinctness” of the logicians. We have there found that the
action of thought is excited by the irritation of doubt, and ceases when
belief is attained; so that the production of belief is the sole function
of thought. All these words, however, are too strong for my purpose.
It is as if I had described the phenomena as they appear under a mental
microscope. Doubt and Belief, as the words are commonly employed,
How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 127

[page 128]

128 I The Essential Peirce
relate to religious or other grave discussions. But here I use them to
designate the starting of any question, no matter how small or how
great, and the resolution of it. If, for instance, in a horse-car, I pull out
my purse and find a five-cent nickel and five coppers, I decide, while
my hand is going to the purse, in which way I will pay my fare. To
call such a question Doubt, and my decision Belief, is certainly to use
words very disproportionate to the occasion. T o speak of such a doubt
as causing an irritation which needs to be appeased, suggests a temper
which is uncomfortable to the verge of insanity. Yet, looking at the
matter minutely, it must be admitted that, if there is the least hesita­
tion as to whether I shall pay the five coppers or the nickel (as there
will be sure to be, unless I act from some previously contracted habit
in the matter), though irritation is too strong a word, yet I am excited
to such small mental activity as may be necessary to deciding how I
shall act. Most frequently doubts arise from some indecision, however
momentary, in our action. Sometimes it is not so. I have, for example,
to wait in a railway-station, and to pass the time I read the advertise­
ments on the walls, I compare the advantages of different trains and
different routes which I never expect to take, merely fancying myself
to be in a state of hesitancy, because I am bored with having nothing
to trouble me. Feigned hesitancy, whether feigned for mere amuse­
ment or with a lofty purpose, plays a great part in the production of
scientific inquiry. However the doubt may originate, it stimulates the
mind to an activity which may be slight or energetic, calm or turbu­
lent. Images pass rapidly through consciousness, one incessantly melt­
ing into another, until at last, when all is over— it may be in a fraction
of a second, in an hour, or after long years—we find ourselves decided
as to how we should act under such circumstances as those which
occasioned our hesitation. In other words, we have attained belief.
In this process we observe two sorts of elements of consciousness,
the distinction between which may best be made clear by means of an
illustration. In a piece of music there are the separate notes, and there
is the air. A single tone may be prolonged for an hour or a day, and
it exists as perfectly in each second of that time as in the whole taken
together; so that, as long as it is sounding, it might be present to a sense
from which everything in the past was as completely absent as the
future itself. But it is different with the air, the performance of which
occupies a certain time, during the portions of which only portions of
it are played. It consists in an orderliness in the succession of sounds
which strike the ear at different times; and to perceive it there must
be some continuity of consciousness which makes the events of a lapse
of time present to us. We certainly only perceive the air by hearing the
separate notes; yet we cannot be said to directly hear it, for we hear
only what is present at the instant, and an orderliness of succession
cannot exist in an instant. These two sorts of objects, what we are

[page 129]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 129
immediately conscious of and what we are mediately conscious of, are
found in all consciousness. Some elements (the sensations) are com­
pletely present at every instant so long as they last, while others (like
thought) are actions having beginning, middle, and end, and consist in
a congruence in the succession of sensations which flow through the
mind. They cannot be immediately present to us, but must cover some
portion of the past or future. Thought is a thread of melody running
through the succession of our sensations.
We may add that just as a piece of music may be written in parts,
each part having its own air, so various systems of relationship of
succession subsist together between the same sensations. These differ­
ent systems are distinguished by having different motives, ideas, or
functions. Thought is only one such system, for its sole motive, idea,
and function, is to produce belief, and whatever does not concern that
purpose belongs to some other system of relations. The action of
thinking may incidentally have other results; it may serve to amuse us,
for example, and among dilettanti it is not rare to find those who have
so perverted thought to the purposes of pleasure that it seems to vex
them to think that the questions upon which they delight to exercise
it may ever get finally settled; and a positive discovery which takes a
favorite subject out of the arena of literary debate is met with ill-
concealed dislike. This disposition is the very debauchery of thought.
But the soul and meaning of thought, abstracted from the other ele­
ments which accompany it, though it may be voluntarily thwarted,
can never be made to direct itself toward anything but the production
of belief. Thought in action has for its only possible motive the attain­
ment of thought at rest; and whatever does not refer to belief is no part
of the thought itself.
And what, then, is belief? It is the demi-cadence which closes a
musical phrase in the symphony of our intellectual life. We have seen
that it has just three properties: First, it is something that we are aware
of; second, it appeases the irritation of doubt; and, third, it involves the
establishment in our nature of a rule of action, or, say for short, a habit.
As it appeases the irritation of doubt, which is the motive for thinking,
thought relaxes, and comes to rest for a moment when belief is
reached. But, since belief is a rule for action, the application of which
involves further doubt and further thought, at the same time that it is
a stopping-place, it is also a new starting-place for thought. That is
why I have permitted myself to call it thought at rest, although
thought is essentially an action. The final upshot of thinking is the
exercise of volition, and of this thought no longer forms a part; but
belief is only a stadium of mental action, an effect upon our nature due
to thought, which will influence future thinking.
The essence of belief is the establishment of a habit, and different
beliefs are distinguished by the different modes of action to which they

[page 130]

130 I The Essential Peirce
give rise. If beliefs do not differ in this respect, if they appease the same
doubt by producing the same rule of action, then no mere differences
in the manner of consciousness of them can make them different be­
liefs, any more than playing a tune in different keys is playing different
tunes. Imaginary distinctions are often drawn between beliefs which
differ only in their mode of expression;—the wrangling which ensues
is real enough, however. To believe that any objects are arranged as
in Fig. i, and to believe that they are arranged6 in Fig. 2, are one and
the same belief; yet it is conceivable that a man should assert one
proposition and deny the other. Such false distinctions do as much
harm as the confusion of beliefs really different, and are among the
pitfalls of which we ought constantly to beware, especially when we
are upon metaphysical ground. One singular deception of this sort,
which often occurs, is to mistake the sensation produced by our own
unclearness of thought for a character of the object we are thinking.
Instead of perceiving that the obscurity is purely subjective, we fancy
that we contemplate a quality of the object which is essentially myste­
rious; and if our conception be afterward presented to us in a clear
form we do not recognize it as the same, owing to the absence of the
feeling of unintelligibility. So long as this deception lasts, it obviously
puts an impassable barrier in the way of perspicuous thinking; so that
it equally interests the opponents of rational thought to perpetuate it,
and its adherents to guard against it.
• • • •
Fig. 1. Fig. 2.
Another such deception is to mistake a mere difference in the
grammatical construction of two words for a distinction between the
ideas they express. In this pedantic age, when the general mob of
writers attend so much more to words than to things, this error is

[page 131]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 131
common enough. When I just said that thought is an action, and that
it consists in a relation, although a person performs an action but not
a relation, which can only be the result of an action, yet there was no
inconsistency in what I said, but only a grammatical vagueness.
From all these sophisms we shall be perfectly safe so long as we
reflect that the whole function of thought is to produce habits of
action; and that whatever there is connected with a thought, but irrele­
vant to its purpose, is an accretion to it, but no part of it. If there be
a unity among our sensations which has no reference to how we shall
act on a given occasion, as when we listen to a piece of music, why we
do not call that thinking. To develop its meaning, we have, therefore,
simply to determine what habits it produces, for what a thing means
is simply what habits it involves. N ow, the identity of a habit depends
on how it might lead us to act, not merely under such circumstances
as are likely to arise, but under such as might possibly occur, no matter
how improbable they may be.7 What the habit is depends on when and
how it causes us to act. As for the when, every stimulus to action is
derived from perception; as for the how, every purpose of action is to
produce some sensible result. Thus, we come down to what is tangible
and practical,8 as the root of every real distinction of thought, no
matter how subtile it may be; and there is no distinction of meaning
so fine as to consist in anything but a possible difference of practice.
To see what this principle leads to, consider in the light of it such
a doctrine as that of transubstantiation. The Protestant churches gen­
erally hold that the elements of the sacrament are flesh and blood only
in a tropical sense; they nourish our souls as meat and the juice of it
would our bodies. But the Catholics maintain that they are literally
just that; although they possess all the sensible qualities of wafer-cakes
and diluted wine. But we can have no conception of wine except what
may enter into a belief, either—
1. That this, that, or the other, is wine; or,
2. That wine possesses certain properties.
Such beliefs are nothing but self-notifications that we should, upon
occasion, act in regard to such things as we believe to be wine accord­
ing to the qualities which we believe wine to possess. The occasion of
such action would be some sensible perception, the motive of it to
produce some sensible result. Thus our action has exclusive reference
to what affects the senses, our habit has the same bearing as our action,
our belief the same as our habit, our conception the same as our belief;
and we can consequently mean nothing by wine but what has certain
effects, direct or indirect, upon our senses; and to talk of something as
having all the sensible characters of wine, yet being in reality blood,
is senseless jargon. N ow, it is not my object to pursue the theological
question; and having used it as a logical example I drop it, without

[page 132]

132 I The Essential Peirce
caring to anticipate the theologian’s reply. I only desire to point out
how impossible it is that we should have an idea in our minds which
relates to anything but conceived sensible effects of things. Our idea
of anything is our idea of its sensible effects; and if we fancy that we
have any other we deceive ourselves, and mistake a mere sensation
accompanying the thought for a part of the thought itself. It is absurd
to say that thought has any meaning unrelated to its only function. It
is foolish for Catholics and Protestants to fancy themselves in disagree­
ment about the elements of the sacrament, if they agree in regard to
all their sensible effects, here or9 hereafter.
It appears, then, that the rule for attaining the third grade of
clearness of apprehension is as follows: Consider what effects, which
might conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of
our conception to have. Then, our conception of these effects is the
whole of our conception of the object.10
Ill
Let us illustrate this rule by some examples;11 and, to begin with
the simplest one possible, let us ask what we mean by calling a thing
hard. Evidently that it will not be scratched by many other substances.
The whole conception of this quality, as of every other, lies in its
conceived effects. There is absolutely no difference between a hard
thing and a soft thing so long as they are not brought to the test.
Suppose, then, that a diamond could be crystallized in the midst of a
cushion of soft cotton, and should remain there until it was finally
burned up. Would it be false to say that that diamond was soft? This
seems a foolish question, and would be so, in fact, except in the realm
of logic. There such questions are often of the greatest utility as serv­
ing to bring logical principles into sharper relief than real discussions
ever could. In studying logic we must not put them aside with hasty
answers, but must consider them with attentive care, in order to make
out the principles involved. We may, in the present case, modify our
question, and ask what prevents us from saying that all hard bodies
remain perfectly soft until they are touched, when their hardness
increases with the pressure until they are scratched. Reflection will
show that the reply is this: there would be nofalsity in such modes of
speech. They would involve a modification of our present usage of
speech with regard to the words hard and soft, but not of their mean­
ings. For they represent no fact to be different from what it is; only
they involve arrangements of facts which would be exceedingly mala­
droit. This leads us to remark that the question of what would occur
under circumstances which do not actually arise is not a question of
fact, but only of the most perspicuous arrangement of them. For exam-

[page 133]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 133
pie, the question of free-will and fate in its simplest form, stripped of
verbiage, is something like this: I have done something of which I am
ashamed; could I, by an effort of the will, have resisted the temptation,
and done otherwise? The philosophical reply is, that this is not a
question of fact, but only of the arrangement of facts. Arranging them
so as to exhibit what is particularly pertinent to my question— namely,
that I ought to blame m yself for having done wrong— it is perfectly
true to say that, if I had willed to do otherwise than I did, I should have
done otherwise. On the other hand, arranging the facts so as to exhibit
another important consideration, it is equally true that, when a temp­
tation has once been allowed to work, it will, if it has a certain force,
produce its effect, let me struggle how I may. There is no objection to
a contradiction in what would result from a false supposition. The
reductio ad absurdum consists in showing that contradictory results
would follow from a hypothesis which is consequently judged to be
false. Many questions are involved in the free-will discussion, and I am
far from desiring to say that both sides are equally right. On the
contrary, I am of opinion that one side denies important facts, and that
the other does not. But what I do say is, that the above single question
was the origin of the whole doubt; that, had it not been for this
question, the controversy would never have arisen; and that this ques­
tion is perfectly solved in the manner which I have indicated.
Let us next seek a clear idea of Weight. This is another very easy
case. To say that a body is heavy means simply that, in the absence of
opposing force, it will fall. This (neglecting certain specifications of
how it w ill fall, etc., which exist in the mind of the physicist who uses
the word) is evidently the whole conception of weight. It is a fair
question whether some particular facts may not account for gravity;
but what we mean by the force itself is completely involved in its
effects.
This leads us to undertake an account of the idea of Force in
general. This is the great conception which, developed in the early
part of the seventeenth century from the rude idea of a cause, and
constantly improved upon since, has shown us how to explain all the
changes of motion which bodies experience, and how to think about
all physical phenomena; which has given birth to modern science, and
changed the face of the globe; and which, aside from its more special
uses, has played a principal part in directing the course of modern
thought, and in furthering modern social development. It is, therefore,
worth some pains to comprehend it. According to our rule, we must
begin by asking what is the immediate use of thinking about force; and
the answer is, that we thus account for changes of motion. I f bodies
were left to themselves, without the intervention of forces, every mo­
tion would continue unchanged both in velocity and in direction.

[page 134]

134 I The Essential Peirce
Furthermore, change of motion never takes place abruptly; if its direc­
tion is changed, it is always through a curve without angles; if its
velocity alters, it is by degrees. The gradual changes which are con­
stantly taking place are conceived by geometers to be compounded
together according to the rules of the parallelogram of forces. If the
reader does not already know what this is, he will find it, I hope, to
his advantage to endeavor to follow the following explanation; but if
mathematics are insupportable to him, pray let him skip three para­
graphs rather than that we should part company here.
A path is a line whose beginning and end are distinguished. Tw o
paths are considered to be equivalent, which, beginning at the same
point, lead to the same point. Thus the two paths, ABCDE and AFGH E,
are equivalent. Paths which do not begin at the same point are consid­
ered to be equivalent, provided that, on moving either of them without
turning it, but keeping it always parallel to its original position, when
its beginning coincides with that of the other path, the ends also
coincide. Paths are considered as geometrically added together, when
one begins where the other ends; thus the path A E is conceived to be
a sum of AB, BC> CD, and DE. In the parallelogram of Fig. 4 the
diagonal A C is the sum of A B and BC; or, since AD is geometrically
equivalent to BC, A C is the geometrical sum of AB and AD.
All this is purely conventional. It simply amounts to this: that we
choose to call paths having the relations I have described equal or
added. But, though it is a convention, it is a convention with a good
reason. The rule for geometrical addition may be applied not only to
paths, but to any other things which can be represented by paths.
N ow, as a path is determined by the varying direction and distance of
the point which moves over it from the starting-point, it follows that
anything which from its beginning to its end is determined by a
varying direction and a varying magnitude is capable of being repre­
sented by a line. Accordingly, velocities may be represented by lines,
for they have only directions and rates. The same thing is true of
accelerations, or changes of velocities. This is evident enough in the case
of velocities; and it becomes evident for accelerations if we consider

[page 135]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 135
that precisely what velocities are to positions— namely, states of
change of them—that accelerations are to velocities.
The so-called “ parallelogram of forces” is simply a rule for com­
pounding accelerations. The rule is, to represent the accelerations by
paths, and then to geometrically add the paths. The geometers, how­
ever, not only use the “ parallelogram of forces” to compound different
accelerations, but also to resolve one acceleration into a sum of several.
Let AB (Fig. 5) be the path which represents a certain acceleration—
say, such a change in the motion of a body that at the end of one second
the body will, under the influence of that change, be in a position
different from what it would have had if its motion had continued
unchanged such that a path equivalent to A B would lead from the
latter position to the former. This acceleration may be considered as
the sum of the accelerations represented by A C and CB. It may also
be considered as the sum of the very different accelerations repre­
sented by AD and DB, where AD is almost the opposite of AC. And
it is clear that there is an immense variety of ways in which A B might
be resolved into the sum of two accelerations.
After this tedious explanation, which I hope, in view of the extraor­
dinary interest of the conception of force, may not have exhausted the
reader’s patience, we are prepared at last to state the grand fact which
this conception embodies. This fact is that if the actual changes of
motion which the different particles of bodies experience are each
resolved in its appropriate way, each component acceleration is pre­
cisely such as is prescribed by a certain law of Nature, according to
which bodies in the relative positions which the bodies in question
actually have at the moment,* always receive certain accelerations,
which, being compounded by geometrical addition, give the accelera­
tion which the body actually experiences.
This is the only fact which the idea of force represents, and who­
C
D
Fig- 5-
*Possibly the velocities also have to be taken into account.

[page 136]

136 I The Essential Peirce
ever will take the trouble clearly to apprehend what this fact is, per­
fectly comprehends what force is. Whether we ought to say that a force
is an acceleration, or that it causes an acceleration, is a mere question
of propriety of language, which has no more to do with our real
meaning than the difference between the French idiom “II fait fro id”
and its English equivalent “It is cold. ” Yet it is surprising to see how
this simple affair has muddled men’s minds. In how many profound
treatises is not force spoken of as a “ mysterious entity,” which seems
to be only a way of confessing that the author despairs of ever getting
a clear notion of what the word means! In a recent admired work on
“ Analytic Mechanics” it is stated that we understand precisely the
effect of force, but what force itself is we do not understand!12 This is
simply a self-contradiction. The idea which the word force excites in
our minds has no other function than to affect our actions, and these
actions can have no reference to force otherwise than through its
effects. Consequently, if we know what the effects of force are, we are
acquainted with every fact which is implied in saying that a force
exists, and there is nothing more to know. The truth is, there is some
vague notion afloat that a question may mean something which the
mind cannot conceive; and when some hair-splitting philosophers
have been confronted with the absurdity of such a view, they have
invented an empty distinction between positive and negative concep­
tions, in the attempt to give their non-idea a form not obviously non­
sensical. The nullity of it is sufficiently plain from the considerations
given a few pages back; and, apart from those considerations, the
quibbling character of the distinction must have struck every mind
accustomed to real thinking.
IV
Let us now approach the subject of logic, and consider a conception
which particularly concerns it, that of reality. 13 Taking clearness in the
sense of familiarity, no idea could be clearer than this. Every child uses
it with perfect confidence, never dreaming that he does not understand
it. As for clearness in its second grade, however, it would probably
puzzle most men, even among those of a reflective turn of mind, to give
an abstract definition of the real. Yet such a definition may perhaps be
reached by considering the points of difference between reality and its
opposite, fiction. A figment is a product of somebody’s imagination; it
has such characters as his thought impresses upon it. That whose
characters are independent of how you or I think is an external reality.
There are, however, phenomena within our own minds, dependent
upon our thought, which are at the same time real in the sense that we
really think them. But though their characters depend on how we

[page 137]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 137
think, they do not depend on what we think those characters to be.
Thus, a dream has a real existence as a mental phenomenon, if some­
body has really dreamt it; that he dreamt so and so, does not depend
on what anybody thinks was dreamt, but is completely independent
of all opinion on the subject. On the other hand, considering, not the
fact of dreaming, but the thing dreamt, it retains its peculiarities by
virtue of no other fact than that it was dreamt to possess them. Thus
we may define the real as that whose characters are independent of
what anybody may think them to be.
But, however satisfactory such a definition may be found, it would
be a great mistake to suppose that it makes the idea of reality perfectly
clear. Here, then, let us apply our rules. According to them, reality,
like every other quality, consists in the peculiar sensible effects which
things partaking of it produce. The only effect which real things have
is to cause belief, for all the sensations which they excite emerge into
consciousness in the form of beliefs. The question therefore is, how is
true belief (or belief in the real) distinguished from false belief (or
belief in fiction). Now, as we have seen in the former paper, the ideas
of truth and falsehood, in their full development, appertain exclusively
to the scientific14 method of settling opinion. A person who arbitrarily
chooses the propositions which he w ill adopt can use the word truth
only to emphasize the expression of his determination to hold on to his
choice. O f course, the method of tenacity never prevailed exclusively;
reason is too natural to men for that. But in the literature of the dark
ages we find some fine examples of it. When Scotus Erigena is com­
menting upon a poetical passage in which hellebore is spoken of as
having caused the death of Socrates, he does not hesitate to inform the
inquiring reader that Helleborus and Socrates were two eminent
Greek philosophers, and that the latter having been overcome in argu­
ment by the former took the matter to heart and died of it!15 What sort
of an idea of truth could a man have who could adopt and teach,
without the qualification of a perhaps, an opinion taken so entirely at
random? The real spirit of Socrates, who I hope would have been
delighted to have been “ overcome in argument,” because he would
have learned something by it, is in curious contrast with the naive idea
of the glossist, for whom 16 discussion would seem to have been simply
a struggle. When philosophy began to awake from its long slumber,
and before theology completely dominated it, the practice seems to
have been for each professor to seize upon any philosophical position
he found unoccupied and which seemed a strong one, to intrench
himself in it, and to sally forth from time to time to give battle to the
others. Thus, even the scanty records we possess of those disputes
enable us to make out a dozen or more opinions held by different
teachers at one time concerning the question of nominalism and real­

[page 138]

138 I The Essential Peirce
ism. Read the opening part of the “ Historia Calamitatum” of Abe­
lard,17 who was certainly as philosophical as any of his contempo­
raries, and see the spirit of combat which it breathes. For him, the
truth is simply his particular stronghold. When the method of author­
ity prevailed, the truth meant little more than the Catholic faith. All
the efforts of the scholastic doctors are directed toward harmonizing
their faith in Aristotle and their faith in the Church, and one may
search their ponderous folios through without finding an argument
which goes any further. It is noticeable that where different faiths
flourish side by side, renegades are looked upon with contempt even
by the party whose belief they adopt; so completely has the idea of
loyalty replaced that of truth-seeking. Since the time of Descartes, the
defect in the conception of truth has been less apparent. Still, it will
sometimes strike a scientific man that the philosophers have been less
intent on finding out what the facts are, than on inquiring what belief
is most in harmony with their system. It is hard to convince a follower
of the a priori method by adducing facts; but show him that an opinion
he is defending is inconsistent with what he has laid down elsewhere,
and he will be very apt to retract it. These minds do not seem to believe
that disputation is ever to cease; they seem to think that the opinion
which is natural for one man is not so for another, and that belief will,
consequently, never be settled. In contenting themselves with fixing
their own opinions by a method which would lead another man to a
different result, they betray their feeble hold of the conception of what
truth is.
On the other hand, all the followers of science are fully persuaded
that the processes of investigation, if only pushed far enough, will give
one certain solution to every question to which they can be applied.18
One man may investigate the velocity of light by studying the transits
of Venus and the aberration of the stars; another by the oppositions
of Mars and the eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites; a third by the method
of Fizeau; a fourth by that of Foucault; a fifth by the motions of the
curves of Lissajous; a sixth, a seventh, an eighth, and a ninth, may
follow the different methods of comparing the measures of statical and
dynamical electricity. They may at first obtain different results, but,
as each perfects his method and his processes, the results will move19
steadily together toward a destined centre. So with all scientific re­
search. Different minds may set out with the most antagonistic views,
but the progress of investigation carries them by a force outside of
themselves to one and the same conclusion. This activity of thought
by which we are carried, not where we wish, but to a foreordained
goal, is like the operation of destiny. No modification of the point of
view taken, no selection of other facts for study, no natural bent of
mind even, can enable a man to escape the predestinate opinion. This

[page 139]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 139
great law 20 is embodied in the conception of truth and reality. The
opinion which is fated* to be ultimately agreed to by all who investi­
gate, is what we mean by the truth, and the object represented in this
opinion is the real. That is the way I would explain reality.
But it may be said that this view is directly opposed to the abstract
definition which we have given of reality, inasmuch as it makes the
characters of the real to depend on what is ultimately thought about
them. But the answer to this is that, on the one hand, reality is indepen­
dent, not necessarily of thought in general, but only of what you or
I or any finite number of men may think about it; and that, on the other
hand, though the object of the final opinion depends on what that
opinion is, yet what that opinion is does not depend on what you or
I or any man thinks. Our perversity and that of others may indefinitely
postpone the settlement of opinion; it might even conceivably cause an
arbitrary proposition to be universally accepted as long as the human
race should last. Yet even that would not change the nature of the
belief, which alone could be the result of investigation carried suffi­
ciently far; and if, after the extinction of our race, another should arise
with faculties and disposition for investigation, that true opinion must
be the one which they would ultimately come to. “ Truth crushed to
earth shall rise again,” 21 and the opinion which would finally result
from investigation does not depend on how anybody may actually
think. But the reality of that which is real does depend on the real fact
that investigation is destined to lead, at last, if continued long enough,
to a belief in it.
But I may be asked what I have to say to all the minute facts of
history, forgotten never to be recovered, to the lost books of the an­
cients, to the buried secrets.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.22
Do these things not really exist because they are hopelessly beyond the
reach of our knowledge? And then, after the universe is dead (accord­
ing to the prediction of some scientists), and all life has ceased forever,
will not the shock of atoms continue though there will be no mind to
know it? To this I reply that, though in no possible state of knowledge
can any number be great enough to express the relation between the
*Fate means merely that which is sure to come true, and can nohow be avoided. It
is a superstition to suppose that a certain sort of events are ever fated, and it is another
to suppose that the word fate can never be freed from its superstitious taint. We are all
fated to die.

[page 140]

140 I The Essential Peirce
amount of what rests unknown to the amount of the known, yet it is
unphilosophical to suppose that, with regard to any given question
(which has any clear meaning), investigation would not bring forth a
solution of it, if it were carried far enough. Who would have said, a
few years ago, that we could ever know of what substances stars are
made whose light may have been longer in reaching us than the human
race has existed? Who can be sure of what we shall not know in a few
hundred years? Who can guess what would be the result of23 contin­
uing the pursuit of science for ten thousand years, with the activity of
the last hundred? And if it were to go on for a million, or a billion, or
any number of years you please, how is it possible to say that there is
any question which might not ultimately be solved?
But it may be objected, “ Why make so much of these remote consid­
erations, especially when it is your principle that only practical dis­
tinctions have a meaning?” Well, I must confess that it makes very
little difference whether we say that a stone on the bottom of the ocean,
in complete darkness, is brilliant or not—that is to say, that it probably
makes no difference, remembering always that that stone may be fished
up to-morrow. But that there are gems at the bottom of the sea, flowers
in the untraveled desert, etc., are propositions which, like that about
a diamond being hard when it is not pressed, concern much more the
arrangement of our language than they do the meaning of our ideas.
It seems to me, however, that we have, by the application of our
rule, reached so clear an apprehension of what we mean by reality, and
of the fact which the idea rests on, that we should not, perhaps, be
making a pretension so presumptuous as it would be singular, if we
were to offer a metaphysical theory of existence for universal accept­
ance among those who employ the scientific method of fixing belief.
However, as metaphysics is a subject much more curious than useful,
the knowledge of which, like that of a sunken reef, serves chiefly to
enable us to keep clear of it, I will not trouble the reader with any more
Ontology at this moment. I have already been led much further into
that path than I should have desired; and I have given the reader such
a dose of mathematics, psychology, and all that is most abstruse, that
I fear he may already have left me, and that what I am now writing
is for the compositor and proof-reader exclusively. I trusted to the
importance of the subject. There is no royal road to logic, and really
valuable ideas can only be had at the price of close attention. But I
know that in the matter of ideas the public prefer the cheap and nasty;
and in my next paper I am going to return to the easily intelligible,
and not wander from it again. The reader who has been at the pains
of wading through this month’s paper, shall be rewarded in the next
one by seeing how beautifully what has been developed in this tedious
way can be applied to the ascertainment of the rules of scientific
reasoning.

[page 141]

How to Make Our Ideas Clear I 141
We have, hitherto, not crossed the threshold of scientific logic. It
is certainly important to know how to make our ideas clear, but they
may be ever so clear without being true. How to make them so, we
have next to study. How to give birth to those vital and procreative
ideas which multiply into a thousand forms and diffuse themselves
everywhere, advancing civilization and making the dignity of man, is
an art not yet reduced to rules, but of the secret of which the history
of science affords some hints.

[page 142]

9
The Doctrine of Chances
P 120: Popular Science Monthly 12 (March 1878):604-15.
[Also published in Wj:276-89 and in CP 2.645-60. Although
the third and fourth “Illustrations” were intended as one
paper, the PSM editors published it in two parts in two
successive months. In 1893, Peirce retyped the third paper to
serve as essay 10 of “Searchfor a Method ” and chapter 18 of
“How to Reason ” (MS 424) and, in 1910, he wrote several
“Notes to C.S.P. 's Third Paper in the Pop. Sci. Monthly. 1878,
March ” (in MSS 703 and 704); some of the changes in the
typescript and one of the notes of 1910 are recorded in the
Notes.] In an early discussion of what will later become his
synechism, Peirce argues that the assumption of continuity
provides a powerful engine fo r logic, and he develops his
theory o f probabilities as the science o f logic quantitatively
treated (or as general logic). To be logical, Peirce says, men
must not be selfish,for logic requires the identification o fone V
interests with those o f an unlimited community. (Peirce also
discusses the probability o f a non-repeatable event in a case
that Hilary Putnam has named “Peirce's Puzzle. ”)
I
It is a common observation that a science first begins to be exact
when it is quantitatively treated. What are called the exact sciences are
no others than the mathematical ones. Chemists reasoned vaguely
until Lavoisier showed them how to apply the balance to the verifica­
tion of their theories, when chemistry leaped suddenly into the posi­
tion of the most perfect of the classificatory sciences. It has thus
become so precise and certain that we usually think of it along with
optics, thermotics, and electrics. But these are studies of general laws,
while chemistry considers merely the relations and classification of
certain objects; and belongs, in reality, in the same category as system­
atic botany and zoology. Compare it with these last, however, and the
advantage that it derives from its quantitative treatment is very evi­
dent.1

[page 143]

The Doctrine o f Chances I 143
The rudest numerical scales, such as that by which the mineralo­
gists distinguish the different degrees of hardness, are found useful.
The mere counting of pistils and stamens sufficed to bring botany out
of total chaos into some kind of form. It is not, however, so much from
counting as from measuring, not so much from the conception of num­
ber as from that of continuous quantity, that the advantage of mathe­
matical treatment comes. Number, after all, only serves to pin us down
to a precision in our thoughts which, however beneficial, can seldom
lead to lofty conceptions, and frequently descends to pettiness. O f
those two faculties of which Bacon speaks,2 that which marks differ­
ences and that which notes resemblances, the employment of number
can only aid the lesser one; and the excessive use of it must tend to
narrow the powers of the mind. But the conception of continuous
quantity has a great office to fulfill, independently of any attempt at
precision. Far from tending to the exaggeration of differences, it is the
direct instrument of the finest generalizations. When a naturalist
wishes to study a species, he collects a considerable number of speci­
mens more or less similar. In contemplating them, he observes certain
ones which are more or less alike in some particular respect. They all
have, for instance, a certain S-shaped marking. He observes that they
are not precisely alike, in this respect; the S has not precisely the same
shape, but the differences are such as to lead him to believe that forms
could be found intermediate between any two of those he possesses.
He, now, finds other forms apparently quite dissimilar— say a marking
in the form of a C— and the question is, whether he can find intermedi­
ate ones which will connect these latter with the others. This he often
succeeds in doing in cases where it would at first be thought impossi­
ble; whereas, he sometimes finds those which differ, at first glance,
much less, to be separated in Nature by the non-occurrence of inter­
mediaries. In this way, he builds up from the study of Nature a new
general conception of the character in question. He obtains, for exam­
ple, an idea of a leaf which includes every part of the flower, and an
idea of a vertebra which includes the skull. I surely need not say much
to show what a logical engine there is here. It is the essence of the
method of the naturalist. How he applies it first to one character, and
then to another, and finally obtains a notion of a species of animals,
the differences between whose members, however great, are confined
within limits, is a matter which does not here concern us. The whole
method of classification must be considered later; but, at present, I
only desire to point out that it is by taking advantage of the idea of
continuity, or the passage from one form to another by insensible
degrees, that the naturalist builds his conceptions. Now, the natural­
ists are the great builders of conceptions; there is no other branch of
science where so much of this work is done as in theirs; and we must,
in great measure, take them for our teachers in this important part of

[page 144]

144 I The Essential Peirce
logic. And it will be found everywhere that the idea of continuity is
a powerful aid to the formation of true and fruitful conceptions. By
means of it, the greatest differences are broken down and resolved into
differences of degree, and the incessant application of it is of the
greatest value in broadening our conceptions. I propose to make a
great use of this idea in the present series of papers; and the particular
series of important fallacies, which, arising from a neglect of it, have
desolated philosophy, must further on be closely studied. At present,
I simply call the reader’s attention to the utility of this conception.
In studies of numbers, the idea of continuity is so indispensable,
that it is perpetually introduced even where there is no continuity in
fact, as where we say that there are in the United States 10.7 inhabitants
per square mile, or that in N ew York 14.72 persons live in the average
house.* Another example is that law of the distribution of errors
which Quetelet, Galton,3 and others, have applied with so much suc­
cess to the study of biological and social matters. This application of
continuity to cases where it does not really exist illustrates, also, an­
other point which will hereafter demand a separate study, namely, the
great utility which fictions sometimes have in science.
II
The theory of probabilities is simply the science of logic quantita­
tively treated. There are two conceivable certainties with reference to
any hypothesis, the certainty of its truth and the certainty of its falsity.
The numbers one and zero are appropriated, in this calculus, to mark­
ing these extremes of knowledge; while fractions having values inter­
mediate between them indicate, as we may vaguely say, the degrees in
which the evidence leans toward one or the other. The general prob­
lem of probabilities is, from a given state of facts, to determine the
numerical probability of a possible fact. This is the same as to inquire
how much the given facts are worth, considered as evidence to prove
the possible fact. Thus the problem of probabilities is simply the
general problem of logic.
Probability is a continuous quantity, so that great advantages may
be expected from this mode of studying logic. Some writers have gone
so far as to maintain that, by means of the calculus of chances, every
solid inference may be represented by legitimate arithmetical opera­
tions upon the numbers given in the premises. If this be, indeed, true,
*This mode of thought is so familiarly associated with all exact numerical considera­
tion, that the phrase appropriate to it is imitated by shallow writers in order to produce
the appearance of exactitude where none exists. Certain newspapers which affect a
learned tone talk of “ the average man,” when they simply mean most men, and have no
idea of striking an average.

[page 145]

The Doctrine of Chances I 145
the great problem of logic, how it is that the observation of one fact
can give us knowledge of another independent fact, is reduced to a
mere question of arithmetic. It seems proper to examine this preten­
sion before undertaking any more recondite solution of the paradox.
But, unfortunately, writers on probabilities are not agreed in re­
gard to this result. This branch of mathematics is the only one, I
believe, in which good writers frequently get results entirely erro­
neous. In elementary geometry the reasoning is frequently fallacious,
but erroneous conclusions are avoided; but it may be doubted if there
is a single extensive treatise on probabilities in existence which does
not contain solutions absolutely indefensible. This is partly owing to
the want of any regular method of procedure; for the subject involves
too many subtilties to make it easy to put its problems into equations
without such an aid. But, beyond this, the fundamental principles of
its calculus are more or less in dispute. In regard to that class of
questions to which it is chiefly applied for practical purposes, there is
comparatively little doubt; but in regard to others to which it has been
sought to extend it, opinion is somewhat unsettled.
This last class of difficulties can only be entirely overcome by
making the idea of probability perfectly clear in our minds in the way
set forth in our last paper.4
h i
To get a clear idea of what we mean by probability, we have to
consider what real and sensible difference there is between one degree
of probability and another.
The character of probability belongs primarily, without doubt, to
certain inferences. Locke explains it as follows: After remarking that
the mathematician positively knows that the sum of the three angles
of a triangle is equal to two right angles because he apprehends the
geometrical proof, he thus continues:
But another man who never took the pains to observe the demonstration,
hearing a mathematician, a man of credit, affirm the three angles of a triangle
to be equal to two right ones, assents to it; i.e., receives it for true. In which
case the foundation of his assent is the probability of the thing, the proof being
such as, for the most part, carries truth with it; the man on whose testimony
he receives it not being wont to affirm anything contrary to, or besides his
knowledge, especially in matters of this kind.5
The celebrated Essay concerning Humane Understanding contains many
passages which, like this one, make the first steps in profound analyses
which are not further developed. It was shown in the first of these
papers6that the validity of an inference does not depend on any tend­

[page 146]

146 I The Essential Peirce
ency of the mind to accept it, however strong such tendency may be;
but consists in the real fact that, when premises like those of the
argument in question are true, conclusions related to them like that of
this argument are also true. It was remarked that in a logical mind an
argument is always conceived as a member of a genus of arguments all
constructed in the same way, and such that, when their premises are
real facts, their conclusions are so also. If the argument is demonstra­
tive, then this is always so; if it is only probable, then it is for the most
part so. As Locke says, the probable argument is “such as for the most
part carries truth with it.” 7
According to this, that real and sensible difference between one
degree of probability and another, in which the meaning of the distinc­
tion lies, is that in the frequent employment of two different modes of
inference, one will carry truth with it oftener than the other. It is
evident that this is the only difference there is in the existing fact.
Having certain premises, a man draws a certain conclusion, and as far
as this inference alone is concerned the only possible practical ques­
tion is whether that conclusion is true or not, and between existence
and non-existence there is no middle term. “ Being only is and nothing
is altogether not,” said Parmenides;8 and this is in strict accordance
with the analysis of the conception of reality given in the last paper.9
For we found that the distinction of reality and fiction depends on the
supposition that sufficient investigation would cause one opinion to be
universally received and all others to be rejected. That presupposition
involved in the very conceptions of reality and figment involves a
complete sundering of the two. It is the heaven-and-hell idea in the
domain of thought. But, in the long run, there is a real fact which
corresponds to the idea of probability, and it is that a given mode of
inference sometimes proves successful and sometimes not, and that in
a ratio ultimately fixed. As we go on drawing inference after inference
of the given kind, during the first ten or hundred cases the ratio of
successes may be expected to show considerable fluctuations; but when
we come into the thousands and millions, these fluctuations become
less and less; and if we continue long enough, the ratio will approxi­
mate toward a fixed limit. We may therefore define the probability of
a mode of argument as the proportion of cases in which it carries truth
with it.
The inference from the premise, A, to the conclusion, B, depends,
as we have seen, on the guiding principle, that if a fact of the class A
is true, a fact of the class B is true. The probability consists of the
fraction whose numerator is the number of times in which both A and
B are true, and whose denominator is the total number of times in
which A is true, whether B is so or not. Instead of speaking of this as
the probability of the inference, there is not the slightest objection to
calling it the probability that, if A happens, B happens. But to speak

[page 147]

The Doctrine of Chances I 147
of the probability of the event B, without naming the condition, really
has no meaning at all. It is true that when it is perfectly obvious what
condition is meant, the ellipsis may be permitted. But we should avoid
contracting the habit of using language in this way (universal as the
habit is), because it gives rise to a vague way of thinking, as if the action
of causation might either determine an event to happen or determine
it not to happen, or leave it more or less free to happen or not, so as
to give rise to an inherent chance in regard to its occurrence. It is quite
clear to me that some of the worst and most persistent errors in the
use of the doctrine of chances have arisen from this vicious mode of
expression.*
IV
But there remains an important point to be cleared up. According
to what has been said, the idea of probability essentially belongs to a
kind of inference which is repeated indefinitely. An individual infer­
ence must be either true or false, and can show no effect of probability;
and, therefore, in reference to a single case considered in itself, proba­
bility can have no meaning. Yet if a man had to choose between
drawing a card from a pack containing twenty-five red cards and a
black one, or from a pack containing twenty-five black cards and a red
one, and if the drawing of a red card were destined to transport him
to eternal felicity, and that of a black one to consign him to everlasting
woe, it would be folly to deny that he ought to prefer the pack contain­
ing the larger proportion of red cards, although, from the nature of the
risk, it could not be repeated. It is not easy to reconcile this with our
analysis of the conception of chance. But suppose he should choose the
red pack, and should draw the wrong card, what consolation would he
have? He might say that he had acted in accordance with reason, but
that would only show that his reason was absolutely worthless. And
if he should choose the right card, how could he regard it as anything
but a happy accident? He could not say that if he had drawn from the
other pack, he might have drawn the wrong one, because an hypotheti­
cal proposition such as, “ if A, then B,” means nothing with reference
to a single case. Truth consists in the existence of a real fact corre­
sponding to the true proposition. Corresponding to the proposition,
“ if A, then B,” there may be the fact that whenever such an event as A
happens such an event as B happens. But in the case supposed, which
has no parallel as far as this man is concerned, there would be no real
*The conception of probability here set forth is substantially that first developed
by Mr. Venn, in his Logic of Chance. Of course, a vague apprehension of the idea had
always existed, but the problem was to make it perfectly clear, and to him belongs the
credit of first doing this.10

[page 148]

148 I The Essential Peirce
fact whose existence could give any truth to the statement that, if he
had drawn from the other pack, he might have drawn a black card.
Indeed, since the validity of an inference consists in the truth of the
hypothetical proposition that i f the premises be true the conclusion
will also be true, and since the only real fact which can correspond to
such a proposition is that whenever the antecedent is true the conse­
quent is so also, it follows that there can be no sense in reasoning in
an isolated case, at all.
These considerations appear, at first sight, to dispose of the diffi­
culty mentioned. Yet the case of the other side is not yet exhausted.
Although probability will probably manifest its effect in, say, a thou­
sand risks, by a certain proportion between the numbers of successes
and failures, yet this, as we have seen, is only to say that it certainly
will, at length, do so. N ow the number of risks, the number of proba­
ble inferences, which a man draws in his whole life, is a finite one, and
he cannot be absolutely certain that the mean result will accord with
the probabilities at all. Taking all his risks collectively, then, it cannot
be certain that they will not fail, and his case does not differ, except
in degree, from the one last supposed. It is an indubitable result of the
theory of probabilities that every gambler, if he continues long
enough, must ultimately be ruined. Suppose he tries the martingale,
which some believe infallible, and which is, as I am informed, disal­
lowed in the gambling-houses. In this method of playing, he first bets
say $i; if he loses it he bets $2; if he loses that he bets $4; if he loses that
he bets $8; if he then gains he has lost 1 + 24-4 = 7, and ^as gained
$1 more; and no matter how many bets he loses, the first one he gains
will make him $1 richer than he was in the beginning. In that way, he
will probably gain at first; but, at last, the time will come when the run
of luck is so against him that he will not have money enough to double,
and must therefore let his bet go. This will probably happen before he
has won as much as he had in the first place, so that this run against
him will leave him poorer than he began; some time or other it will
be sure to happen. It is true that there is always a possibility of his
winning any sum the bank can pay, and we thus come upon a cele­
brated paradox that, though he is certain to be ruined, the value of his
expectation calculated according to the usual rules (which omit this
consideration) is large. But, whether a gambler plays in this way or any
other, the same thing is true, namely, that if he plays long enough he
will be sure some time to have such a run against him as to exhaust
his entire fortune. The same thing is true of an insurance company.
Let the directors take the utmost pains to be independent of great
conflagrations and pestilences, their actuaries can tell them that, ac­
cording to the doctrine of chances, the time must come, at last, when
their losses will bring them to a stop. They may tide over such a crisis

[page 149]

The Doctrine of Chances I 149
by extraordinary means, but then they will start again in a weakened
state, and the same thing will happen again all the sooner. An actuary
might be inclined to deny this, because he knows that the expectation
of his company is large, or perhaps (neglecting the interest upon
money) is infinite. But calculations of expectations leave out of account
the circumstance now under consideration, which reverses the whole
thing. However, I must not be understood as saying that insurance is
on this account unsound, more than other kinds of business. All
human affairs rest upon probabilities, and the same thing is true every­
where. If man were immortal he could be perfectly sure of seeing the
day when everything in which he had trusted should betray his trust,
and, in short, of coming eventually to hopeless misery. He would break
down, at last, as every great fortune, as every dynasty, as every civiliza­
tion does. In place of this we have death.
But what, without death, would happen to every man, with death
must happen to some man. At the same time, death makes the number
of our risks, of our inferences, finite, and so makes their mean result
uncertain. The very idea of probability and of reasoning rests on the
assumption that this number is indefinitely great. We are thus landed
in the same difficulty as before, and I can see but one solution of it. It
seems to me that we are driven to this, that logicality inexorably
requires that our interests shall not be limited. They must not stop at
our own fate, but must embrace the whole community. This commu­
nity, again, must not be limited, but must extend to all races of beings
with whom we can come into immediate or mediate intellectual rela­
tion. It must reach, however vaguely, beyond this geological epoch,
beyond all bounds. He who would not sacrifice his own soul to save
the whole world, is, as it seems to me, illogical in all his inferences,
collectively. Logic is rooted in the social principle.
T o be logical men should not be selfish; and, in point of fact, they
are not so selfish as they are thought. The willful prosecution of one’s
desires is a different thing from selfishness. The miser is not selfish; his
money does him no good, and he cares for what shall become of it after
his death. We are constantly speaking of our possessions on the Pacific,
and of our destiny as a republic, where no personal interests are in­
volved, in a way which shows that we have wider ones. We discuss
with anxiety the possible exhaustion of coal in some hundreds of years,
or the cooling-off of the sun in some millions, and show in the most
popular of all religious tenets that we can conceive the possibility of
a man’s descending into hell for the salvation of his fellows.
N ow, it is not necessary for logicality that a man should himself be
capable of the heroism of self-sacrifice. It is sufficient that he should
recognize the possibility of it, should perceive that only that man’s
inferences who has it are really logical, and should consequently re­

[page 150]

150 I The Essential Peirce
gard his own as being only so far valid as they would be accepted by
the hero. So far as he thus refers his inferences to that standard, he
becomes identified with such a mind.
This makes logicality attainable enough. Sometimes we can person­
ally attain to heroism. The soldier who runs to scale a wall knows that
he will probably be shot, but that is not all he cares for. He also knows
that if all the regiment, with whom in feeling he identifies himself,
rush forward at once, the fort will be taken. In other cases we can only
imitate the virtue. The man whom we have supposed as having to draw
from the two packs, who if he is not a logician will draw from the red
pack from mere habit, will see, if he is logician enough, that he cannot
be logical so long as he is concerned only with his own fate, but that
that man who should care equally for what was to happen in all
possible cases of the sort could act logically, and would draw from the
pack with the most red cards, and thus, though incapable himself of
such sublimity, our logician would imitate the effect of that man’s
courage in order to share his logicality.
But all this requires a conceived identification of one’s interests
with those of an unlimited community. N ow, there exist no reasons,
and a later discussion will show that there can be no reasons, for
thinking that the human race, or any intellectual race, will exist for­
ever. On the other hand, there can be no reason against it;* and,
fortunately, as the whole requirement is that we should have certain
sentiments, there is nothing in the facts to forbid our having a hope,
or calm and cheerful wish, that the community may last beyond any
assignable date.
It may seem strange that I should put forward three sentiments,
namely, interest in an indefinite community, recognition of the possi­
bility of this interest being made supreme, and hope in the unlimited
continuance of intellectual activity, as indispensable requirements of
logic. Yet, when we consider that logic depends on a mere struggle to
escape doubt, which, as it terminates in action, must begin in emotion,
and that, furthermore, the only cause of our planting ourselves on
reason is that other methods of escaping doubt fail on account of the
social impulse, why should we wonder to find social sentiment presup­
posed in reasoning? As for the other two sentiments which I find
necessary, they are so only as supports and accessories of that. It
interests me to notice that these three sentiments seem to be pretty
much the same as that famous trio of Charity, Faith, and Hope, which,
in the estimation of St. Paul, are the finest and greatest of spiritual
gifts.11 Neither Old nor N ew Testament is a text-book of the logic of
*1 do not here admit an absolutely unknowable. Evidence could show us what would
probably be the case after any given lapse of time; and though a subsequent time might
be assigned which that evidence might not cover, yet further evidence would cover it.

[page 151]

The Doctrine of Chances I 151
science, but the latter is certainly the highest existing authority in
regard to the dispositions of heart which a man ought to have.
V
Such average statistical numbers as the number of inhabitants per
square mile, the average number of deaths per week, the number of
convictions per indictment, or, generally speaking, the number of x ’s
per y, where the x y
s are a class of things some or all of which are
connected with another class of things, their y ’s, I term relative numbers.
O f the two classes of things to which a relative number refers, that one
of which it is a number may be called its relate, and that one per which
the numeration is made may be called its correlate.
Probability is a kind of relative number; namely, it is the ratio of
the number of arguments of a certain genus which carry truth with
them to the total number of arguments of that genus, and the rules for
the calculation of probabilities are very easily derived from this consid­
eration. They may all be given here, since they are extremely simple,
and it is sometimes convenient to know something of the elementary
rules of calculation of chances.
R u l e I. Direct Calculation.— To calculate, directly, any relative
number, say for instance the number of passengers in the average trip
oi s street-car, we must proceed ix\Ur>ws.-
Count the number of passengers for each trip; add all these num­
bers, and divide by the number of trips. There are cases in which this
rule may be simplified. Suppose we wish to know the number of
inhabitants to a dwelling in N ew York. The same person cannot in­
habit two dwellings. If he divide his time between two dwellings he
ought to be counted a half-inhabitant of each. In this case we have only
to divide the total number of the inhabitants of N ew York by the
number of their dwellings, without the necessity of counting sepa­
rately those which inhabit each one. A similar proceeding will apply
wherever each individual relate belongs to one individual correlate
exclusively. If we want the number of x's per y, and no x belongs to
more than one y, we have only to divide the whole number of x's of
y ’s by the number of y ’s. Such a method would, of course, fail if
applied to finding the average number of street-car passengers per trip.
We could not divide the total number of travelers by the number of
trips, since many of them would have made many passages.
To find the probability that from a given class of premises, A, a
given class of conclusions, B, follow, it is simply necessary to ascertain
what proportion of the times in which premises of that class are true,
the appropriate conclusions are also true. In other words, it is the
number of cases of the occurrence of both the events A and B, divided
by the total number of cases of the occurrence of the event A.

[page 152]

152 I The Essential Peirce
R u l e II. Addition o fRelative Numbers.— Given two relative numbers
having the same correlate, say the number of x's pery, and the number
of z ’s per y; it is required to find the number of x ’s and z 9
s together
per y . If there is nothing which is at once an x and a z to the same
y, the sum of the two given numbers would give the required number.
Suppose, for example, that we had given the average number of friends
that men have, and the average number of enemies, the sum of these
two is the average number of persons interested in a man. On the other
hand, it plainly would not do to add the average number of persons
having constitutional diseases to the average number over military age,
and to the average number exempted by each special cause from mili­
tary service, in order to get the average number exempt in any way,
since many are exempt in two or more ways at once.
This rule applies directly to probabilities. Given the probability
that two different and mutually exclusive events will happen under the
same supposed set of circumstances. Given, for instance, the probabil­
ity that if A then B, and also the probability that if A then C, then the
sum of these two probabilities is the probability that if A then either
B or C, so long as there is no event which belongs at once to the two
classes B and C.
R u l e III. Multiplication ofRelative Numbers.— Suppose that we have
given the relative number of .r’s per y; also the relative number of ¡z’s
per x of y; or, to take a concrete example, suppose that we have given,
first, the average number of children in families living in N ew York;
and, second, the average number of teeth in the head of a N ew York
child— then the product of these two numbers would give the average
number of children’s teeth in a N ew York family. But this mode of
reckoning will only apply in general under two restrictions. In the
first place, it would not be true if the same child could belong to
different families, for in that case those children who belonged to
several different families might have an exceptionally large or small
number of teeth, which would affect the average number of children’s
teeth in a family more than it would affect the average number of teeth
in a child’s head. In the second place, the rule would not be true if
different children could share the same teeth, the average number of
children’s teeth being in that case evidently something different from
the average number of teeth belonging to a child.
In order to apply this rule to probabilities, we must proceed as
follows: Suppose that we have given the probability that the conclu­
sion B follows from the premise A, B and A representing as usual
certain classes of propositions. Suppose that we also knew the proba­
bility of an inference in which B should be the premise, and a proposi­
tion of a third kind, C, the conclusion. Here, then, we have the materi­
als for the application of this rule. We have, first, the relative number
of B ’s per A. We next should have the relative number of C ’s per B

[page 153]

The Doctrine of Chances I 153
following from A. But the classes of propositions being so selected that
the probability of C following from any B in general is just the same
as the probability of C ’s following from one of those B ’s which is
deducible from an A, the two probabilities may be multiplied together,
in order to give the probability of C following from A. The same
restrictions exist as before. It might happen that the probability that
B follows from A was affected by certain propositions of the class B
following from several different propositions of the class A. But, prac­
tically speaking, all these restrictions are of very little consequence,
and it is usually recognized as a principle universally true that the
probability that, if A is true, B is, multiplied by the probability that,
if B is true, C is, gives the probability that, if A is true, C is.
There is a rule supplementary to this, of which great use is made.
It is not universally valid, and the greatest caution has to be exercised
in making use of it— a double care, first, never to use it when it will
involve serious error; and, second, never to fail to take advantage of it
in cases in which it can be employed. This rule depends upon the fact
that in very many cases the probability that C is true if B is, is substan­
tially the same as the probability that C is true if A is. Suppose, for
example, we have the average number of males among the children
born in N ew York; suppose that we also have the average number of
children born in the winter months among those born in N ew York.
N ow , we may assume without doubt, at least as a closely approximate
proposition (and no very nice calculation would be in place in regard
to probabilities), that the proportion of males among all the children
born in N ew York is the same as the proportion of males born in
summer in N ew York, and, therefore, if the names of all the children
born during a year were put into an urn, we might multiply the
probability that any name drawn would be the name of a male child
by the probability that it would be the name of a child born in summer,
in order to obtain the probability that it would be the name of a male
child born in summer. The questions of probability, in the treatises
upon the subject, have usually been such as relate to balls drawn from
urns, and games of cards, and so on, in which the question of the
independence of events, as it is called—that is to say, the question of
whether the probability of C, under the hypothesis B, is the same as
its probability under the hypothesis A, has been very simple; but, in
the application of probabilities to the ordinary questions of life, it is
often an exceedingly nice question whether two events may be consid­
ered as independent with sufficient accuracy or not. In all calculations
about cards it is assumed that the cards are thoroughly shuffled, which
makes one deal quite independent of another. In point of fact the cards
seldom are, in practice, shuffled sufficiently to make this true; thus, in
a game of whist, in which the cards have fallen in suits of four of the
same suit, and are so gathered up, they will lie more or less in sets of

[page 154]

154 I The Essential Peirce
four of the same suit, and this will be true even after they are shuffled.
At least some traces of this arrangement will remain, in consequence
of which the number of “ short suits,” as they are called—that is to say,
the number of hands in which the cards are very unequally divided in
regard to suits— is smaller than the calculation would make it to be;
so that, when there is a misdeal, where the cards, being thrown about
the table, get very thoroughly shuffled, it is a common saying that in
the hands next dealt out there are generally short suits. A few years
ago a friend of mine, who plays whist a great deal, was so good as to
count the number of spades dealt to him in 165 hands, in which the
cards had been, if anything, shuffled better than usual. According to
calculation, there should have been 85 of these hands in which my
friend held either three or four spades, but in point of fact there were
94, showing the influence of imperfect shuffling.
According to the view here taken, these are the only fundamental
rules for the calculation of chances. An additional one, derived from
a different conception of probability, is given in some treatises, which
if it be sound might be made the basis of a theory of reasoning. Being,
as I believe it is, absolutely absurd, the consideration of it serves to
bring us to the true theory; and it is for the sake of this discussion,
which must be postponed to the next number, that I have brought the
doctrine of chances to the reader’s attention at this early stage of our
studies of the logic of science.

[page 155]

10
The Probability ofInduction
P 121: Popular Science Monthly 12 (April 1878)^05-18.
[Also published in Wr
3:290-305 and in CP 2.669-93.] In this
paper, Peirce continues to develop his theory o f probability
and gives rules fo r calculating the probability of multiple
events. He compares the conceptualistic view (which refers
probabilities to events) with the materialistic view (which
makesprobability the ratio ofthefrequency offavorable cases
to all cases) and differentiates chance from probability. He
arguesfor thefrequency view (which he held until nearly the
turn of the century) and then connects his views on probabil­
ity with the nature of inductive (or synthetic) reasoning and
the problem o f induction, for which he considers the needfor
an appeal to possible worlds.
I
We have found that every argument derives its force from the
general truth of the class of inferences to which it belongs; and that
probability is the proportion of arguments carrying truth with them
among those of any genus. This is most conveniently expressed in the
nomenclature of the mediaeval logicians. They called the fact ex­
pressed by a premise an antecedent, and that which follows from it its
consequent; while the leading principle, that every (or almost every)
such antecedent is followed by such a consequent, they termed the
consequence. Using this language, we may say that probability belongs
exclusively to consequences, and the probability of any consequence is
the number of times in which antecedent and consequent both occur
divided by the number of all the times in which the antecedent occurs.
From this definition are deduced the following rules for the addition
and multiplication of probabilities:
Rule for the Addition of Probabilities.— Given the separate probabili­
ties of two consequences having the same antecedent and incompatible
consequents. Then the sum of these two numbers is the probability of
the consequence, that from the same antecedent one or other of those
consequents follows.

[page 156]

156 I The Essential Peirce
Rulefor the Multiplication ofProbabilities.— Given the separate proba­
bilities of the two consequences, “ If A then B,” and “ If both A and B,
then C.” Then the product of these two numbers is the probability of
the consequence, “ If A, then both B and C .”
Special Rule for the Multiplication of Independent Probabilities.— Given
the separate probabilities of two consequences having the same ante­
cedents, “ If A, then B,” and “ If A, then C .” Suppose that these conse­
quences are such that the probability of the second is equal to the
probability of the consequence, “ If both A and B, then C .” Then the
product of the two given numbers is equal to the probability of the
consequence, “ If A, then both B and C.”
To show the working of these rules we may examine the probabili­
ties in regard to throwing dice. What is the probability of throwing
a six with one die? The antecedent here is the event of throwing a die;
the consequent, its turning up a six. As the die has six sides, all of
which are turned up with equal frequency, the probability of turning
up any one is \. Suppose two dice are thrown, what is the probability
of throwing sixes? The probability of either coming up six is obviously
the same when both are thrown as when one is thrown— namely,
The probability that either will come up six when the other does is also
the same as that of its coming up six whether the other does or not.
The probabilities are, therefore, independent; and, by our rule, the
probability that both events will happen together is the product of
their several probabilities, or g X What is the probability of throw­
ing deuce-ace? The probability that the first die will turn up ace and
the second deuce is the same as the probability that both will turn up
sixes— namely, the probability that the second will turn up ace and
thefirst deuce is likewise these two events—first, ace; second, deuce;
and, second, ace; first, deuce— are incompatible. Hence the rule for
addition holds, and the probability that either will come up ace and
the other deuce is 3^ -f or
In this way all problems about dice, etc., may be solved. When the
number of dice thrown is supposed very large, mathematics (which
may be defined as the art of making groups to facilitate numeration)
comes to our aid with certain devices to reduce the difficulties.
II
The conception of probability as a matter offact, i.e., as the propor­
tion of times in which an occurrence of one kind is accompanied by
an occurrence of another kind, is termed by Mr. Venn the materialistic
view of the subject.1 But probability has pften been regarded as being
simply the degree of belief which ought to attach to a proposition; and
this mode of explaining the idea is termed by Venn the conceptualistic

[page 157]

The Probability o f Induction I 157
view. Most writers have mixed the two conceptions together. They,
first, define the probability of an event as the reason we have to believe
that it has taken place, which is conceptualistic; but shortly after they
state that it is the ratio of the number of cases favorable to the event
to the total number of cases favorable or contrary, and all equally
possible. Except that this introduces the thoroughly unclear idea of
cases equally possible in place of cases equally frequent, this is a tolera­
ble statement of the materialistic view. The pure conceptualistic the­
ory has been best expounded by Mr. De Morgan in his Formal Logic:
or, the Calculus o f Inference, Necessary and Probable.
The great difference between the two analyses is, that the concep-
tualists refer probability to an event, while the materialists make it the
ratio of frequency of events of a species to those of a genus over that
species, thus giving it two terms instead o f one. The opposition may be
made to appear as follows:
Suppose that we have two rules of inference, such that, of all the
questions to the solution of which both can be applied, the first yields
correct answers to $5, and incorrect answers to the remaining
while the second yields correct answers to and incorrect answers
to the remaining 1^. Suppose, further, that the two rules are entirely
independent as to their truth, so that the second answers correctly
of the questions which the first answers correctly, and also $5 of the
questions which the first answers incorrectly, and answers incorrectly
the remaining ^5 of the questions which the first answers correctly,
and also the remaining jJo of the questions which the first answers
incorrectly. Then, of all the questions to the solution of which both
rules can be applied—
1 * . 93 r 81 93 X 81
both answer correctly ................................. -— 01 ——, or
100 100’ 1 0 0 x 1 0 0 ’
the second answers correctly and ^ ^ ^
the first in c o rre c tly ........................................ — ° f — ,, or 100* 10Q;
the second answers incorrectly and ^ ^ 7 81
the first c o r r e c tly ........................................... — of — ,, o r Q
-;
7 19 7 X 19
and both answer c o rre c tly .......................... —— of ——
, or
100 100’ 100x100
Suppose, now, that, in reference to any question, both give the
same answer. Then (the questions being always such as are to be
answered by yes or no), those in reference to which their answers agree
are the same as those which both answer correctly together with those
which both answer falsely, or ^ox'iod + Imx'moof all. The proportion of
those which both answer correctly out of those their answers to which
agree is, therefore—

[page 158]

158 I The Essential Peirce
93 X 81
100X 100 93 X 81
--------------------------- or
93 X 81 7 X 19 (93 X 81) + (7 X 19).
100 X 100 100 X 100
This is, therefore, the probability that, if both modes of inference
yield the same result, that result is correct. We may here conveniently
make use of another mode of expression. Probability is the ratio of the
favorable cases to all the cases. Instead of expressing our result in terms
of this ratio, we may make use of another—the ratio of favorable to
unfavorable cases. This last ratio may be called the chance of an event.
Then the chance of a true answer by the first mode of inference is f?
and by the second is y ; and the chance of a correct answer from both,
when they agree, is—
81 X 93 81 w 93
19 X 7 OF 19 7 ’
or the product of the chances of each singly yielding a true answer.
It will be seen that a chance is a quantity which may have any
magnitude, however great. An event in whose favor there is an even
chance, or {, has a probability of An argument having an even chance
can do nothing toward reenforcing others, since according to the rule
its combination with another would only multiply the chance of the
latter by i.
Probability and chance undoubtedly belong prim arily to conse­
quences, and are relative to premises; but we may, nevertheless, speak
of the chance of an event absolutely, meaning by that the chance of the
combination of all arguments in reference to it which exist for us in
the given state of our knowledge. Taken in this sense it is incontestable
that the chance of an event has an intimate connection with the degree
of our belief in it. Belief is certainly something more than a mere
feeling; yet there is a feeling of believing, and this feeling does and
ought to vary with the chance of the thing believed, as deduced from
all the arguments. Any quantity which varies with the chance might,
therefore, it would seem, serve as a thermometer for the proper inten­
sity of belief. Among all such quantities there is one which is pecu­
liarly appropriate. When there is a very great chance, the feeling of
belief ought to be very intense. Absolute certainty, or an infinite
chance, can never be attained by mortals, and this may be represented
appropriately by an infinite belief. As the chance diminishes the feel­
ing of believing should diminish, until an even chance is reached,
where it should completely vanish and not incline either toward or
away from the proposition. When the chance becomes less, then a
contrary belief should spring up and should increase in intensity as the
chance diminishes, and as the chance almost vanishes (which it can

[page 159]

The Probability of Induction I 159
never quite do) the contrary belief should tend toward an infinite
intensity. Now, there is one quantity which, more simply than any
other, fulfills these conditions; it is the logarithm of the chance. But
there is another consideration which must, if admitted, fix us to this
choice for our thermometer. It is that our belief ought to be propor­
tional to the weight of evidence, in this sense, that two arguments
which are entirely independent, neither weakening nor strengthening
each other, ought, when they concur, to produce a belief equal to the
sum of the intensities of belief which either would produce separately.
N ow, we have seen that the chances of independent concurrent argu­
ments are to be multiplied together to get the chance of their combina­
tion, and therefore the quantities which best express the intensities of
belief should be such that they are to be added when the chances are
multiplied in order to produce the quantity which corresponds to the
combined chance. N ow, the logarithm is the only quantity which
fulfills this condition. There is a general law of sensibility, called
Fechner’s psycho-physical law.2It is that the intensity of any sensation
is proportional to the logarithm of the external force which produces
it. It is entirely in harmony with this law that the feeling of belief
should be as the logarithm of the chance, this latter being the expres­
sion of the state of facts which produces the belief.
The rule for the combination of independent concurrent argu­
ments takes a very simple form when expressed in terms of the inten­
sity of belief, measured in the proposed way. It is this: Take the sum
of all the feelings of belief which would be produced separately by all
the arguments pro, subtract from that the similar sum for arguments
con, and the remainder is the feeling of belief which we ought to have
on the whole. This is a proceeding which men often resort to, under
the name of balancing reasons.
These considerations constitute an argument in favor of the con-
ceptualistic view. The kernel of it is that the conjoint probability of
all the arguments in our possession, with reference to any fact, must
be intimately connected with the just degree of our belief in that fact;
and this point is supplemented by various others showing the consist­
ency of the theory with itself and with the rest of our knowledge.
But probability, to have any value at all, must express a fact. It is,
therefore, a thing to be inferred upon evidence. Let us, then, consider
for a moment the formation of a belief of probability. Suppose we have
a large bag of beans from which one has been secretly taken at random
and hidden under a thimble. We are now to form a probable judgment
of the color of that bean, by drawing others singly from the bag and
looking at them, each one to be thrown back, and the whole well mixed
up after each drawing. Suppose the first drawing is white and the next
black. We conclude that there is not an immense preponderance of
either color, and that there is something like an even chance that the

[page 160]

160 I The Essential Peirce
bean under the thimble is black. But this judgment may be altered by
the next few drawings. When we have drawn ten times, if 4, 5, or 6,
are white, we have more confidence that the chance is even. When we
have drawn a thousand times, if about half have been white, we have
great confidence in this result. We now feel pretty sure that, if we were
to make a large number of bets upon the color of single beans drawn
from the bag, we could approximately insure ourselves in the long run
by betting each time upon the white, a confidence which would be
entirely wanting if, instead of sampling the bag by 1,000 drawings, we
had done so by only two. Now, as the whole utility of probability is
to insure us in the long run, and as that assurance depends, not merely
on the value of the chance, but also on the accuracy of the evaluation,
it follows that we ought not to have the same feeling of belief in
reference to all events of which the chance is even. In short, to express
the proper state of our belief, not one number but two are requisite, the
first depending on the inferred probability, the second on the amount
of knowledge on which that probability is based.* It is true that when
our knowledge is very precise, when we have made many drawings
from the bag, or, as in most of the examples in the books, when the
total contents of the bag are absolutely known, the number which
expresses the uncertainty of the assumed probability and its liability
to be changed by further experience may become insignificant, or
utterly vanish. But, when our knowledge is very slight, this number
may be even more important than the probability itself; and when we
have no knowledge at all this completely overwhelms the other, so that
there is no sense in saying that the chance of the totally unknown event
is even (for what expresses absolutely no fact has absolutely no mean­
ing), and what ought to be said is that the chance is entirely indefinite.
We thus perceive that the conceptualistic view, though answering well
enough in some cases, is quite inadequate.
Suppose that the first bean which we drew from our bag were
black. That would constitute an argument, no matter how slender, that
the bean under the thimble was also black. If the second bean were also
to turn out tylack, that would be a second independent argument reen­
forcing the first. If the whole of the first twenty beans drawn should
prove black, our confidence that the hidden bean was black would
justly attain considerable strength. But suppose the twenty-first bean
were to be white and that we were to go on drawing until we found
that we had drawn 1,010 black beans and 990 white ones. We should
conclude that our first twenty beans being black was simply an ex­
traordinary accident, and that in fact the proportion of white beans to
black was sensibly equal, and that it was an even chance that the
*Strictly we should need an infinite series of numbers each depending on the
probable error of the last.

[page 161]

The Probability o f Induction I 161
hidden bean was black. Yet according to the rule of balancing reasons,
since all the drawings of black beans are so many independent argu­
ments in favor of the one under the thimble being black, and all the
white drawings so many against it, an excess of twenty black beans
ought to produce the same degree of belief that the hidden bean was
black, whatever the total number drawn.
In the conceptualistic view of probability, complete ignorance,
where the judgment ought not to swerve either toward or away from
the hypothesis, is represented by the probability
But let us suppose that we are totally ignorant what colored hair
the inhabitants of Saturn have. Let us, then, take a color-chart in which
all possible colors are shown shading into one another by impercepti­
ble degrees. In such a chart the relative areas occupied by different
classes of colors are perfectly arbitrary. Let us inclose such an area
with a closed line, and ask what is the chance on conceptualistic princi­
ples that the color of the hair of the inhabitants of Saturn falls within
that area? The answer cannot be indeterminate because we must be in
some state of belief; and, indeed, conceptualistic writers do not admit
indeterminate probabilities. As there is no certainty in the matter, the
answer lies between zero and unity. As no numerical value is afforded
by the data, the number must be determined by the nature of the scale
of probability itself, and not by calculation from the data. The answer
can, therefore, only be one-half, since the judgment should neither
favor nor oppose the hypothesis. What is true of this area is true of any
other one; and it will equally be true of a third area which embraces
the other two. But the probability for each of the smaller areas being
one-half, that for the larger should be at least unity, which is absurd.
Ill
All our reasonings are of two kinds: i. Explicative, analytic, or deduc­
tive; 2. Amplificative, synthetic, or (loosely speaking) inductive. In explica­
tive reasoning, certain facts are first laid down in the premises. These
facts are, in every case, an inexhaustible multitude, but they may often
be summed up in one simple proposition by means of some regularity
which runs through them all. Thus, take the proposition that Socrates
was a man; this implies (to go no further) that during every fraction
of a second of his whole life (or, if you please, during the greater part
of them) he was a man. He did not at one instant appear as a tree and
at another as a dog; he did not flow into water, or appear in two places
at once; you could not put your finger through him as if he were an
optical image, etc. N ow, the facts being thus laid down, some order
*“ Perfect indecision, belief inclining neither way, an even chance.”
— D e M o r g a n [Formal Logic (18 4 7 )], p. 182.

[page 162]

162 I The Essential Peirce
among some of them, not particularly made use of for the purpose of
stating them, may perhaps be discovered; and this will enable us to
throw part or all of them into a new statement, the possibility of which
might have escaped attention. Such a statement will be the conclusion
of an analytic inference. O f this sort are all mathematical demonstra­
tions. But synthetic reasoning is of another kind. In this case the facts
summed up in the conclusion are not among those stated in the prem­
ises. They are different facts, as when one sees that the tide rises m
times and concludes that it will rise the next time. These are the only
inferences which increase our real knowledge, however useful the
others may be.
In any problem in probabilities, we have given the relative fre­
quency of certain events, and we perceive that in these facts the rela­
tive frequency of another event is given in a hidden way. This being
stated makes the solution. This is therefore mere explicative reasoning,
and is evidently entirely inadequate to the representation of synthetic
reasoning, which goes out beyond the facts given in the premises.
There is, therefore, a manifest impossibility in so tracing out any
probability for a synthetic conclusion.
Most treatises on probability contain a very different doctrine.
They state, for example, that if one of the ancient denizens of the
shores of the Mediterranean, who had never heard of tides, had gone
to the bay of Biscay, and had there seen the tide rise, say m times, he
could know that there was a probability equal to
m + 1
m + 2
that it would rise the next time. In a well-known work by Quetelet,
much stress is laid on this, and it is made the foundation of a theory
of inductive reasoning.3
But this solution betrays its origin if we apply it to the case in
which the man has never seen the tide rise at all; that is, if we put m
= o. In this case, the probability that it will rise the next time comes
out or, in other words, the solution involves the conceptualistic
principle that there is an even chance of a totally unknown event. The
manner in which it has been reached has been by considering a num­
ber of urns all containing the same number of balls, part white and
part black. One urn contains all white balls, another, one black and the
rest white, a third, two black and the rest white, and so on, one urn
for each proportion, until an urn is reached containing only black
balls. But the only possible reason for drawing any analogy between
such an arrangement and that of Nature is the principle that alterna­
tives of which we know nothing must be considered as equally proba­
ble. But this principle, is absurd. There is an indefinite variety of ways
of enumerating the different possibilities, which, on the application of

[page 163]

this principle, would give different results. If there be any way of
enumerating the possibilities so as to make them all equal, it is not that
from which this solution is derived, but is the following: Suppose we
had an immense granary filled with black and white balls well mixed
up; and suppose each urn were filled by taking a fixed number of balls
from this granary quite at random. The relative number of white balls
in the granary might be anything, say one in three. Then in one-third
of the urns the first ball would be white, and in two-thirds black. In
one-third of those urns of which the first ball was white, and also in
one-third of those in which the first ball was black, the second ball
would be white. In this way, we should have a distribution like that
shown in the following table, where w stands for a white ball and b
for a black one. The reader can, if he chooses, verify the table for
himself.
The Probability o f Induction I 163
wwww.
wwwb. wwbw. wbww. bwww.
wwwb. wwbw. wbww. bwww.
wwbb. wbwb. bwwb. wbbw. bwbw. bbww.
wwbb. wbwb. bwwb. wbbw. bwbw. bbww.
wwbb. wbwb. bwwb. wbbw. bwbw. bbww.
wwbb. wbwb. bwwb. wbbw. bwbw. bbww.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
wbbb. bwbb. bbwb. bbbw.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
bbbb.
In the second group, where there is one b, there are two sets just
alike; in the third there are 4, in the fourth 8, and in the fifth 16,

[page 164]

164 I The Essential Peirce
doubling every time. This is because we have supposed twice as many
black balls in the granary as white ones; had we supposed 10 times as
many, instead of
i, 2, 4, 8, 16
sets we should have had
i, io, ioo, iooo, ioooo
sets; on the other hand, had the numbers of black and white balls in
the granary been even, there would have been but one set in each
group. N ow suppose two balls were drawn from one of these urns and
were found to be both white, what would be the probability of the next
one being white? If the two drawn out were the first two put into the
urns, and the next to be drawn out were the third put in, then the
probability of this third being white would be the same whatever the
colors of the first two, for it has been supposed that just the same
proportion of urns has the third ball white among those which have
the first two white-white, white-black, black-white, and black-black. Thus,
in this case, the chance of the third ball being white would be the same
whatever the first two were. But, by inspecting the table, the reader
can see that in each group all orders of the balls occur with equal
frequency, so that it makes no difference whether they are drawn out
in the order they were put in or not. Hence the colors of the balls
already drawn have no influence on the probability of any other being
white or black.
Now, if there be any way of enumerating the possibilities of N a­
ture so as to make them equally probable, it is clearly one which should
make one arrangement or combination of the elements of Nature as
probable as another, that is, a distribution like that we have supposed,
and it, therefore, appears that the assumption that any such thing can
be done, leads simply to the conclusion that reasoning from past to
future experience is absolutely worthless. In fact, the moment that you
assume that the chances in favor of that of which we are totally igno­
rant are even, the problem about the tides does not differ, in any
arithmetical particular, from the case in which a penny (known to be
equally likely to come up heads and tails) should turn up heads m times
successively. In short, it would be to assume that Nature is a pure
chaos, or chance combination of independent elements, in which rea­
soning from one fact to another would be impossible; and since, as we
shall hereafter see, there is no judgment of pure observation without
reasoning, it would be to suppose all human cognition illusory and no
real knowledge possible. It would be to suppose that if we have found
the order of Nature more or less regular in the past, this has been by
a pure run of luck which we may expect is now at an end. Now, it may
be we have no scintilla of proof to the contrary, but reason is unneces­

[page 165]

The Probability o f Induction I 165
sary in reference to that belief which is of all the most settled, which
nobody doubts or can doubt, and which he who should deny would
stultify himself in so doing.
The relative probability of this or that arrangement of Nature is
something which we should have a right to talk about if universes were
as plenty as blackberries, if we could put a quantity of them in a bag,
shake them well up, draw out a sample, and examine them to see what
proportion of them had one arrangement and what proportion an­
other. But, even in that case, a higher universe would contain us, in
regard to whose arrangements the conception of probability could
have no applicability.
IV
We have examined the problem proposed by the conceptualists,
which, translated into clear language, is this: Given a synthetic conclu­
sion; required to know out of all possible states of things how many
will accord, to any assigned extent, with this conclusion; and we have
found that it is only an absurd attempt to reduce synthetic to analytic
reason, and that no definite solution is possible.
But there is another problem in connection with this subject, ft is
this: Given a certain state of things, required to know what proportion
of all synthetic inferences relating to it will be true within a given
degree of approximation. Now, there is no difficulty about this prob­
lem (except for its mathematical complication); it has been much stud­
ied, and the answer is perfectly well known. And is not this, after all,
what we want to know much rather than the other? Why should we
want to know the probability that the fact will accord with our conclu­
sion? That implies that we are interested in all possible worlds, and not
merely the one in which we find ourselves placed. Why is it not much
more to the purpose to know the probability that our conclusion will
accord with the fact? One of these questions is the first above stated
and the other the second, and I ask the reader whether, if people,
instead of using the word probability without any clear apprehension
of their own meaning, had always spoken of relative frequency, they
could have failed to see that what they wanted was not to follow along
the synthetic procedure with an analytic one, in order to find the
probability of the conclusion; but, on the contrary, to begin with the
fact at which the synthetic inference aims, and follow back to the facts
it uses for premises in order to see the probability of their being such
as will yield the truth.
As we cannot have an urn with an infinite number of balls to
represent the inexhaustibleness of Nature, let us suppose one with a
finite number, each ball being thrown back into the urn after being
drawn out, so that there is no exhaustion of them. Suppose one ball

[page 166]

166 I The Essential Peirce
out of three is white and the rest black, and that four balls are drawn.
Then the table on page 163 represents the relative frequency of the
different ways in which these balls might be drawn. It will be seen that
if we should judge by these four balls of the proportion in the urn, 32
times out of 81 we should find it and 24 times out of 81 we should find
it the truth being To extend this table to high numbers would be
great labor, but the mathematicians have found some ingenious ways
of reckoning what the numbers would be. It is found that, if the true
proportion of white balls is p, and s balls are drawn, then the error of
the proportion obtained by the induction will be—
half the time within
9 times out of 10 within
99 times out of 100 within
999 times out of 1,000 within
9,999 times out of 10,000 within
9,999,999,999 times out of 10,000,000,000 within
The use of this may be illustrated by an example. By the census of
1870, it appears that the proportion of males among native white chil­
dren under one year old was 0.5082, while among colored children of
the same age the proportion was only 0.4977. The difference between
these is 0.0105, or about one in a 100. Can this be attributed to chance,
or would the difference always exist among a great number of white
and colored children under like circumstances? Here p may be taken
at hence 2p(i —p) is also The number of white children counted
was near 1,000,000; hence the fraction whose square-root is to be taken
is about 20000
00• The root is about -p^o, and this multiplied by 0.477 gives
about 0.0003 as t^
le probable error in the ratio of males among the
whites as obtained from the induction. The number of black children
was about 150,000, which gives 0.0008 for the probable error. We see
that the actual discrepancy is ten times the sum of these, and such a
result would happen, according to our table, only once out of 10,000,-
000,000 censuses, in the long run.
It may be remarked that when the real value of the probability
sought inductively is either very large or very small, the reasoning is
more secure. Thus, suppose there were in reality one white ball in 100
in a certain urn, and we were to judge of the number by 100 drawings.
0 .4 7 7 ^/}PS\jz£L
1.821
2.328- ^ ^ - ^ ^
2.751-^
A . n J l p(x- p)

[page 167]

The Probability o f Induction I 167
The probability of drawing no white ball would be that of drawing
one white ball would be S ; that of drawing two would be that
of drawing three would be that of drawing four would be that
of drawing five would be only etc. Thus we should be tolerably
certain of not being in error by more than one ball in 100.
It appears, then, that in one sense we can, and in another we
cannot, determine the probability of synthetic inference. When I rea­
son in this way:
Ninety-nine Cretans in a hundred are liars;
But Epimenides is a Cretan;
Therefore, Epimenides is a liar:—
I know that reasoning similar to that would carry truth 99 times in 100.
But when I reason in the opposite direction:
Minos, Sarpedon, Rhadamanthus, Deucalion, and Epimenides, are
all the Cretans I can think of;
But these were all atrocious liars,
Therefore, pretty much all Cretans must have been liars; I do not
in the least know how often such reasoning would carry me right. On
the other hand, what I do know is that some definite proportion of
Cretans must have been liars, and that this proportion can be probably
approximated to by an induction from five or six instances. Even in
the worst case for the probability of such an inference, that in which
about half the Cretans are liars, the ratio so obtained would probably
not be in error by more than So much I know; but, then, in the
present case the inference is that pretty much all Cretans are liars, and
whether there may not be a special improbability in that I do not
know.
V
Late in the last century, Immanuel Kant asked the question, “ How
are synthetical judgments a priori possible?” 4 By synthetical judg­
ments he meant such as assert positive fact and are not mere affairs of
arrangement; in short, judgments of the kind which synthetical rea­
soning produces, and which analytic reasoning cannot yield. By a
priori judgments he meant such as that all outward objects are in space,
every event has a cause, etc., propositions which according to him can
never be inferred from experience. Not so much by his answer to this
question as by the mere asking of it, the current philosophy of that
time was shattered and destroyed, and a new epoch in its history was
begun. But before asking that question he ought to have asked the more
general one, “ How are any synthetical judgments at all possible?”
How is it that a man can observe one fact and straightway pronounce
judgment concerning another different fact not involved in the first?
Such reasoning, as we have seen, has, at least in the usual sense of the

[page 168]

168 I The Essential Peirce
phrase, no definite probability; how, then, can it add to our knowl­
edge? This is a strange paradox; the Abbé G ratry says it is a miracle,
and that every true induction is an immediate inspiration from on
high.* I respect this explanation far more than many a pedantic at­
tempt to solve the question by some juggle with probabilities, with the
forms of syllogism, or what not. I respect it because it shows an
appreciation of the depth of the problem, because it assigns an ade­
quate cause, and because it is intimately connected— as the true ac­
count should be—with a general philosophy of the universe. At the
same time, I do not accept this explanation, because an explanation
should tell how a thing is done, and to assert a perpetual miracle seems
to be an abandonment of all hope of doing that, without sufficient
justification.
It will be interesting to see how the answer which Kant gave to his
question about synthetical judgments a priori will appear if extended
to the question of synthetical judgments in general. That answer is,
that synthetical judgments a priori are possible because whatever is
universally true is involved in the conditions of experience. Let us
apply this to a general synthetical reasoning. I take from a bag a
handful of beans; they are all purple, and I infer that all the beans in
the bag are purple. How can I do that? Why, upon the principle that
whatever is universally true of my experience (which is here the ap­
pearance of these different beans) is involved in the condition of expe­
rience. The condition of this special experience is that all these beans
were taken from that bag. According to Kant’s principle, then, what­
ever is found true of all the beans drawn from the bag must find its
explanation in some peculiarity of the contents of the bag. This is a
satisfactory statement of the principle of induction.
When we draw a deductive or analytic conclusion, our rule of
inference is that facts of a certain general character are either invari­
ably or in a certain proportion of cases accompanied by facts of an­
other general character. Then our premise being a fact of the former
class, we infer with certainty or with the appropriate degree of proba­
bility the existence of a fact of the second class. But the rule for
synthetic inference is of a different kind. When we sample a bag of
beans we do not in the least assume that the fact of some beans being
purple involves the necessity or even the probability of other beans
being so. On the contrary, the conceptualistic method of treating prob­
abilities, which really amounts simply to the deductive treatment of
them, when rightly carried out leads to the result that a synthetic
inference has just an even chance in its favor, or in other words is
*Logique. The same is true, according to him, of every performance of a differentia­
tion, but not of integration. He does not tell us whether it is the supernatural assistance
which makes the former process so much the easier.5

[page 169]

The Probability of Induction I 169
absolutely worthless. The color of one bean is entirely independent of
that of another. But synthetic inference is founded upon a classifica­
tion of facts, not according to their characters, but according to the
manner of obtaining them. Its rule is, that a number of facts obtained
in a given way will in general more or less resemble other facts ob­
tained in the same way; or, experiences whose conditions are the same will
have the same general characters.
In the former case, we know that premises precisely similar in form
to those of the given ones will yield true conclusions, just once in a
calculable number of times. In the latter case, we only know that
premises obtained under circumstances similar to the given ones
(though perhaps themselves very different) will yield true conclusions,
at least once in a calculable number of times. We may express this by
saying that in the case of analytic inference we know the probability
of our conclusion (if the premises are true), but in the case of synthetic
inferences we only know the degree of trustworthiness of our proceed­
ing. As all knowledge comes from synthetic inference, we must
equally infer that all human certainty consists merely in our knowing
that the processes by which our knowledge has been derived are such
as must generally have led to true conclusions.
Though a synthetic inference cannot by any means be reduced to
deduction, yet that the rule of induction will hold good in the long run
may be deduced from the principle that reality is only the object of the
final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead. That belief
gradually tends to fix itself under the influence of inquiry is, indeed,
one of the facts with which logic sets out.

[page 170]

11
The Order ofNature
P 122: Popular Science Monthly 13 (June 1878)1203-17.
[Also published in W
3:306-22 and in CP 6.395-427.] In the
jifth “Illustrations” paper, Peirce argues against Mill's view
that the uniformity of nature is the sole warrant fo r induc­
tion and for the theory set out in the preceding paper: that
induction should be explained by the doctrine ofprobabilities
(which, as hepoints out, shouldpose noproblemfor religion).
He also proclaims, as he did throughout his life, that “the
mind of man is strongly adapted to the comprehension of the
world, ” a capacity explained as the result of natural selection
and as beingfundamentalfor success in abductive reasoning
(or hypothesis). Finally, he turns to some of the cosmological
questions that open the line o f inquiry that will eventually
result in his guess at the riddle of the universe.
I
Any proposition whatever concerning the order of Nature must
touch more or less upon religion. In our day, belief, even in these
matters, depends more and more upon the observation of facts. If a
remarkable and universal orderliness be found in the universe, there
must be some cause for this regularity, and science has to consider
what hypotheses might account for the phenomenon. One way of
accounting for it, certainly, would be to suppose that the world is
ordered by a superior power. But if there is nothing in the universal
subjection of phenomena to laws, nor in the character of those laws
themselves (as being benevolent, beautiful, economical, etc.), which
goes to prove the existence of a governor of the universe, it is
hardly to be anticipated that any other sort of evidence w ill be
found to weigh very much with minds emancipated from the tyr­
anny of tradition.
Nevertheless, it cannot truly be said that even an absolutely nega­
tive decision of that question could altogether destroy religion, inas­
much as there are faiths in which, however much they differ from our

[page 171]

The Order of Nature I 171
own, we recognize those essential characters which make them worthy
to be called religions, and which, nevertheless, do not postulate an
actually existing Deity. That one, for instance, which has had the most
numerous and by no means the least intelligent following of any on
earth, teaches that the D ivinity in his highest perfection is wrapped
away from the world in a state of profound and eternal sleep, which
really does not differ from non-existence, whether it be called by that
name or not. N o candid mind who has followed the writings of M.
Vacherot can well deny that his religion is as earnest as can be.1 He
worships the Perfect, the Supreme Ideal; but he conceives that the very
notion of the Ideal is repugnant to its real existence. In fact, M. Vache­
rot finds it agreeable to his reason to assert that non-existence is an
essential character of the perfect, just as St. Anselm and Descartes
found it agreeable to theirs to assert the extreme opposite. I confess
that there is one respect in which either of these positions seems to me
more congruous with the religious attitude than that of a theology
which stands upon evidences; for as soon as the Deity presents himself
to either Anselm or Vacherot, and manifests his glorious attributes,
whether it be in a vision of the night or day, either of them recognizes
his adorable God, and sinks upon his knees at once; whereas the theolo­
gian of evidences will first demand that the divine apparition shall
identify himself, and only after having scrutinized his credentials and
weighed the probabilities of his being found among the totality of
existences, will he finally render his circumspect homage, thinking
that no characters can be adorable but those which belong to a real
thing.
If we could find out any general characteristic of the universe, any
mannerism in the ways of Nature, any law everywhere applicable and
universally valid, such a discovery would be of such singular assistance
to us in all our future reasoning, that it would deserve a place almost
at the head of the principles of logic. On the other hand, if it can be
shown that there is nothing of the sort to find out, but that every
discoverable regularity is of limited range, this again will be of logical
importance. What sort of a conception we ought to have of the uni­
verse, how to think of the ensemble of things, is a fundamental problem
in the theory of reasoning.
II
It is the legitimate endeavor of scientific men now, as it was twenty-
three hundred years ago, to account for the formation of the solar
system and of the cluster of stars which forms the galaxy, by the
fortuitous concourse of atoms. The greatest expounder of this theory,
when asked how he could write an immense book on the system of the

[page 172]

172 I The Essential Peirce
world without one mention of its author, replied, very logically, “Je
n’avais pas besoin de cette hypothese-la.” 2 But, in truth, there is noth­
ing atheistical in the theory, any more than there was in this answer.
Matter is supposed to be composed of molecules which obey the laws
of mechanics and exert certain attractions upon one another; and it is
to these regularities (which there is no attempt to account for) that
general arrangement of the solar system would be due, and not to
hazard.
If any one has ever maintained that the universe is a pure throw
of the dice, the theologians have abundantly refuted him. “ How
often,” says Archbishop Tillotson, “ might a man, after he had jumbled
a set of letters in a bag, fling them out upon the ground before they
would fall into an exact poem, yea, or so much as make a good dis­
course in prose! And may not a little book be as easily made by chance
as this great volume of the world?” 3 The chance world here shown to
be so different from that in which we live would be one in which there
were no laws, the characters of different things being entirely indepen­
dent; so that, should a sample of any kind of objects ever show a
prevalent character, it could only be by accident, and no general prop­
osition could ever be established. Whatever further conclusions we
may come to in regard to the order of the universe, thus much may
be regarded as solidly established, that the world is not a mere chance-
medley.
But whether the world makes an exact poem or not, is another
question. When we look up at the heavens at night, we readily perceive
that the stars are not simply splashed on to the celestial vault; but there
does not seem to be any precise system in their arrangement either. It
will be worth our while, then, to inquire into the degree of orderliness
in the universe; and, to begin, let us ask whether the world we live in
is any more orderly than a purely chance-world would be.
Any uniformity, or law of Nature, may be stated in the form,
“ Every A is B ” ; as, every ray of light is a non-curved line, every body
is accelerated toward the earth’s centre, etc. This is the same as to say,
“ There does not exist any A which is not B ” ; there is no curved ray;
there is no body not accelerated toward the earth; so that the uniform­
ity consists in the non-occurrence in Nature of a certain combination
of characters (in this case, the combination of being A with being
non-B).* And, conversely, every case of the non-occurence of a combi­
nation of characters would constitute a uniformity in Nature. Thus,
suppose the quality A is never found in combination with the quality
*For the present purpose, the negative of a character is to be considered as much
a character as the positive, for a uniformity may either be affirmative or negative. I do
not say that no distinction can be drawn between positive and negative uniformities.

[page 173]

The Order of Nature I 173
C: for example, suppose the quality of idiocy is never found in combi­
nation with that of having a well-developed brain. Then nothing of the
sort A is of the sort C, or everything of the sort A is of the sort non-C
(or say, every idiot has an ill-developed brain), which, being something
universally true of the A ’s, is a uniformity in the world. Thus we see
that, in a world where there were no uniformities, no logically possible
combination of characters would be excluded, but every combination
would exist in some object. But two objects not identical must differ
in some of their characters, though it be only in the character of being
in such-and-such a place. Hence, precisely the same combination of
characters could not be found in two different objects; and, conse­
quently, in a chance-world every combination involving either the
positive or negative of every character would belong to just one thing.
Thus, if there were but five simple characters in such a world,* we
might denote them by A, B, C, D, E, and their negatives by a, b, c, d,
e; and then, as there would be 25 or 32 different combinations of these
characters, completely determinate in reference to each of them, that
world would have just 32 objects in it, their characters being as in the
following table:
T a b l e I
A B C D E AbCD E aBCD E abCDE
ABCD e AbCDe aBCDe abCDe
A BCdE AbCdE aBCdE abCdE
ABCde AbCde aBCde abCde
A B cD E AbcD E aBcD E abcDE
ABcD e AbcDe aBcDe abcDe
A BcdE AbcdE aBcdE abcdE
ABcde Abcde aBcde abcde
For example, if the five primary characters were hard, sweet, fra ­
grant, green, bright, there would be one object which reunited all these
qualities, one which was hard, sweet, fragrant, and green, but not
bright; one which was hard, sweet, fragrant, and bright, but not green;
one which was hard, sweet, and fragrant, but neither green nor bright;
and so on through all the combinations.
This is what a thoroughly chance-world would be like, and cer­
tainly nothing could be imagined more systematic. When a quantity
of letters are poured out of a bag, the appearance of disorder is due to
the circumstance that the phenomena are only partly fortuitous. The
*There being 5 simple characters, with their negatives, they could be compounded
in various ways so as to make 241 characters in all, without counting the characters
existence and non-existence, which make up 243 or 3 s.

[page 174]

174 I The Essential Peirce
laws of space are supposed, in that case, to be rigidly preserved, and
there is also a certain amount of regularity in the formation of the
letters. The result is that some elements are orderly and some are
disorderly, which is precisely what we observe in the actual world.
Tillotson, in the passage of which a part has been quoted, goes on to
ask, “ How long might 20,000 blind men, which should be sent out
from the several remote parts of England, wander up and down before
they would all meet upon Salisbury Plains, and fall into rank and file
in the exact order of an army? And yet this is much more easy to be
imagined than how the innumerable blind parts of matter should
rendezvous themselves into a world.” 4 This is very true, but in the
actual world the blind men are, as far as we can see, not drawn up in
any particular order at all. And, in short, while a certain amount of
order exists in the world, it would seem that the world is not so orderly
as it might be, and, for instance, not so much so as a world of pure
chance would be.
But we can never get to the bottom of this question until we take
account of a highly-important logical principle* which I now proceed
to enounce. This principle is that any plurality or lot of objects what­
ever have some character in common (no matter how insignificant)
which is peculiar to them and not shared by anything else. The word
“ character” here is taken in such a sense as to include negative charac­
ters, such as incivility, inequality, etc., as well as their positives,
civility, equality, etc. To prove the theorem, I will show what charac­
ter any two things, A and B, have in common, not shared by anything
else. The things, A and B, are each distinguished from all other things
by the possession of certain characters which may be named A-ness
and B-ness. Corresponding to these positive characters, are the nega­
tive characters un-A-ness, which is possessed by everything except A,
and un-B-ness, which is possessed by everything except B. These two
characters are united in everything except A and B; and this union of
the characters un-A-ness and un-B-ness makes a compound character
which may be termed A-B-lessness. This is not possessed by either A
or B, but it is possessed by everything else. This character, like every
other, has its corresponding negative un-A-B-lessness, and this last is
the character possessed by both A and B, and by nothing else. It is
obvious that what has thus been shown true of two things is, mutatis
mutandis, true of any number of things. Q T .D .
In any world whatever, then, there must be a character peculiar to
each possible group of objects. If, as a matter of nomenclature, charac­
ters peculiar to the same group be regarded as only different aspects
*This principle was, I believe, first stated by Mr. De Morgan [Formal Logic, p. 39].

[page 175]

The Order o f Nature I 175
of the same character, then we may say that there w ill be precisely one
character for each possible group of objects. Thus, suppose a world to
contain five things, a, /3, y, S, €. Then it w ill have a separate character
for each of the 31 groups (with non-existence making up 32 or 25) shown
in the following table:
T a b l e II
aß aßy aßyS
a ay aß8 aßye
ß aS aße aßde
y ae ay8 ayde
8 ßy aye ßy8e
€ ß8 a8e
ße ßy8
y 8 ßye
ye ß8e
8e yde
This shows that a contradiction is involved in the very idea of a
chance-world, for in a world of 32 things, instead of there being only
35 or 243 characters, as we have seen that the notion of a chance-world
requires, there would, in fact, be no less than 232, or 4,294,967,296
characters, which would not be all independent, but would have all
possible relations with one another.
We further see that so long as we regard characters abstractly,
without regard to their relative importance, etc., there is no possibility
of a more or less degree of orderliness in the world, the whole system
of relationship between the different characters being given by mere
logic; that is, being implied in those facts which are tacitly admitted
as soon as we admit that there is any such thing as reasoning.
In order to descend from this abstract point of view, it is requisite
to consider the characters of things as relative to the perceptions and
active powers of living beings. Instead, then, of attempting to imagine
a world in which there should be no uniformities, let us suppose one
in which none of the uniformities should have reference to characters
interesting or important to us. In the first place, there would be noth­
ing to puzzle us in such a world. The small number of qualities which
would directly meet the senses would be the ones which would afford
the key to everything which could possibly interest us. The whole
universe would have such an air of system and perfect regularity that
there would be nothing to ask. In the next place, no action of ours, and
no event of Nature, would have important consequences in such a
world. We should be perfectly free from all responsibility, and there
would be nothing to do but to enjoy or suffer whatever happened to

[page 176]

176 I The Essential Peirce
come along. Thus there would be nothing to stimulate or develop
either the mind or the will, and we consequently should neither act
nor think. We should have no memory, because that depends on a law
of our organization. Even if we had any senses, we should be situated
toward such a world precisely as inanimate objects are toward the
present one, provided we suppose that these objects have an absolutely
transitory and instantaneous consciousness without memory— a sup­
position which is a mere mode of speech, for that would be no con­
sciousness at all. We may, therefore, say that a world of chance is
simply our actual world viewed from the standpoint of an animal at
the very vanishing-point of intelligence. The actual world is almost a
chance-medley to the mind of a polyp. The interest which the unifor­
mities of Nature have for an animal measures his place in the scale of
intelligence.
Thus, nothing can be made out from the orderliness of Nature in
regard to the existence of a God, unless it be maintained that the
existence of a finite mind proves the existence of an infinite one.
Ill
In the last of these papers5 we examined the nature of inductive or
synthetic reasoning. We found it to be a process of sampling. A num­
ber of specimens of a class are taken, not by selection within that class,
but at random. These specimens will agree in a great number of
respects. If, now, it were likely that a second lot would agree with the
first in the majority of these respects, we might base on this considera­
tion an inference in regard to any one of these characters. But such an
inference would neither be of the nature of induction, nor would it
(except in special cases) be valid, because the vast majority of points
of agreement in the first sample drawn would generally be entirely
accidental, as well as insignificant. T o illustrate this, I take the ages at
death of the first five poets given in Wheeler’s Biographical Dictionary.
They are:
Aagard, 48.
Abeille, 70.
Abulola, 84.
Abunowas, 48.
Accords, 45.
These five ages have the following characters in common:
1. The difference of the two digits composing the number, divided
by three, leaves a remainder of one.
2. The first digit raised to the power indicated by the second, and
divided by three, leaves a remainder of one.

[page 177]

The Order of Nature I 177
3. The sum of the prime factors of each age, including one, is
divisible by three.
It is easy to see that the number of accidental agreements of this
sort would be quite endless. But suppose that, instead of considering
a character because of its prevalence in the sample, we designate a
character before taking the sample, selecting it for its importance,
obviousness, or other point of interest. Then two considerable samples
drawn at random are extremely likely to agree approximately in re­
gard to the proportion of occurrences of a character so chosen. The
inference that a previously designated character has nearly the samefrequency
o f occurrence in the whole o f a class that it has in a sample drawn at random
out o f that class is induction. If the character be not previously desig­
nated, then a sample in which it is found to be prevalent can only serve
to suggest that it may be prevalent in the whole class. We may consider
this surmise as an inference if we please— an inference of possibility;
but a second sample must be drawn to test the question of whether the
character actually is prevalent. Instead of designating beforehand a
single character in reference to which we will examine a sample, we
may designate two, and use the same sample to determine the relative
frequencies of both. This will be making two inductive inferences at
once; and, of course, we are less certain that both will yield correct
conclusions than we should be that either separately would /do so.
What is true of two characters is true of any limited number. Now,
the number of characters which have any considerable interest for us
in reference to any class of objects is more moderate than might be
supposed. As we shall be sure to examine any sample with reference
to these characters, they may be regarded not exactly as predesignated,
but as predetermined (which amounts to the same thing); and we may
infer that the sample represents the class in all these respects if we
please, remembering only that this is not so secure an inference as if
the particular quality to be looked for had been fixed upon beforehand.
The demonstration of this theory of induction rests upon princi­
ples and follows methods which are accepted by all those who display
in other matters the particular knowledge and force of mind which
qualify them to judge of this. The theory itself, however, quite unac­
countably seems never to have occurred to any of the writers who have
undertaken to explain synthetic reasoning. The most widely-spread
opinion in the matter is one which was much promoted by Mr. John
Stuart M ill— namely, that induction depends for its validity upon the
uniformity of Nature—that is, on the principle that what happens
once will, under a sufficient degree of similarity of circumstances,
happen again as often as the same circumstances recur.6 The applica­
tion is this: The fact that different things belong to the same class
constitutes the similarity of circumstances, and the induction is good,

[page 178]

178 I The Essential Peirce
provided this similarity is “ sufficient.” What happens once is, that a
number of these things are found to have a certain character; what may
be expected, then, to happen again as often as the circumstances recur
consists in this, that all things belonging to the same class should have
the same character.
This analysis of induction has, I venture to think, various imperfec­
tions, to some of which it may be useful to call attention. In the first
place, when I put my hand in a bag and draw out a handful of beans,
and, finding three-quarters of them black, infer that about three-quar-
ters of all in the bag are black, my inference is obviously of the same
kind as if I had found any larger proportion, or the whole, of the
sample black, and had assumed that it represented in that respect the
rest of the contents of the bag. But the analysis in question hardly
seems adapted to the explanation of this proportionate induction, where
the conclusion, instead of being that a certain event uniformly hap­
pens under certain circumstances, is precisely that it does not uni­
formly occur, but only happens in a certain proportion of cases. It is
true that the whole sample may be regarded as a single object, and the
inference may be brought under the formula proposed by considering
the conclusion to be that any similar sample will show a similar pro­
portion among its constituents. But this is to treat the induction as if
it rested on a single instance, which gives a very false idea of its
probability.
In the second place, if the uniformity of Nature were the sole
warrant of induction, we should have no right to draw one in regard
to a character whose constancy we knew nothing about. Accordingly,
Mr. Mill says that, though none but white swans were known to
Europeans for thousands of years, yet the inference that all swans were
white was “ not a good induction,” because it was not known that color
was a usual generic character (it, in fact, not being so by any means).7
But it is mathematically demonstrable that an inductive inference may
have as high a degree of probability as you please independent of any
antecedent knowledge of the constancy of the character inferred.
Before it was known that color is not usually a character of genera,
there was certainly a considerable probability that all swans were
white. But the further study of the genera of animals led to the induc­
tion of their non-uniformity in regard to color. A deductive applica­
tion of this general proposition would have gone far to overcome the
probability of the universal whiteness of swans before the black spe­
cies was discovered. When we do know anything in regard to the
general constancy or inconstancy of a character, the application of that
general knowledge to the particular class to which any induction re­
lates, though it serves to increase or diminish the force of the induc­
tion, is, like every application of general knowledge to particular cases,
deductive in its nature and not inductive.

[page 179]

The Order of Nature I 179
In the third place, to say that inductions are true because similar
events happen in similar circumstances—or, what is the same thing,
because objects similar in some respects are likely to be similar in
others— is to overlook those conditions which really are essential to
the validity of inductions. When we take all the characters into ac­
count, any pair of objects resemble one another in just as many par­
ticulars as any other pair. If we limit ourselves to such characters as
have for us any importance, interest, or obviousness, then a synthetic
conclusion may be drawn, but only on condition that the specimens
by which we judge have been taken at random from the class in
regard to which we are to form a judgment, and not selected as be­
longing to any sub-class. The induction only has its full force when
the character concerned has been designated before examining the
sample. These are the essentials of induction, and they are not recog­
nized in attributing the validity of induction to the uniformity of
Nature. The explanation of induction by the doctrine of probabili­
ties, given in the last of these papers,8 is not a mere metaphysical
formula, but is one from which all the rules of synthetic reasoning
can be deduced systematically and with mathematical cogency. But
the account of the matter by a principle of Nature, even if it were in
other respects satisfactory, presents the fatal disadvantage of leaving
us quite as much afloat as before in regard to the proper method of
induction. It does not surprise me, therefore, that those who adopt
this theory have given erroneous rules for the conduct of reasoning,
nor that the greater number of examples put forward by Mr. Mill in
his first edition, as models of what inductions should be, proved in
the light of further scientific progress so particularly unfortunate
that they had to be replaced by others in later editions. One would
have supposed that Mr. M ill might have based an induction on this
circumstance, especially as it is his avowed principle that, if the con­
clusion of an induction turns out false, it cannot have been a good
induction. Nevertheless, neither he nor any of his scholars seem to
have been led to suspect, in the least, the perfect solidity of the
framework which he devised for securely supporting the mind in its
passage from the known to the unknown, although at its first trial it
did not answer quite so well as had been expected.
IV
When we have drawn any statistical induction—such, for instance,
as that one-half of all births are of male children— it is always possible
to discover, by investigation sufficiently prolonged, a class of which
the same predicate may be affirmed universally; to find out, for in­
stance, what sort of births are of male children. The truth of this
principle follows immediately from the theorem that there is a charac­

[page 180]

180 I The Essential Peirce
ter peculiar to every possible group of objects. The form in which the
principle is usually stated is, that every event must have a cause.
But, though there exists a cause for every event, and that of a kind
which is capable of being discovered, yet if there be nothing to guide
us to the discovery; if we have to hunt among all the events in the
world without any scent; if, for instance, the sex of a child might
equally be supposed to depend on the configuration of the planets, on
what was going on at the antipodes, or on anything else— then the
discovery would have no chance of ever getting made.
That we ever do discover the precise causes of things, that any
induction whatever is absolutely without exception, is what we have
no right to assume. On the contrary, it is an easy corollary, from the
theorem just referred to, that every empirical rule has an exception.
But there are certain of our inductions which present an approach to
universality so extraordinary that, even if we are to suppose that they
are not strictly universal truths, we cannot possibly think that they
have been reached merely by accident. The most remarkable laws of
this kind are those of time and space. With reference to space, Bishop
Berkeley first showed, in a very conclusive manner, that it was not a
thing seen, but a thing inferred.9Berkeley chiefly insists on the impossi­
bility of directly seeing the third dimension of space, since the retina
of the eye is a surface. But, in point of fact, the retina is not even a
surface; it is a conglomeration of nerve-needles directed toward the
light and having only their extreme points sensitive, these points lying
at considerable distances from one another compared with their areas.
Now, of these points, certainly the excitation of no one singly can
produce the perception of a surface, and consequently not the aggre­
gate of all the sensations can amount to this. But certain relations
subsist between the excitations of different nerve-points, and these
constitute the premises upon which the hypothesis of space is founded,
and from which it is inferred. That space is not immediately perceived
is now universally admitted; and a mediate cognition is what is called
an inference, and is subject to the criticism of logic. But what are we
to say to the fact of every chicken as soon as it is hatched solving a
problem whose data are of a complexity sufficient to try the greatest
mathematical powers? It would be insane to deny that the tendency
to light upon the conception of space is inborn in the mind of the
chicken and of every animal. The same thing is equally true of time.
That time is not directly perceived is evident, since no lapse of time
is present, and we only perceive what is present. That, not having the
idea of time, we should ever be able to perceive the flow in our sensa­
tions without some particular aptitude for it, will probably also be
admitted. The idea of force— at least, in its rudiments— is another
conception so early arrived at, and found in animals so low in the scale

[page 181]

The Order of Nature I 181
of intelligence, that it must be supposed innate. But the innateness of
an idea admits of degree, for it consists in the tendency of that idea to
present itself to the mind. Some ideas, like that of space, do so present
themselves irresistibly at the very dawn of intelligence, and take pos­
session of the mind on small provocation, while of other conceptions
we are prepossessed, indeed, but not so strongly, down a scale which
is greatly extended. The tendency to personify every thing, and to
attribute human characters to it, may be said to be innate; but it is a
tendency which is very soon overcome by civilized man in regard to
the greater part of the objects about him. Take such a conception as
that of gravitation varying inversely as the square of the distance. It
is a very simple law. But to say that it is simple is merely to say that
it is one which the mind is particularly adapted to apprehend with
facility. Suppose the idea of a quantity multiplied into another had
been no more easy to the mind than that of a quantity raised to the
power indicated by itself—should we ever have discovered the law of
the solar system?
It seems incontestable, therefore, that the mind of man is strongly
adapted to the comprehension of the world; at least, so far as this goes,
that certain conceptions, highly important for such a comprehension,
naturally arise in his mind; and, without such a tendency, the mind
could never have had any development at all.
H ow are we to explain this adaptation? The great utility and in­
dispensableness of the conceptions of time, space, and force, even to
the lowest intelligence, are such as to suggest that they are the results
of natural selection. Without something like geometrical, kinetical,
and mechanical conceptions, no animal could seize his food or do
anything which might be necessary for the preservation of the spe­
cies. He might, it is true, be provided with an instinct which would
generally have the same effect; that is to say, he might have concep­
tions different from those of time, space, and force, but which coin­
cided with them in regard to the ordinary cases of the animal’s expe­
rience. But, as that animal would have an immense advantage in the
struggle for life whose mechanical conceptions did not break down
in a novel situation (such as development must bring about), there
would be a constant selection in favor of more and more correct
ideas of these matters. Thus would be attained the knowledge of that
fundamental law upon which all science rolls; namely, that forces
depend upon relations of time, space, and mass. When this idea was
once sufficiently clear, it would require no more than a comprehensi­
ble degree of genius to discover the exact nature of these relations.
Such an hypothesis naturally suggests itself, but it must be admitted
that it does not seem sufficient to account for the extraordinary accu­
racy with which these conceptions apply to the phenomena of N a­

[page 182]

182 I The Essential Peirce
ture, and it is probable that there is some secret here which remains
to be discovered.
V
Some important questions of logic depend upon whether we are to
consider the material universe as of limited extent and finite age, or
quite boundless in space and in time. In the former case, it is conceiv­
able that a general plan or design embracing the whole universe should
be discovered, and it would be proper to be on the alert for some traces
of such a unity. In the latter case, since the proportion of the world
of which we can have any experience is less than the smallest assigna­
ble fraction, it follows that we never could discover any pattern in the
universe except a repeating one; any design embracing the whole
would be beyond our powers to discern, and beyond the united powers
of all intellects during all time. N ow, what is absolutely incapable of
being known is, as we have seen in a former paper, not real at all. An
absolutely incognizable existence is a nonsensical phrase. If, therefore,
the universe is infinite, the attempt to find in it any design embracing
it as a whole is futile, and involves a false way of looking at the subject.
If the universe never had any beginning, and if in space world
stretches beyond world without limit, there is no whole of material
things, and consequently no general character to the universe, and no
need or possibility of any governor for it. But if there was a time before
which absolutely no matter existed, if there are certain absolute
bounds to the region of things outside of which there is a mere void,
then we naturally seek for an explanation of it, and, since we cannot
look for it among material things, the hypothesis of a great disembod­
ied animal, the creator and governor of the world, is natural enough.
The actual state of the evidence as to the limitation of the universe
is as follows: As to time, we find on our earth a constant progress of
development since the planet was a red-hot ball; the solar system seems
to have resulted from the condensation of a nebula, and the process
appears to be still going on. We sometimes see stars (presumably with
systems of worlds) destroyed and apparently resolved back into the
nebulous condition, but we have no evidence of any existence of the
world previous to the nebulous stage from which it seems to have been
evolved. All this rather favors the idea of a beginning than otherwise.
As for limits in space, we cannot be sure that we see anything outside
of the system of the milky-way. Minds of theological predilections
have therefore no need of distorting the facts to reconcile them with
their views.
But the only scientific presumption is, that the unknown parts of
space and time are like the known parts, occupied; that, as we see

[page 183]

The Order of Nature I 183
cycles of life and death in all development which we can trace out to
the end, the same holds good in regard to solar systems; that as enor­
mous distances lie between the different planets of our solar system,
relatively to their diameters, and as still more enormous distances lie
between our system relatively to its diameter and other systems, so it
may be supposed that other galactic clusters exist so remote from ours
as not to be recognized as such with certainty. I do not say that these
are strong inductions; I only say that they are the presumptions which,
in our ignorance of the facts, should be preferred to hypotheses which
involve conceptions of things and occurrences totally different in their
character from any of which we have had any experience, such as
disembodied spirits, the creation of matter, infringements of the laws
of mechanics, etc.
The universe ought to be presumed too vast to have any character.
When it is claimed that the arrangements of Nature are benevolent,
or just, or wise, or of any other peculiar kind, we ought to be preju­
diced against such opinions, as being the offspring of an ill-founded
notion of the finitude of the world. And examination has hitherto
shown that such beneficences, justice, etc., are of a most limited kind—
limited in degree and limited in range.
In like manner, if any one claims to have discovered a plan in the
structure of organized beings, or a scheme in their classification, or a
regular arrangement among natural objects, or a system of proportion­
ality in the human form, or an order of development, or a correspon­
dence between conjunctions of the planets and human events, or a
significance in numbers, or a key to dreams, the first thing we have to
ask is whether such relations are susceptible of explanation on me­
chanical principles, and if not they should be looked upon with disfa­
vor as having already a strong presumption against them; and exami­
nation has generally exploded all such theories.
There are minds to whom every prejudice, every presumption,
seems unfair. It is easy to say what minds these are. They are those who
never have known what it is to draw a well-grounded induction, and
who imagine that other people’s knowledge is as nebulous as their
own. That all science rolls upon presumption (not of a formal but of
a real kind) is no argument with them, because they cannot imagine
that there is anything solid in human knowledge. These are the people
who waste their time and money upon perpetual motions and other
such rubbish.
But there are better minds who take up mystical theories (by which
I mean all those which have no possibility of being mechanically
explained). These are persons who are strongly prejudiced in favor of
such theories. We all have natural tendencies to believe in such things;
our education often strengthens this tendency; and the result is, that

[page 184]

184 I The Essential Peirce
to many minds nothing seems so antecedently probable as a theory of
this kind. Such persons find evidence enough in favor of their views,
and in the absence of any recognized logic of induction they cannot
be driven from their belief.
But to the mind of a physicist there ought to be a strong presump­
tion against every mystical theory; and therefore it seems to me that
those scientific men who have sought to make out that science was not
hostile to theology have not been so clear-sighted as their opponents.
It would be extravagant to say that science can at present disprove
religion; but it does seem to me that the spirit of science is hostile to
any religion except such a one as that of M. Vacherot. Our appointed
teachers inform us that Buddhism is a miserable and atheistical faith,
shorn of the most glorious and needful attributes of a religion; that its
priests can be of no use to agriculture by praying for rain, nor to war
by commanding the sun to stand still. We also hear the remonstrances
of those who warn us that to shake the general belief in the living God
would be to shake the general morals, public and private. This, too,
must be admitted; such a revolution of thought could no more be
accomplished without waste and desolation than a plantation of trees
could be transferred to new ground, however wholesome in itself,
without all of them languishing for a time, and many of them dying.
N or is it, by-the-way, a thing to be presumed that a man would have
taken part in a movement having a possible atheistical issue without
having taken serious and adequate counsel in regard to that responsi­
bility. But, let the consequences of such a belief be as dire as they may,
one thing is certain: that the state of the facts, whatever it may be, will
surely get found out, and no human prudence can long arrest the
triumphal car of truth— no, not if the discovery were such as to drive
every individual of our race to suicide!
But it would be folly to suppose that any metaphysical theory in
regard to the mode of being of the perfect is to destroy that aspiration
toward the perfect which constitutes the essence of religion. It is true
that, if the priests of any particular form of religion succeed in making
it generally believed that religion cannot exist without the acceptance
of certain formulas, or if they succeed in so interweaving certain
dogmas with the popular religion that the people can see no essential
analogy between a religion which accepts these points of faith and one
which rejects them, the result may very well be to render those who
cannot believe these things irreligious. N or can we ever hope that any
body of priests should consider themselves more teachers of religion
in general than of the particular system of theology advocated by their
own party. But no man need be excluded from participation in the
common feelings, nor from so much of the public expression of them
as is open to all the laity, by the unphilosophical narrowness of those
who guard the mysteries of worship. Am I to be prevented from

[page 185]

The Order of Nature I 185
joining in that common joy at the revelation of enlightened principles
of religion, which we celebrate at Easter and Christmas, because I
think that certain scientific, logical, and metaphysical ideas which have
been mixed up with these principles are untenable? No; to do so would
be to estimate those errors as of more consequence than the truth— an
opinion which few would admit. People who do not believe what are
really the fundamental principles of Christianity are rare to find, and
all but these few ought to feel at home in the churches.

[page 186]

12
Deduction, Induction,
Hypothesis
P u j: Popular Science Monthly ij (August 18/8)14/0-82.
[Also published in W3.323-38 and in CP 2.619-44.] Peirce
concludes his six “Illustrations” with a discussion o f the three
kinds of reasoning (deduction, induction, hypothesis) based on
the general form o f syllogistic argument composed of rule,
case, and result. With examplesfrom the history ofscience, he
demonstrates that hypothesis is different from induction
proper in that “hypothesis supposes something of a different
kind from what we have directly observed, and frequently
something which it would be impossible fo r us to observe
directly, ” while induction only “infers the existence ofphe­
nomena such as we have observed in cases which are similar. ”
I
The chief business of the logician is to classify arguments; for all
testing clearly depends on classification. The classes of the logicians
are defined by certain typical forms called syllogisms. For example, the
syllogism called Barbara is as follows:
S is M; M is P:
Hence, S is P.
Or, to put words for letters—
Enoch and Elijah were men; all men die:
Hence, Enoch and Elijah must have died.
The “ is P ” of the logicians stands for any verb, active or neuter. It
is capable of strict proof (with which, however, I will not trouble the
reader) that all arguments whatever can be put into this form ;1 but
only under the condition that the is shall mean “is for the purposes of
the argument” or “ is represented by.” Thus, an induction will appear
in this form something like this:

[page 187]

Deduction, Induction, ¿z/m?Hypothesis I 187
These beans are two-thirds white;
But, the beans in this bag are (represented by) these beans;
The beans in the bag are two-thirds white.
But, because all inference may be reduced in some way to Barbara,
it does not follow that this is the most appropriate form in which to
represent every kind of inference. On the contrary, to show the dis­
tinctive characters of different sorts of inference, they must clearly be
exhibited in different forms peculiar to each. Barbara particularly typi­
fies deductive reasoning; and so long as the is is taken literally, no
inductive reasoning can be put into this form. Barbara is, in fact,
nothing but the application of a rule. The so-called major premise lays
down this rule; as, for example, A ll men are mortal. The other or minor
premise states a case under the rule; as, Enoch was a man. The conclu­
sion applies the rule to the case and states the result: Enoch is mortal.
All deduction is of this character; it is merely the application of general
rules to particular cases. Sometimes this is not very evident, as in the
following:
All quadrangles are figures,
But no triangle is a quadrangle;
Therefore, some figures are not triangles.
But here the reasoning is really this:
Rule.— Every quadrangle is other than a triangle.
Case.— Some figures are quadrangles.
Result.— Some figures are not triangles.
Inductive or synthetic reasoning, being something more than the
mere application of a general rule to a particular case, can never be
reduced to this form.
If, from a bag of beans of which we know that f are white, we take
one at random, it is a deductive inference that this bean is probably
white, the probability being ]. We have, in effect, the following syllo­
gism:
Rule.— The beans in this bag are j white.
Case.— This bean has been drawn in such a way that in the long
run the relative number of white beans so drawn would be
equal to the relative number in the bag.
Result.— This bean has been drawn in such a way that in the
long run it would turn out white j of the time.
If instead of drawing one bean we draw a handful at random and
conclude that about j of the handful are probably white, the reasoning

[page 188]

188 I The Essential Peirce
is of the same sort. If, however, not knowing what proportion of white
beans there are in the bag, we draw a handful at random and, finding
] of the beans in the handful white, conclude that about j of those in
the bag are white, we are rowing up the current of deductive sequence,
and are concluding a rule from the observation of a result in a certain
case. This is particularly clear when all the handful turn out one color.
The induction then is:
These beans were in this b ag .________________________
These beans are w h ite.____________________________
All the beans in the bag were w hite.___________
Which is but an inversion of the deductive syllogism.
Rule.— All the beans in the bag were w h ite.____
Case.— These beans were in the b ag._________________
Result.— These beans are w h ite.___________________
So that induction is the inference of the rule from the case and result.
But this is not the only way of inverting a deductive syllogism so
as to produce a synthetic inference. Suppose I enter a room and there
find a number of bags, containing different kinds of beans. On the table
there is a handful of white beans; and, after some searching, I find one
of the bags contains white beans only. I at once infer as a probability,
or as a fair guess, that this handful was taken out of that bag. This sort
of inference is called making an hypothesis. It is the inference of a case
from a rule and result. We have, then—
D e d u c t i o n
Rule.— All the beans from this bag are white.
Case.— These beans are from this bag.
Result.— These beans are white.
I n d u c t i o n
Case.— These beans are from this bag.
Result.— These beans are white.
Rule.— All the beans from this bag are white.
H y p o t h e s i s
Rule.— All the beans from this bag are white.
Result.— These beans are white.
Case.— These beans are from this bag.

[page 189]

We, accordingly, classify all inference as follows:
Inference.
Deductive or Analytic
Induction. Hypothesis.
Induction is where we generalize from a number of cases of which
something is true, and infer that the same thing is true of a whole class.
Or, where we find a certain thing to be true of a certain proportion
of cases and infer that it is true of the same proportion of the whole
class. Hypothesis is where we find some very curious circumstance,
which would be explained by the supposition that it was a case of a
certain general rule, and thereupon adopt that supposition. Or, where
we find that in certain respects two objects have a strong resemblance,
and infer that they resemble one another strongly in other respects.
I once landed at a seaport in a Turkish province;2 and, as I was
walking up to the house which I was to visit, I met a man upon
horseback, surrounded by four horsemen holding a canopy over his
head. As the governor of the province was the only personage I could
think of who would be so greatly honored, I inferred that this was he.
This was an hypothesis.
Fossils are found; say, remains like those of fishes, but far in the
interior of the country. To explain the phenomenon, we suppose the
sea once washed over this land. This is another hypothesis.
Numberless documents and monuments refer to a conqueror called
Napoleon Bonaparte. Though we have not seen the man, yet we can­
not explain what we have seen, namely, all these documents and monu­
ments, without supposing that he really existed. Hypothesis again.
As a general rule, hypothesis is a weak kind of argument. It often
inclines our judgment so slightly toward its conclusion that we cannot
say that we believe the latter to be true; we only surmise that it may
be so. But there is no difference except one of degree between such an
inference and that by which we are led to believe that we remember
the occurrences of yesterday from our feeling as if we did so.
II
Besides the way just pointed out of inverting a deductive syllogism
to produce an induction or hypothesis, there is another. If from the
truth of a certain premise the truth of a certain conclusion would
necessarily follow, then from the falsity of the conclusion the falsity
Deduction, Induction, Hypothesis I 189
Synthetic.

[page 190]

190 I The Essential Peirce
of the premise would follow. Thus, take the following syllogism in
Barbara:
Rule.— All men are mortal.
Case.— Enoch and Elijah were men.
Result.— Enoch and Elijah were mortal.
N ow, a person who denies this result may admit the rule, and, in
that case, he must deny the case. Thus:
Denial of Result.— Enoch and Elijah were not mortal.
Rule.— All men are mortal.
Denial o f Case.— Enoch and Elijah were not men.
This kind of syllogism is called Baroco, which is the typical mood
of the second figure. On the other hand, the person who denies the
result may admit the case, and in that case he must deny the rule. Thus:
Denial o f the Result.— Enoch and Elijah were not mortal.
Case.— Enoch and Elijah were men.
Denial o f the Rule.— Some men are not mortal.
This kind of syllogism is called Bocardo, which is the typical mood
of the third figure.
Baroco and Bocardo are, of course, deductive syllogisms; but of a
very peculiar kind. They are called by logicians indirect moods, be­
cause they need some transformation to appear as the application of
a rule to a particular case. But if, instead of setting out as we have
here done with a necessary deduction in Barbara, we take a probable
deduction of similar form, the indirect moods which we shall obtain
will be—
Corresponding to Baroco, an hypothesis;
and, Corresponding to Bocardo, an induction.
For example, let us begin with this probable deduction in Barbara:
Rule.— Most of the beans in this bag are white.
Case.— This handful of beans are from this bag.
. . Result.— Probably, most of this handful of beans are white.
N ow, deny the result, but accept the rule:
Denial o f Result.— Few beans of this handful are white.
Rule.— Most beans in this bag are white.
Denial of Case.— Probably, these beans were taken from
another bag.

[page 191]

Deduction, Induction, Hypothesis I 191
This is an hypothetical inference. Next, deny the result, but accept
the case:
Denial o f Result.— Few beans of this handful are white.
Case.— These beans came from this bag.
Denial o f Rule.— Probably, few beans in the bag are white.
This is an induction.
The relation thus exhibited between synthetic and deductive rea­
soning is not without its importance. When we adopt a certain hypoth­
esis, it is not alone because it will explain the observed facts, but also
because the contrary hypothesis would probably lead to results con­
trary to those observed. So, when we make an induction, it is drawn
not only because it explains the distribution of characters in the sam­
ple, but also because a different rule would probably have led to the
sample being other than it is.
But the advantage of this way of considering the subject might
easily be overrated. An induction is really the inference of a rule, and
to consider it as the denial of a rule is an artificial conception, only
admissible because, when statistical or proportional propositions are
considered as rules, the denial of a rule is itself a rule. So, an hypothesis
is really a subsumption of a case under a class and not the denial of it,
except for this, that to deny a subsumption under one class is to admit
a subsumption under another.
Bocardo may be considered as an induction, so timid as to lose its
amplificative character entirely. Enoch and Elijah are specimens of a
certain kind of men. All that kind of men are shown by these instances
to be immortal. But instead of boldly concluding that all very pious
men, or all men favorites of the Alm ighty, etc., are immortal, we
refrain from specifying the description of men, and rest in the merely
explicative inference that some men are immortal. So Baroco might be
considered as a very timid hypothesis. Enoch and Elijah are not mor­
tal. N ow , we might boldly suppose them to be gods or something of
that sort, but instead of that we limit ourselves to the inference that
they are of some nature different from that of man.
But, after all, there is an immense difference between the relation
of Baroco and Bocardo to Barbara and that of Induction and Hypothesis
to Deduction. Baroco and Bocardo are based upon the fact that if the
truth of a conclusion necessarily follows from the truth of a premise,
then the falsity of the premise follows from the falsity of the conclu­
sion. This is always true. It is different when the inference is only
probable. It by no means follows that, because the truth of a certain
premise would render the truth of a conclusion probable, therefore the
falsity of the conclusion renders the falsity of the premise probable. At
least, this is only true, as we have seen in a former paper, when the

[page 192]

192 I The Essential Peirce
word probable is used in one sense in the antecedent and in another
in the consequent.
Ill
A certain anonymous writing is upon a torn piece of paper. It is
suspected that the author is a certain person. His desk, to which only
he has had access, is searched, and in it is a found a piece of paper, the
torn edge of which exactly fits, in all its irregularities, that of the paper
in question. It is a fair hypothetic inference that the suspected man was
actually the author. The ground of this inference evidently is that two
torn pieces of paper are extremely unlikely to fit together by accident.
Therefore, of a great number of inferences of this sort, but a very small
proportion would be deceptive. The analogy of hypothesis with induc­
tion is so strong that some logicians have confounded them. Hypothe­
sis has been called an induction of characters. A number of characters
belonging to a certain class are found in a certain object; whence it is
inferred that all the characters of that class belong to the object in
question. This certainly involves the same principle as induction; yet
in a modified form. In the first place, characters are not susceptible of
simple enumeration like objects; in the next place, characters run in
categories. When we make an hypothesis like that about the piece of
paper, we only examine a single line of characters, or perhaps two or
three, and we take no specimen at all of others. If the hypothesis were
nothing but an induction, all that we should be justified in concluding,
in the example above, would be that the two pieces of paper which
matched in such irregularities as have been examined would be found
to match in other, say slighter, irregularities. The inference from the
shape of the paper to its ownership is precisely what distinguishes
hypothesis from induction, and makes it a bolder and more perilous
step.
The same warnings that have been given against imagining that
induction rests upon the uniformity of Nature might be repeated in
regard to hypothesis. Here, as there, such a theory not only utterly
fails to account for the validity of the inference, but it also gives rise
to methods of conducting it which are absolutely vicious. There are,
no doubt, certain uniformities in Nature, the knowledge of which will
fortify an hypothesis very much. For example, we suppose that iron,
titanium, and other metals exist in the sun, because we find in the solar
spectrum many lines coincident in position with those which these
metals would produce; and this hypothesis is greatly strengthened by
our knowledge of the remarkable distinctiveness of the particular line
of characters observed. But such a fortification of hypothesis is of a
deductive kind, and hypothesis may still be probable when such reen­
forcement is wanting.

[page 193]

Deduction, Induction, ¿zm/ Hypothesis I 193
There is no greater nor more frequent mistake in practical logic
than to suppose that things which resemble one another strongly in
some respects are any the more likely for that to be alike in others.
That this is absolutely false, admits of rigid demonstration; but, inas­
much as the reasoning is somewhat severe and complicated (requiring,
like all such reasoning, the use of A, B, C, etc., to set it forth), the reader
would probably find it distasteful, and I omit it. An example, however,
may illustrate the proposition: The comparative mythologists occupy
themselves with finding points of resemblance between solar phenom­
ena and the careers of the heroes of all sorts of traditional stories; and
upon the basis of such resemblances they infer that these heroes are
impersonations of the sun. If there be anything more in their reason­
ings, it has never been made clear to me. An ingenious logician, to
show how futile all that is, wrote a little book, in which he pretended
to prove, in the same manner, that Napoleon Bonaparte is only an
impersonation of the sun. It was really wonderful to see how many
points of resemblance he made out. The truth is, that any two things
resemble one another just as strongly as any two others, if recondite
resemblances are admitted. But, in order that the process of making
an hypothesis should lead to a probable result, the following rules
must be followed:
1. The hypothesis should be distinctly put as a question, before
making the observations which are to test its truth. In other words,
we must try to see what the result of predictions from the hypothesis
will be.
2. TVie respect im TCgtrri to 'wVntVi tYic i ^vcTTujVaTn:cfstt't mciSt
be taken at random. We must not take a particular kind of predictions
for which the hypothesis is known to be good.
3. The failures as well as the successes of the predictions must be
honestly noted. The whole proceeding must be fair and unbiased.
Some persons fancy that bias and counter-bias are favorable to the
extraction of truth—that hot and partisan debate is the way to investi­
gate. This is the theory of our atrocious legal procedure. But Logic
puts its heel upon this suggestion. It irrefragably demonstrates that
knowledge can only be furthered by the real desire for it, and that the
methods of obstinacy, of authority, and every mode of trying to reach
a foregone conclusion, are absolutely of no value. These things are
proved. The reader is at liberty to think so or not as long as the proof
is not set forth, or as long as he refrains from examining it. Just so, he
can preserve, if he likes, his freedom of opinion in regard to the
propositions of geometry; only, in that case, if he takes a fancy to read
Euclid, he will do well to skip whatever he finds with A, B, C, etc., for,
if he reads attentively that disagreeable matter, the freedom of his
opinion about geometry may unhappily be lost forever.
How many people there are who are incapable of putting to their

[page 194]

194 I The Essential Peirce
own consciences this question, “ Do I want to know how the fact
stands, or not?”
The rules which have thus far been laid down for induction and
hypothesis are such as are absolutely essential. There are many other
maxims expressing particular contrivances for making synthetic infer­
ences strong, which are extremely valuable and should not be ne­
glected. Such are, for example, Mr. M ill’s four methods.3Nevertheless,
in the total neglect of these, inductions and hypotheses may and some­
times do attain the greatest force.
IV
Classifications in all cases perfectly satisfactory hardly exist. Even
in regard to the great distinction between explicative and ampliative
inferences, examples could be found which seem to lie upon the border
between the two classes, and to partake in some respects of the charac­
ters of either. The same thing is true of the distinction between induc­
tion and hypothesis. In the main, it is broad and decided. By induction,
we conclude that facts, similar to observed facts, are true in cases not
examined. By hypothesis, we conclude the existence of a fact quite
different from anything observed, from which, according to known
laws, something observed would necessarily result. The former, is
reasoning from particulars to the general law; the latter, from effect
to cause. The former classifies, the latter explains. It is only in some
special cases that there can be more than a momentary doubt to which
category a given inference belongs. One exception is where we ob­
serve, not facts similar under similar circumstances, but facts different
under different circumstances— the difference of the former having,
however, a definite relation to the difference of the latter. Such infer­
ences, which are really inductions, sometimes present nevertheless
some indubitable resemblances to hypotheses.
Knowing that water expands by heat, we make a number of obser­
vations of the volume of a constant mass of water at different tempera­
tures. The scrutiny of a few of these suggests a form of algebraical
formula which will approximately express the relation of the volume
to the temperature. It may be, for instance, that v being the relative
volume, and t the temperature, the few observations examined indi­
cate a relation of the form—
v = I + at + bt2 + ct3.
Upon examining observations at other temperatures taken at random,
this idea is confirmed; and we draw the inductive conclusion that all
observations within the limits of temperature from which we have
drawn our observations could equally be so satisfied. Having once
ascertained that such a formula is possible, it is a mere affair of arith­

[page 195]

Deduction, Induction, Hypothesis I 195
metic to find the values of a, b, and c, which will make the formula
satisfy the observations best. This is what physicists call an empirical
formula, because it rests upon mere induction, and is not explained by
any hypothesis.
Such formulas, though very useful as means of describing in gen­
eral terms the results of observations, do not take any high rank among
scientific discoveries. The induction which they embody, that expan­
sion by heat (or whatever other phenomenon is referred to) takes place
in a perfectly gradual manner without sudden leaps or innumerable
fluctuations, although really important, attracts no attention, because
it is what we naturally anticipate. But the defects of such expressions
are very serious. In the first place, as long as the observations are
subject to error, as all observations are, the formula cannot be expected
to satisfy the observations exactly. But the discrepancies cannot be due
solely to the errors of the observations, but must be partly owing to
the error of the formula which has been deduced from erroneous
observations. Moreover, we have no right to suppose that the real facts,
if they could be had free from error, could be expressed by such a
formula at all. They might, perhaps, be expressed by a similar formula
with an infinite number of terms; but of what use would that be to us,
since it would require an infinite number of coefficients to be written
down? When one quantity varies with another, if the corresponding
values are exactly known, it is a mere matter of mathematical ingenu­
ity to find some way of expressing their relation in a simple manner.
If one quantity is of one kind— say, a specific gravity— and the other
of another kind— say, a temperature— we do not desire to find an
expression for their relation which is wholly free from numerical
constants, since if it were free from them when, say, specific gravity
as compared with water, and temperature as expressed by the centi­
grade thermometer, were in question, numbers would have to be intro­
duced when the scales of measurement were changed. We may, how­
ever, and do desire to find formulas expressing the relations of physical
phenomena which shall contain no more arbitrary numbers than
changes in the scales of measurement might require.
When a formula of this kind is discovered, it is no longer called an
empirical formula, but a law of Nature; and is sooner or later made the
basis of an hypothesis which is to explain it. These simple formulae are
not usually, if ever, exactly true, but they are none the less important
for that; and the great triumph of the hypothesis comes when it ex­
plains not only the formula, but also the deviations from the formula.
In the current language of the physicists, an hypothesis of this impor­
tance is called a theory, while the term hypothesis is restricted to
suggestions which have little evidence in their favor. There is some
justice in the contempt which clings to the word hypothesis. T o think
that we can strike out of our own minds a true preconception of how

[page 196]

196 I The Essential Peirce
Nature acts, is a vain fancy. As Lord Bacon well says: “ The subtlety
of Nature far exceeds the subtlety of sense and intellect: so that these
fine meditations, and speculations, and reasonings of men are a sort of
insanity, only there is no one at hand to remark it.” 4 The successful
theories are not pure guesses, but are guided by reasons.
The kinetical theory of gases is a good example of this. This theory
is intended to explain certain simple formulae, the chief of which is
called the law of Boyle.5 It is, that if air or any other gas be placed in
a cylinder with a piston, and if its volume be measured under the
pressure of the atmosphere, say fifteen pounds on the square inch, and
if then another fifteen pounds per square inch be placed on the piston,
the gas will be compressed to one-half its bulk, and in similar inverse
ratio for other pressures. The hypothesis which has been adopted to
account for this law is that the molecules of a gas are small, solid
particles at great distances from each other (relatively to their dimen­
sions), and moving with great velocity, without sensible attractions or
repulsions, until they happen to approach one another very closely.
Admit this, and it follows that when a gas is under pressure what
prevents it from collapsing is not the incompressibility of the separate
molecules, which are under no pressure at all, since they do not touch,
but the pounding of the molecules against the piston. The more the
piston falls, and the more the gas is compressed, the nearer together
the molecules will be; the greater number there will be at any moment
within a given distance of the piston, the shorter the distance which
any one will go before its course is changed by the influence of an­
other, the greater number of new courses of each in a given time, and
the oftener each, within a given distance of the piston, will strike it.
This explains Boyle’s law. The law is not exact; but the hypothesis
does not lead us to it exactly. For, in the first place, if the molecules
are large, they will strike each other oftener when their mean distances
are diminished, and will consequently strike the piston oftener, and
will produce more pressure upon it. On the other hand, if the mole­
cules have an attraction for one another, they will remain for a sensible
time within one another’s influence, and consequently they will not
strike the wall so often as they otherwise would, and the pressure will
be less increased by compression.
When the kinetical theory of gases was first proposed by Daniel
Bernoulli, in 1738,6it rested only on the law of Boyle, and was therefore
pure hypothesis. It was accordingly quite naturally and deservedly
neglected. But, at present, the theory presents quite another aspect;
for, not to speak of the considerable number of observed facts of
different kinds with which it has been brought into relation, it is
supported by the mechanical theory of heat. That bringing together
bodies which attract one another, or separating bodies which repel one
another, when sensible motion is not produced nor destroyed, is al­

[page 197]

Deduction, Induction, Hypothesis I 197
ways accompanied by the evolution of heat, is little more than an
induction. N ow , it has been shown by experiment that, when a gas is
allowed to expand without doing work, a very small amount of heat
disappears. This proves that the particles of the gas attract one another
slightly, and but very slightly. It follows that, when a gas is under
pressure, what prevents it from collapsing is not any repulsion be­
tween the particles, since there is none. Now, there are only two
modes of force known to us, force of position or attractions and repul­
sions, and force of motion. Since, therefore, it is not the force of
position which gives a gas its expansive force, it must be the force of
motion. In this point of view, the kinetical theory of gases appears as
a deduction from the mechanical theory of heat. It is to be observed,
however, that it supposes the same law of mechanics (that there are
only those two modes of force) which holds in regard to bodies such
as we can see and examine, to hold also for what are very different, the
molecules of bodies. Such a supposition has but a slender support from
induction. Our belief in it is greatly strengthened by its connection
with the law of Boyle, and it is, therefore, to be considered as an
hypothetical inference. Yet it must be admitted that the kinetical the­
ory of gases would deserve little credence if it had not been connected
with the principles of mechanics.
The great difference between induction and hypothesis is, that the
former infers the existence of phenomena such as we have observed in
cases which are similar, while hypothesis supposes something of a
different kind from what we have directly observed, and frequently
something which it would be impossible for us to observe directly.
Accordingly, when we stretch an induction quite beyond the limits of
our observation, the inference partakes of the nature of hypothesis. It
would be absurd to say that we have no inductive warrant for a gener­
alization extending a little beyond the limits of experience, and there
is no line to be drawn beyond which we cannot push our inference;
only it becomes weaker the further it is pushed. Yet, if an induction
be pushed very far, we cannot give it much credence unless we find
that such an extension explains some fact which we can and do ob­
serve. Here, then, we have a kind of mixture of induction and hypothe­
sis supporting one another; and of this kind are most of the theories
of physics.
V
That synthetic inferences may be divided into induction and hy­
pothesis in the manner here proposed,* admits of no question. The
*This division was first made in a course of lectures by the author before the Lowell
Institute, Boston, in 1866, and was printed in the Proceedings of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, for April 9, 1867.7

[page 198]

198 I The Essential Peirce
utility and value of the distinction are to be tested by their applica­
tions.
Induction is, plainly, a much stronger kind of inference than hy­
pothesis; and this is the first reason for distinguishing between them.
Hypotheses are sometimes regarded as provisional resorts, which in
the progress of science are to be replaced by inductions. But this is a
false view of the subject. Hypothetic reasoning infers very frequently
a fact not capable of direct observation. It is an hypothesis that Napo­
leon Bonaparte once existed. How is that hypothesis ever to be re­
placed by an induction? It may be said that from the premise that such
facts as we have observed are as they would be if Napoleon existed, we
are to infer by induction that all facts that are hereafter to be observed
will be of the same character. There is no doubt that every hypothetic
inference may be distorted into the appearance of an induction in this
way. But the essence of an induction is that it infers from one set of
facts another set of similar facts, whereas hypothesis infers from facts
of one kind to facts of another. Now, the facts which serve as grounds
for our belief in the historic reality of Napoleon are not by any means
necessarily the only kind of facts which are explained by his existence.
It may be that, at the time of his career, events were being recorded
in some way not now dreamed of, that some ingenious creature on a
neighboring planet was photographing the earth, and that these pic­
tures on a sufficiently large scale may some time come into our posses­
sion, or that some mirror upon a distant star will, when the light
reaches it, reflect the whole story back to earth. N ever mind how
improbable these suppositions are; everything which happens is infi­
nitely unprobable. I am not saying that these things are likely to occur,
but that some effect of Napoleon’s existence which now seems impossi­
ble is certain nevertheless to be brought about. The hypothesis asserts
that such facts, when they do occur, will be of a nature to confirm, and
not to refute, the existence of the man. We have, in the impossibility
of inductively inferring hypothetical conclusions, a second reason for
distinguishing between the two kinds of inference.
A third merit of the distinction is, that it is associated with an
important psychological or rather physiological difference in the mode
of apprehending facts. Induction infers a rule. Now, the belief of a rule
is a habit. That a habit is a rule active in us, is evident. That every belief
is of the nature of a habit, in so far as it is of a general character, has
been shown in the earlier papers of this series. Induction, therefore,
is the logical formula which expresses the physiological process of
formation of a habit. Hypothesis substitutes, for a complicated tangle
of predicates attached to one subject, a single conception. Now, there
is a peculiar sensation belonging to the act of thinking that each of
these predicates inheres in the subject. In hypothetic inference this
complicated feeling so produced is replaced by a single feeling of

[page 199]

Deduction, Induction, ¿/^¿/ Hypothesis I 199
greater intensity, that belonging to the act of thinking the hypothetic
conclusion. N ow, when our nervous system is excited in a complicated
way, there being a relation between the elements of the excitation, the
result is a single harmonious disturbance which I call an emotion.
Thus, the various sounds made by the instruments of an orchestra
strike upon the ear, and the result is a peculiar musical emotion, quite
distinct from the sounds themselves. This emotion is essentially the
same thing as an hypothetic inference, and every hypothetic inference
involves the formation of such an emotion. We may say, therefore, that
hypothesis produces the sensuous element of thought, and induction the
habitual element. As for deduction, which adds nothing to the prem­
ises, but only out of the various facts represented in the premises
selects one and brings the attention down to it, this may be considered
as the logical formula for paying attention, which is the volitional
element of thought, and corresponds to nervous discharge in the
sphere of physiology.
Another merit of the distinction between induction and hypothesis
is, that it leads to a very natural classification of the sciences and of the
minds which prosecute them. What must separate different kinds of
scientific men more than anything else are the differences of their
techniques. We cannot expect men who work with books chiefly to have
much in common with men whose lives are passed in laboratories. But,
after differences of this kind, the next most important are differences
in the modes of reasoning. O f the natural sciences, we have, first, the
classificatory sciences, which are purely inductive— systematic botany
and zoology, mineralogy, and chemistry. Then, we have the sciences
of theory, as above explained— astronomy, pure physics, etc. Then, we
have sciences of hypothesis— geology, biology, etc.
There are many other advantages of the distinction in question
which I shall leave the reader to find out by experience. If he will only
take the custom of considering whether a given inference belongs to
one or other of the two forms of synthetic inference given on page 188,
I can promise him that he will find his advantage in it, in various ways.

[page 200]

13
[from] On the Algebra ofLogic
(1880)
P 167: American Journal of Mathematics 3 (1880)^5-57.
[Also published in W41163-73 (with two earlier versions of
part of thefirst chapter, M SS 350 and 354 [pp. 38-467, and
a fragmentary continuation of the whole article, which ends
with “to be continued, ” in MS 371 [pp. 210-11]) and in CP
3.154-81. (Three further attempts at a continuation are in
W5:107-15.)] This article holds a place ofsome importance in
the history o f formal logic and mathematics. In what is
published herefrom thefirst chapter; Peirce discusses the rela­
tionship between thinking and cerebration (or logic andphys­
iology), formulates the theory fo r his logic o f the copula em­
ploying statements o f inclusion rather than Boolean
equations, and places some of his important epistemological
conceptions into the context offormal logic. (Item 16 repre­
sents the subsequent stage of his development of this part
of the algebra of logic and should be read in conjuction with
item 13.)
C h a p t e r I.— S y l l o g i s t i c .
§1. Derivation of Logic.
In order to gain a clear understanding of the origin of the various
signs used in logical algebra and the reasons of the fundamental for­
mulas, we ought to begin by considering how logic itself arises.
Thinking, as cerebration, is no doubt subject to the general laws of
nervous action.
When a group of nerves are stimulated, the ganglions with which
the group is most intimately connected on the whole are thrown into
an active state, which in turn usually occasions movements of the
body. The stimulation continuing, the irritation spreads from gan­
glion to ganglion (usually increasing meantime). Soon, too, the parts
first excited begin to show fatigue; and thus for a double reason the

[page 201]

[from] On the Algebra o f Logic (1880) I 201
bodily activity is of a changing kind. When the stimulus is withdrawn,
the excitement quickly subsides.
It results from these facts that when a nerve is affected, the reflex
action, if it is not at first of the sort to remove the irritation, w ill change
its character again and again until the irritation is removed; and then
the action will cease.
N ow , all vital processes tend to become easier on repetition.1 Along
whatever path a nervous discharge has once taken place, in that path
a new discharge is the more likely to take place.
Accordingly, when an irritation of the nerves is repeated, all the
various actions which have taken place on previous similar occasions
are the more likely to take place now, and those are most likely to take
place which have most frequently taken place on those previous occa­
sions. N ow, the various actions which did not remove the irritation
may have previously sometimes been performed and sometimes not;
but the action which removes the irritation must have always been
performed, because the action must have every time continued until
it was performed. Hence, a strong habit of responding to the given
irritation in this particular way must quickly be established.
A habit so acquired may be transmitted by inheritance.
One of the most important of our habits is that one by virtue of
which certain classes of stimuli throw us at first, at least, into a purely
cerebral activity.
V ery often it is not an outward sensation but only a fancy which
starts the train of thought. In other words, the irritation instead of
being peripheral is visceral. In such a case the activity has for the most
part the same character; an inward action removes the inward excita­
tion. A fancied conjuncture leads us to fancy an appropriate line of
action. It is found that such events, though no external action takes
place, strongly contribute to the formation of habits of really acting
in the fancied way when the fancied occasion really arises.
A cerebral habit of the highest kind, which will determine what we
do in fancy as well as what we do in action, is called a belief The
representation to ourselves that we have a specified habit of this kind
is called ajudgment. A belief-habit in its development begins by being
vague, special, and meagre; it becomes more precise, general, and full,
without limit. The process of this development, so far as it takes place
in the imagination, is called thought. A judgment is formed; and under
the influence of a belief-habit this gives rise to a new judgment, indicat­
ing an addition to belief. Such a process is called an inference; the
antecedent judgment is called the premise; the consequent judgment,
the conclusion; the habit of thought, which determined the passage from
the one to the other (when formulated as a proposition), the leading
principle.

[page 202]

202 I The Essential Peirce
At the same time that this process of inference, or the spontaneous
development of belief, is continually going on within us, fresh periph­
eral excitations are also continually creating new belief-habits. Thus,
belief is partly determined by old beliefs and partly by new experi­
ence. Is there any law about the mode of the peripheral excitations?
The logician maintains that there is, namely, that they are all adapted
to an end, that of carrying belief, in the long run, toward certain
predestinate conclusions which are the same for all men. This is the
faith of the logician. This is the matter of fact, upon which all maxims
of reasoning repose. In virtue of this fact, what is to be believed at last
is independent of what has been believed hitherto, and therefore has
the character of reality. Hence, if a given habit, considered as determin­
ing an inference, is of such a sort as to tend toward the final result, it
is correct; otherwise not. Thus, inferences become divisible into the
valid and the invalid; and thus logic takes its reason of existence.
§2. Syllogism and Dialogism.
The general type of inference is
P
. C ,
where .'. is the sign of illation.
The passage from the premise (or set of premises) P to the conclu­
sion C takes place according to a habit or rule active within us. All the
inferences which that habit would determine when once the proper
premises were admitted, form a class. The habit is logically good
provided it would never (or in the case of a probable inference, seldom)
lead from a true premise to a false conclusion; otherwise it is logically
bad. That is, every possible case of the operation of a good habit would
either be one in which the premise was false or one in which the
conclusion would be true; whereas, if a habit of inference is bad, there
is a possible case in which the premise would be true, while the conclu­
sion was false. When we speak of a possible case, we conceive that from
the general description of cases we have struck out all those kinds
which we know how to describe in general terms but which we know
never will occur; those that then remain, embracing all whose non­
occurrence we are not certain of, together with all those whose non­
occurrence we cannot explain on any general principle, are called
possible.
A habit of inference may be formulated in a proposition which
shall state that every proposition c, related in a given general way to
any true proposition py is true. Such a proposition is called the leading
principle of the class of inferences whose validity it implies. When the
inference is first drawn, the leading principle is not present to the
mind, but the habit it formulates is active in such a way that, upon

[page 203]

[from] On the Algebra o f Logic (1880) I 203
contemplating the believed premise, by a sort of perception the con­
clusion is judged to be true.* Afterwards, when the inference is sub­
jected to logical criticism, we make a new inference, of which one
premise is that leading principle of the former inference, according to
which propositions related to one another in a certain way are fit to
be premise and conclusion of a valid inference, while another premise
is a fact of observation, namely, that the given relation does subsist
between the premise and conclusion of the inference under criticism;
whence it is concluded that the inference was valid.
Logic supposes inferences not only to be drawn, but also to be
subjected to criticism; and therefore we not only require the form
P.'.C to express an argument, but also a form, P. —
< C ., to express the
truth of its leading principle. Here P f. denotes any one of the class of
premises, and the corresponding conclusion. The symbol -< is the
copula, and signifies prim arily that every state of things in which a
proposition of the class P. is true is a state of things in which the
corresponding propositions of the class C- are true. But logic also
supposes some inferences to be invalid, and must have a form for
denying the leading premise. This we shall write P^ ^ C., a dash over
any symbol signifying in our notation the negative o f that symbol t
Thus, the form P ? -< C . implies
either, 1, that it is impossible that a premise of the class P^. should be
true,
or, 2, that every state of things in which P . is true is a state of things
in which the corresponding C. is true.
The form P f. ^ C ? implies
both, 1, that a premise of the class P . is possible,
and, 2, that among the possible cases of the truth of a P^ there is one
in which the corresponding C ? is not true.
This acceptation of the copula differs from that of other systems of
syllogistic in a manner which will be explained below in treating of
the negative.
In the form of inference P.'.C the leading principle is not ex­
pressed; and the inference might be justified on several separate princi­
ples. One of these, however, P f. -< C^, is the formulation of the habit
which, in point of fact, has governed the inferences. This principle
contains all that is necessary besides the premise P to justify the con­
clusion. (It w ill generally assert more than is necessary.) We may,
therefore, construct a new argument which shall have for its premises
the two propositions P and P f. —
< C ? taken together, and for its conclu­
*Though the leading principle itself is not present to the mind, we are generally
conscious of inferring on some general principle.
tThis dash was used by Boole [Laws of Thought, p. 119], but not over other than
class-signs.

[page 204]

204 I The Essential Peirce
sion, C. This argument, no doubt, has, like every other, its leading
principle, because the inference is governed by some habit; but yet the
substance of the leading principle must already be contained implicitly
in the premises, because the proposition P . -< C • contains by hypothe­
sis all that is requisite to justify the inference of C from P. Such a
leading principle, which contains no fact not implied or observable in
the premises, is termed a logical principle, and the argument it governs
is termed a complete, in contradistinction to an incomplete, argument, or
enthymeme.
The above will be made clear by an example. Let us begin with the
enthymeme,
Enoch was a man,
Enoch died.
The leading principle of this is, “ All men die.” Stating it, we get the
complete argument,
All men die,
Enoch was a man;
Enoch was to die.
The leading principle of this is nota notae est nota rei ipsius.2 Stating this
as a premise, we have the argument,
Nota notae est nota rei ipsius,
M ortality is a mark of humanity, which is a mark of Enoch;
M ortality is a mark of Enoch.
But this very same principle of the nota notae is again active in the
drawing of this last inference, so that the last state of the argument is
no more complete than the last but one.
There is another way of rendering an argument complete, namely,
instead of adding the leading principle P . —
< conjunctively to the
premise P, to form a new argument, we might add its denial disjunc­
tively to the conclusion; thus,
P
Either C or P ^ C .
i i
A logical principle is said to be an empty or merely formal proposi­
tion, because it can add nothing to the premises of the argument it
governs, although it is relevant; so that it implies no fact except such
as is presupposed in all discourse, as we have seen in §i that certain
facts are implied. We may here distinguish between logical and extra-
logical validity; the former being that of a complete, the latter that of an
incomplete argument. The term logical leading principle we may take to
mean the principle which must be supposed true in order to sustain
the logical validity of any argument. Such a principle states that

[page 205]

[from] On the Algebra of Logic (1880) I 205
among all the states of things which can be supposed without conflict
with logical principles, those in which the premise of the argument
would be true would also be cases of the truth of the conclusion.
N othing more than this would be relevant to the logical leading princi­
ple, which is, therefore, perfectly determinate and not vague, as we
have seen an extralogical leading principle to be.
A complete argument, with only one premise, is called an immediate
inference. Example: All crows are black birds; therefore, all crows are
birds. If from the premise of such an argument everything redundant
is omitted, the state of things expressed in the premise is the same as
the state of things expressed in the conclusion, and only the form of
expression is changed. Now, the logician does not undertake to enu­
merate all the ways of expressing facts: he supposes the facts to be
already expressed in certain standard or canonical forms. But the
equivalence between different ones of his own standard forms is of the
highest importance to him, and thus certain immediate inferences play
the great part in formal logic. Some of these will not be reciprocal
inferences or logical equations, but the most important of them will
have that character.
If one fact has such a relation to a different one that, if the former
be true, the latter is necessarily or probably true, this relation consti­
tutes a determinate fact; and therefore, since the leading principle of
a complete argument involves no matter of fact (beyond those em­
ployed in all discourse), it follows that every complete and material (in
opposition to a merely formal) argument must have at least two prem­
ises.
From the doctrine of the leading principle it appears that if we have
a valid and complete argument from more than one premise, we may
suppress all premises but one and still have a valid but incomplete
argument. This argument is justified by the suppressed premises;
hence, from these premises alone we may infer that the conclusion
would follow from the remaining premises. In this way, then, the
original argument
P Q Jt S T
.. C
is broken up into two, namely, i st,

[page 206]

206 I The Essential Peirce
By repeating this process, any argument may be broken up into argu­
ments of two premises each. A complete argument having two prem­
ises is called a syllogism. *
An argument may also be broken up in a different way by substitut­
ing for the second constituent above, the form
T -< C
Either C or not T.
In this way, any argument may be resolved into arguments, each
of which has one premise and two alternative conclusions. Such an
argument, when complete, may be called a dialogism.
§3. Forms o f Propositions.
In place of the two expressions A -< B and B -< A taken together
we may write A = B;t in place of the two expressions A -< B and
B =< A taken together we may write A < B or B > A; and in place of
the two expressions A :=< B and B ^ A taken together we may
write A MB.
De Morgan, in the remarkable memoir with which he opened his
*The general doctrine of this section is contained in my paper, “ On the Classifica­
tion of Arguments,” 1867. [^¥2:23-48.]
tThere is a difference of opinion among logicians as to whether -< or = is the
simpler relation. But in my paper on the “ Logic of Relatives,” 3 I have strictly demon­
strated that the preference must be given to -< in this respect. The term simpler has an
exact meaning in logic; it means that whose logical depth is smaller; that is, if one
conception implies another, but not the reverse, then the latter is said to be the simpler.
N ow to say that A = B implies that A ^ B, but not conversely. Ergo, etc. It is to no
purpose to reply that A —
< B implies A = (A that is B); it would be equally relevant to
say that A -< B implies A = A. Consider an analogous case. Logical sequence is a simpler
conception than causal sequence, because every causal sequence is a logical sequence but
not every logical sequence is a causal sequence; and it is no reply to this to say that a
logical sequence between two facts implies a causal sequence between some two facts
whether the same or different. The idea that = is a very simple relation is probably due
to the fact that the discovery of such a relation teaches us that instead of two objects
we have only one, so that it simplifies our conception of the universe. On this account
the existence of such a relation is an important fact to learn; in fact, it has the sum of
the importances of the two facts of which it is compounded. It frequently happens that
it is more convenient to treat the propositions A -< B and B —
< A together in their form
A = B; but it also frequently happens that it is more convenient to treat them separately.
Even in geometry we can see that to say that two figures A and B are equal is to say
that when they are properly put together A will cover B and B will cover A; and it is
generally necessary to examine these facts separately. So, in comparing the numbers of
two lots of objects, we set them over against one another, each to each, and observe that
for every one of the lot A there is one of the lot B, and for every one of the lot B there
is one of the lot A.
In logic, our great object is to analyze all the operations of reason and reduce them
to their ultimate elements; and to make a calculus of reasoning is a subsidiary object.
Accordingly, it is more philosophical to use the copula -<, apart from all considerations
of convenience. Besides, this copula is intimately related to our natural logical and
metaphysical ideas; and it is one of the chief purposes of logic to show what validity
those ideas have. Moreover, it will be seen further on that the more analytical copula
does in point of fact give rise to the easiest method of solving problems of logic.

[page 207]

[from] On the Algebra of Logic (1880) I 207
discussion of the syllogism (1846, p. 380), has pointed out that we often
carry on reasoning under an implied restriction as to what we shall
consider as possible, which restriction, applying to the whole of what
is said, need not be expressed.4 The total of all that we consider pos­
sible is called the universe of discourse, and may be very limited.
One mode of limiting our universe is by considering only what actu­
ally occurs, so that everything which does not occur is regarded as
impossible.
The forms A -< B, or A implies B, and A =< B, or A does not imply
B, embrace both hypothetical and categorical propositions. Thus, to
say that all men are mortal is the same as to say that if any man
possesses any character whatever then a mortal possesses that charac­
ter. T o say, ‘if A, then B ’ is obviously the same as to say that from A,
B follows, logically or extralogically. By thus identifying the relation
expressed by the copula with that of illation, we identify the proposi­
tion with the inference, and the term with the proposition. This identi­
fication, by means of which all that is found true of term, proposition,
or inference is at once known to be true of all three, is a most important
engine of reasoning, which we have gained by beginning with a con­
sideration of the genesis of logic.*
O f the two forms A B and A B, no doubt the former is the
more primitive, in the sense that it is involved in the idea of reasoning,
while the latter is only required in the criticism of reasoning. The two
kinds of proposition are essentially different, and every attempt to
reduce the latter to a special case of the former must fail. Boole at­
tempts to express ‘some men are not mortal’, in the form ‘whatever
men have a certain unknown character v are not mortal’.5 But the
propositions are not identical, for the latter does not imply that some
men have that character v; and, accordingly, from Boole’s proposition
we may legitimately infer that ‘whatever mortals have the unknown
character v are not men’; yet we cannot reason from ‘some men are
not mortal’ to ‘some mortals are not men’.t On the other hand, we can
rise to a more general form under which A —
< B and A ^ B are both
included. For this purpose we write A ^ B in the form A -< B, where
A is some-A and B is not-B. This more general form is equivocal in so
far as it is left undetermined whether the proposition would be true
if the subject were impossible. When the subject is general this is the
case, but when the subject is particular (i.e., is subject to the modifica­
*In consequence of the identification in question, in S -< P, I speak of S indifferently
as subject, antecedent, or premise, and of P as predicate, consequent, or conclusion.
+Equally unsuccessful is Mr. Jevons’s attempt to overcome the difficulty by omitting
particular propositions, “ because we can always substitute for it [some] more definite
expressions if we like.” The same reason might be alleged for neglecting the consid­
eration of not. But in fact the form A ^ B is required to enable us to simply deny
A -< B.6

[page 208]

208 I The Essential Peirce
tion some) it is not. The general form supposes merely inclusion of the
subject under the predicate. The short curved mark over the letter in
the subject shows that some part of the term denoted by that letter is
the subject, and that that is asserted to be in possible existence.
The modification of the subject by the curved mark and of the
predicate by the straight mark gives the old set of propositional forms,
viz.:
A. a -< b Every a is b. Universal affirmative.
E. a -< b No a is b. Universal negative.
I. a -< b Some a is b. Particular affirmative.
O. a -< b Some a is not b. Particular negative.
There is, however, a difference between the senses in which these
propositions are here taken and those which are traditional; namely,
it is usually understood that affirmative propositions imply the exis­
tence of their subjects, while negative ones do not. Accordingly, it is
said that there is an immediate inference from A to I and from E to
O. But in the sense assumed in this paper, universal propositions do
not, while particular propositions do, imply the existence of their
subjects. The following figure illustrates the precise sense here as­
signed to the four forms A, E, I, O.
A
In the quadrant marked i there are lines which are all vertical; in
the quadrant marked 2 some lines are vertical and some not; in quad­
rant 3 there are lines none of which are vertical; and in quadrant 4
there are no lines. Now, taking line as subject and vertical as predicate,
A is true of quadrants 1 and 4 and false of 2 and 3.
E is true of quadrants 3 and 4 and false of 1 and 2.
I is true of quadrants 1 and 2 and false of 3 and 4.
O is true of quadrants 2 and 3 and false of 1 and 4.
Hence, A and O precisely deny each other, and so do E and I. But any
other pair of propositions may be either both true or both false or one
true while the other is false.

[page 209]

[from] On the Algebra o f Logic (1880) I 209
De Morgan (“ On the Syllogism ,” No. I, 1846, p. 381) has enlarged
the system of propositional forms by applying the sign of negation
which first appears in A ^ B to the subject and predicate. He thus gets
A —
< B. Every A is B. A is species of B.
B. Some A is not B. A is exient of B.
A -< B. N o A is B. A is external of B.
A ^ B . Some A is B. A is partient of B.
A -< B. Everything is either A or B. A is complement of B.
A 11^ B. There is something besides A and B. A is coinadequate of B.
A —
< B. A includes all B. A is genus of B.
B. A does not include all B. A is deficient of B.
De M organ’s table of the relations of these propositions must be modi­
fied to conform to the meanings here attached to -< and to =
=
<.
We might confine ourselves to the two propositional forms S —
<
P and S P. If we once go beyond this and adopt the form S —
< P, we
must, for the sake of completeness, adopt the whole of De M organ’s
system. But this system, as we shall see in the next section, is itself
incomplete, and requires to complete it the admission of particularity
in the predicate. This has already been attempted by Hamilton, with
an incompetence which ought to be extraordinary.7 I shall allude to
this matter further on, but I shall not attempt to say how many forms
of propositions there would be in the completed system.*8
*In this connection see De Morgan, “ On the Syllogism, No. V ,” 1863.

[page 210]

14
Introductory Lecture on
the Study ofLogic
P225: Johns Hopkins University Circulars 2:19 (Novem­
ber 1882)111-12. [Also published in W4:378-82, in CP 7.39-76,
and in HPPLS 940-44.] In this “Outline of the Remarks
made by Prof. C. S. Peirce, at the beginning of his Course,
September; 1882, ” Peirce reflects on the achievements of Dar­
win (who had died in April) and attributes them mainly to
Darwin's method. In describing the lecture to his eldest
brother, James Mills, zw # 4 October 1882 letter, Peirce said:
“I spoke of our time as the age of method and said that the
highest honors could no longer be paid to the mere scientific
specialist but to those who adapted the methods of one science
to the uses o f another. That a liberal education sofa r as it
regards the intellect means logic, considered as the method of
methods,—the via ad principia methodorum. That the stu­
dent ought tofeelfrom the beginning to the end of his course,
that in whatever lecture room he is, it is logic he is studying. ”
Peirce is now defining his task as applying the methods of
logic, especially induction and hypothesis, to philosophy and
science. 1
It might be supposed that logic taught that much was to be accom­
plished by mere rumination, though every one knows that experiment,
observation, comparison, active scrutiny of facts, is what is wanted,
and that mere thinking will accomplish nothing even in mathematics.
Logic had certainly been defined as the “ art of thinking,” and as the
“science of the normative laws of thought.” 2 But those are not true
definitions. “Dyalectica, ” says the logical text-book of the middle ages,
“est ars artium et scientia scientiarum, ad omnium aliarum scientiarum me­
thodorumprincipia viam habens, ” 3 and although the logic of our day must
naturally be utterly different from that of the Plantagenet epoch, yet
this general conception that it is the art o f devising methods of research,—
the method ofmethods, — is the true and worthy idea of the science. Logic
will not undertake to inform you what kind of experiments you ought

[page 211]

Introductory Lecture on the Study of Logic I 211
to make in order best to determine the acceleration of gravity, or the
value of the Ohm;4 but it will tell you how to proceed to form a plan
of experimentation.
It is impossible to maintain that the superiority of the science of
the moderns over that of the ancients is due to anything but a better
logic. N o one can think that the Greeks were inferior to any modern
people whatever in natural aptitude for science. We may grant that
their opportunities for research were less; and it may be said that
ancient astronomy could make no progress beyond the Ptolemaic sys­
tem until sufficient time had elapsed to prove the insufficiency of
Ptolemy’s tables. The ancients could have no dynamics so long as no
important dynamical problem had presented itself; they could have no
theory of heat without the steam-engine, etc. O f course, these causes
had their influence, and of course they were not the main reason of the
defects of the ancient civilization. Ten years’ astronomical observa­
tions with instruments such as the ancients could have constructed
would have sufficed to overthrow the old astronomy. The great me­
chanical discoveries of Galileo were made with no apparatus to speak
of. If, in any direction whatever, the ancients had once commenced
research by right methods, opportunities for new advances would have
been brought along in the train of those that went before. But read the
logical treatise of Philodemus;5 see how he strenuously argues that
inductive reasoning is not utterly without value, and you see where the
fault lay. When such an elementary point as that needed serious ar­
gumentation it is clear that the conception of scientific method was
almost entirely wanting.
Modern methods have created modern science; and this century,
and especially the last twenty-five years, have done more to create new
methods than any former equal period. We live in the very age of
methods. Even mathematics and astronomy have put on new faces.
Chemistry and physics are on completely new tracks. Linguistic, his­
tory, mythology, sociology, biology, are all getting studied in new
ways. Jurisprudence and law have begun to feel the impulse, and must
in the future be more and more rapidly influenced by it.
This is the age of methods; and the university which is to be the
exponent of the living condition of the human mind, must be the
university of methods.
N ow I grant you that to say that this is the age of the development
of new methods of research is so far from saying that it is the age of
the theory of methods, that it is almost to say the reverse. Unfortu­
nately practice generally precedes theory, and it is the usual fate of
mankind to get things done in some boggling way first, and find out
afterward how they could have been done much more easily and per­
fectly. And it must be confessed that we students of the science of
modern methods are as yet but a voice crying in the wilderness, and

[page 212]

212 I The Essential Peirce
saying prepare ye the way for this lord of the sciences which is to
come.6
Yet even now we can do a little more than that. The theory of any
act in no wise aids the doing of it, so long as what is to be done is of
a narrow description, so that it can be governed by the unconscious
part of our organism. For such purposes, rules of thumb or no rules
at all are the best. You cannot play billiards by analytical mechanics
nor keep shop by political economy. But when new paths have to be
struck out, a spinal cord is not enough; a brain is needed, and that brain
an organ of mind, and that mind perfected by a liberal education. And
a liberal education— so far as its relation to the understanding goes—
means logic. That is indispensible to it, and no other one thing is.
I do not need to be told that science consists of specialties. I know
all that, for I belong to the guild of science, have learned one of its
trades and am saturated with its current notions. But in my judgment
there are scientific men, all whose training has only served to belittle
them, and I do not see that a mere scientific specialist stands intellectu­
ally much higher than an artisan. I am quite sure that a young man
who spends his time exclusively in the laboratory of physics or chemis­
try or biology, is in danger of profiting but little more from his work
than if he were an apprentice in a machine shop.
The scientific specialists— pendulum swingers and the like— are
doing a great and useful work; each one very little, but altogether
something vast. But the higher places in science in the coming years
are for those who succeed in adapting the methods of one science to
the investigation of another. That is what the greatest progress of the
passing generation has consisted in. Darwin adapted to biology the
methods of Malthus and the economists;7 M axwell adapted to the
theory of gases the methods of the doctrine of chances, and to electric­
ity the methods of hydrodynamics. Wundt adapts to psychology the
methods of physiology; Galton adapts to the same study the methods
of the theory of errors; Morgan adapted to history a method from
biology; Cournot adapted to political economy the calculus of varia­
tions. The philologists8 have adapted to their science the methods of
the decipherers of dispatches. The astronomers have learned the meth­
ods of chemistry; radiant heat is investigated with an ear trumpet; the
mental temperament is read off on a vernier.9
N ow although a man needs not the theory of a method in order to
apply it as it has been applied already, yet in order to adapt to his own
science the method of another with which he is less familiar, and to
properly modify it so as to suit it to its new use, an acquaintance with
the principles upon which it depends will be of the greatest benefit.
For that sort of work a man needs to be more than a mere specialist;
he needs such a general training of his mind, and such knowledge as

[page 213]

Introductory Lecture on the Study of Logic I 213
shall show him how to make his powers most effective in a new direc­
tion. That knowledge is logic.
In short, if my view is the true one, a young man wants a physical
education and an aesthetic education, an education in the ways of the
world and a moral education, and with all these logic has nothing in
particular to do; but so far as he wants an intellectual education, it is
precisely logic that he wants; and whether he be in one lecture-room
or another, his ultimate purpose is to improve his logical power and
his knowledge of methods. To this great end a young man’s attention
ought to be directed when he first comes to the university; he ought
to keep it steadily in view during the whole period of his studies; and
finally, he will do well to review his whole work in the light which an
education in logic throws upon it.
I should be the very first to insist that logic can never be learned
from logic-books or logic lectures. The material of positive science
must form its basis and its vehicle. Only relatively little could be done
by the lecturer on method even were he master of the whole circle of
the sciences. Nevertheless, I do think that I can impart to you some­
thing of real utility, and that the theory of method will shed much light
on all your other studies.
The impression is rife that success in logic requires a mathematical
head. But this is not true. The habit of looking at questions in a
mathematical way is, I must say, of great advantage, and thus a turn
for mathematics is of more or less service in any science, physical or
moral. But no brilliant talent for mathematics is at all necessary for the
study of logic.
The course which I am to give this year begins with some necessary
preliminaries upon the theory of cognition.10 For it is requisite to form
a clear idea at the outset of what knowledge consists of, and to consider
a little what are the operations of the mind by which it is produced.
But I abridge this part of the course as much as possible, partly because
it will be treated by other instructors, and partly because I desire to
push on to my main subject, the method of science.
I next take up syllogism, the lowest and most rudimentary of all
forms of reasoning, but very fundamental because it is rudimentary.
I treat this after the general style of De Morgan, with references to the
old traditional doctrine. N ext comes the logical algebra of Boole, a
subject in itself extremely easy, but very useful both from a theoretical
point of view and also as giving a method of solving certain rather
frequently occurring and puzzling problems. From this subject, I am
naturally led to the consideration of relative terms. The logic of rela­
tives, so far as it has been investigated, is clear and easy, and at the same
time it furnishes the key to many of the difficulties of logic, and has
already served as the instrument of some discoveries in mathematics.11

[page 214]

214 I The Essential Peirce
An easy application of this branch of logic is to the doctrine of breadth
and depth or the relations between objects and characters. I next
introduce the conception of number, and after showing how to treat
certain statistical problems, I take up the doctrine of chances. A very
simple and elegant mathematical method of treating equations of finite
differences puts the student into possession of a powerful instrument
for the solution of all problems of probability that do not import
difficulties extraneous to the theory of probability itself.
We thus arrive at the study of that kind of probable inference that
is really distinctive; that is to say, Induction in its broadest sense—
Scientific Reasoning.12 The general theory of the subject is carefully
worked out with the aid of real examples in great variety, and rules
for the performance of the operation are given. These rules have not
been picked up by hazard, nor are they merely such as experience
recommends; they are deduced methodically from the general theory.
Finally, it is desirable to illustrate a long concatenation of scientific
inferences. For this purpose we take up Kepler’s great work, De Moti-
bus Stellae Martis, the greatest piece of inductive reasoning ever pro­
duced.13 O wing to the admirable and exceptional manner in which the
work is written, it is possible to follow Kepler’s whole course of inves­
tigation from beginning to end, and to show the application of all the
maxims of induction already laid down.
In order to illustrate the method of reasoning about a subject of a
more metaphysical kind, I shall then take up the scientific theories of
the constitution of matter.
Last of all, I shall give a few lectures to show what are the lessons
that a study of scientific procedure teaches with reference to philo­
sophical questions, such as the conception of causation and the like.

[page 215]

15
Design and Chance
MS 875. [First published, as M S 494, in ¡¥4:544-54.] Writ­
ten in December 1883/January 1884, thisfragmentary manu­
script was usedfo r a lecture entitled “Design and Chance, ”
before the Johns Hopkins University Metaphysical
Club on 17January 1884. Despite its brevity and incomplete­
ness, it represents a major advance in Peirce 9
sprogress toward
his guess at the riddle of the universe, and it marks the
beginning of his evolutionary explanation of the laws of
nature (and his architectonic metaphysics detailed in items
21-25). By the hypotheses o fabsolute chance, habit-taking, and
universal evolution, Peirce extends thepostulate that “every­
thing is explicable . . . in a general way. ”
The epoch of intellectual history at which the world is now arrived
finds thought still strongly under the influence imparted to it in 1859
by D arw in’s great w ork.1 But a new element has crept in, not intro­
duced by any great book, yet already showing itself in different direc­
tions, and destined as it seems to me to play a considerable part in the
coming years,— I mean the tendency to question the exact truth of
axioms. It appears to me that the development of this general idea in
the various realms of mathematics, positive science, and philosophy is,
in the immediate future, likely to teach us more than any other general
conception. It has already done important work in geometry, in which
our own Professor Story has an honorable share.2 In physics we see
its influence in the investigations of Crookes and Zöllner3 into the
phenomena of spiritualism & supernaturalism, in regard to which the
attitude of scientific men must now be essentially different from what
it was 25 years ago. For my part, I cannot withhold my approval of the
proceedings of the society for the prosecution of psychical research,
which is engaged in the careful examination of all kinds of phenomena
which suggest the possibility of the relation between body and soul
being different from what ordinary experience leads us to conceive it.4
I do not mean to say, and that society does not say, that any facts have
yet been established sufficient to call for a modification of existing
conceptions; but I do say that enough evidence has been collected to

[page 216]

216 I The Essential Peirce
make a careful & serious examination of the matter no waste of time;
and that the bias that formerly existed and was rightly entertained in
favor of the dicta of common sense upon this subject, is sensibly weak­
ened and rightly weakened by its having been proved that the axioms
of geometry are mere empirical laws whose perfect exactitude we have
no reason whatever to feel confident of.
The scientific world will not be disturbed because all the weak-
minded persons whose mental equilibrium was shaken by spiritualism
during the period when it was in fashion will now turn round and say,
we investigated these things long ago and always told you you were
wrong not to investigate them,— and now we are glad you see your
error. The scientific world was entirely right before, when it declined
to waste time in absurd inquiries; and it is quite consistent in saying,—
as I think it is about to say,— that the pretended facts seem now to
deserve examination. More than that, as a general maxim in scientific
method, I maintain that at one stage of inquiry it is quite right to insist
strongly on the exactitude of established laws, to question which
would only lead to confusion, while at a later stage it is proper to
question the exactitude of those same laws when we are in possession
of a guiding idea which shows us in what manner they may possibly
be corrected.
I may illustrate this point by something which comes within the
experience of every man. Every man at some time mislays something;
I for my part, I am ashamed to confess, am rather apt to do so. I entirely
forget what I did with the object and am obliged to hunt it up. Now
at the beginning of my hunt, I am guided by the knowledge that I have
of my own habits; I look for the object where the ordinary rule of my
action would have led me to place it, and I rightly decline to spend my
time in looking where I almost know I should never have left it. But
at a later stage of my search when the likely places are exhausted I
begin to look in the unlikely ones, and in doing so I am equally in the
right.
In a somewhat similar way, when we first begin to question an
axiom, we do not say that it is likely to be inexact;— far from it. We
only say that the question whether it is exact or not has come to have
a claim to consideration greater than it had had in a former state of
science.
What I propose to do tonight is, following the lead of those mathe­
maticians who question whether the sum of the three angles of a
triangle is exactly equal to two right angles, to call in question the
perfect accuracy of the fundamental axiom of logic.
This axiom is that real things exist or in other words, what comes
to the same thing, that every intelligible question whatever is suscepti­
ble in its own nature of receiving a definitive and satisfactory answer,
if it be sufficiently investigated by observation and reasoning. This is

[page 217]

Design and Chance I 217
the way I should put it; different logicians would state the axiom
differently. Mill, for instance, throws it into the form: Nature is uni­
form. 5 I am not now concerned with inquiring how it ought to be
stated. It is the axiom itself whatever be the proper form of it which
I wish to call into doubt.
Let me be quite understood. As far as all ordinary and practical
questions go I insist upon this axiom as much as ever,— as much as
anybody can do. I should think that any man who proposed to go on
any other principle as a maxim of reasoning would be as insane as
Gauss, Lobachewsky, Riemann or Helmholtz would hold that geode­
sist to be, who should think that he could detect any departure from
the accepted laws of geometry, in any triangle measured on this earth.
It is worth while to notice how much it means to question the exacti­
tude of an axiom. There are 25 stars whose parallaxes have been deter­
mined by unexceptionable methods. According to ordinary geometry,
this parallax should slightly exceed zero. According to the non-Eu-
clidean geometry, it might be either more or less than zero, and the
value the nearest possible to zero should be proportional to the area
of the triangle. N ow of the 25 stars, there is but one for which the
parallax comes out negative. It is a Cygni of which there is but one
determination and the probable error is more than half the value of the
negative parallax. There are however several whose parallax is less
than o."i, among them Groombridge 1830, one of the best determined
of all. We may therefore conclude that for a star so far distant that the
area of the triangle is over a thousand millions of millions of millions
of square miles the error of the ordinary Geometry is a quantity less
than 5^ of the smallest speck that can be seen on the broad horizon,
and the extinction of the human race is to be expected sooner than the
applicability of the non-Euclidean geometry to any geodesic triangle.
It is a doubt comparable to this which I propose in regard to the axiom
of logic.
In order to explain what I mean, let us take one of the most familiar,
although not one of the most scientifically accurate statements of the
axiom viz.: that every event has a cause. I question whether this is exactly
true. Bodies obey sensibly the laws of mechanics; but may it not be that
if our means of measurement were inconceivably nicer, or if we were
to wait inconceivable ages for an exception, exceptions irreducible in
their own nature to any law would be found? In short, may it not be
that chance, in the Aristotelian sense, mere absence of cause, has to be
admitted as having some slight place in the universe.
Is this a mere idle doubt? Are there any considerations which lead
to such a supposition and can any use be made of it if it be granted?
In the first place for the motive of the doubt. If we are to admit that
every event has a cause, we are bound by every maxim of consistency
to grant that every fact has an explanation, a reason. When we detect

[page 218]

218 I The Essential Peirce
a motion among bodies, the demand for a cause is held to be just.
Suppose then we find that cause to be that the bodies repel one another
inversely as the fifth power of the distance, according to M axwell’s
theory about molecules. N ow that force is itself not an event; but are
we, merely because it is not an event, but is a different kind of fact,
not entitled to ask why molecules should repel one another inversely
as the fifth power of the distance, with the confidence that some reason
for it there must be? Gravitation seems less strange in its law, which
is that of an emanation. In the case of heat we have energy radiated
from the sun; but the energy of gravity does not follow the law of
radiation. The singular analogy, therefore, between the acceleration of
gravitation and the energy of heat demands an explanation. There has
been an attempt to explain gravitation by the impact of particles, but
the law of impact is as unreasonable as that of gravity or more so.
Among the things that demand explanation, then, are the laws of
physics; and not this law or that law only but every single law. Why
are the three laws of mechanics as they are and not otherwise? What
is the cause of the restriction of extended bodies to three dimensions?
And then the general fact that there are laws, how is that to be
explained?
The general idea of evolution governs science more and more; and
every system of philosophy since Kant, however idealistic or however
materialistic has strongly felt its influence. Evolution is the postulate
of logic, itself; for what is an explanation but the adoption of a simpler
supposition to account for a complex state of things.
Every theory of evolution that I have seen is more or less special.
It is true that in order to be scientifically grounded a theory must be
special; but nevertheless evolutionist science and evolutionist philoso­
phy are more closely connected in logic than scientists //commonly
suppose/are apt to think// them to be. Upon this subject, I refer to the
remarks of Clifford’s concerning very general conclusions a propos of
Spontaneous Generation.6 A most important premise, playing a great
part in the establishment of the Nebular Hypothesis or the Theory of
Natural Selection, is that things must on the whole have proceeded
from the Homogeneous to the Heterogeneous.
N ow the theories of evolution that have hitherto been set forth, at
least to the very limited extent, I am sorry to confess it, with which
I am familiar with them, while they do go to make it probable that
organisms and worlds have taken their origin from a state of things
indefinitely homogeneous, all suppose essentially the same basis of
physical law to have been operative in every age of the universe.
But I maintain that the postulate that things shall be explicable
extends itself to laws as well as to states of things. We want a theory
of the evolution of physical law. We ought to suppose that as we go
back into the indefinite past not merely special laws but law itself is

[page 219]

Design and Chance I 219
found to be less and less determinate. And how can that be if causation
was always as rigidly necessary as it is now?
But let me state the point in all its generality. That very postulate
of logic whose rigid accuracy I call in question, itself demands that
every determinate fact shall have an explanation, and there is no rea­
son in making any exception. N ow among the determinate facts which
ought thus to be explained is the very fact supposed in this postulate.
This must also be explained, must be among the things which have
been somehow brought about. How then can it be absolutely, rigidly
& immoveably true?
So much for the motive of the doubt. N ow for the question to what
useful result will this hypothesis lead? It is not my purpose to offer any
determinate explanation of a single one of the laws of nature. All that
I can do is to suggest that they may perhaps be explicable by means
of hypotheses having a certain general [. . J
It has always seemed to me singular that when we put the question
to an evolutionist, Spencerian, Darwinian, or whatever school he may
belong to, what are the agencies which have brought about evolution,
he mentions various determinate facts and laws, but among the agen­
cies at work he never once mentions Chance. Yet it appears to me that
chance is the one essential agency upon which the whole process
depends. About the nature of the ordinary phenomena of chance there
can be no dispute whatever. A certain antecedent, for example that I
throw a die from a box, determines the general character of a conse­
quent, namely that a number is turned up, but does not specifically
determine the character of the consequent, that is what number that
is to be; but that is determined by other causes which cannot be taken
into account. I suppose that on excessively rare sporadic occasions a
law of nature is violated in some infinitesimal degree; that may be
called absolute chance; but ordinary chance is merely relative to the
causex that are taken into account.
The laws of the two kinds of chance are in the main the same.
Speaking first of ordinary and relative chance, a man with an indefinite
number of silver dollars who sits down to a perfectly fair game and
bets one dollar on every throw of the dice will go on losing and
winning in about equal measure. Speaking of absolute chance, the
same thing will happen, for if not there would ipsofacto be a definite
tendency toward winning or losing. The only difference between the
two cases is this, that the hypothesis of absolute chance is part and
parcel of the hypothesis that everything is explicable, not absolutely,
rigidly without the smallest inexactitude or sporadic exception, for
that is a self-contradictory supposition but yet explicable in a general
way. Explicability has no determinate & absolute limit. Everything
being explicable, everything has been brought about; and conse­
quently everything is subject to change and subject to chance. N ow

[page 220]

220 I The Essential Peirce
everything that can happen by chance, sometime or other will happen
by chance. Chance will sometime bring about a change in every condi­
tion; or, at least, this is as near a correct statement of the matter as can
readily be drawn up, for quite correct it certainly is not.
N ow I propose to prove that the operation of chance will always
present this phenomenon when the objects operated upon are very
manifold.
A million players sit down to play a fair game. Each bets one dollar
each time which he has an even chance of winning or losing. Let each
player be provided at the outset with a pile of a million silver dollars.
N ow it is a curious & apparently paradoxical result that although
everything is supposed to happen by pure chance yet we know very
closely how those million players will stand at the end of a million bets.
About 10 will have lost $2000 or more, no one over $3000; and half of
them after playing day and night for nearly a fortnight at the rate of
one bet a second will stand within $300 of where they started.
But now we will suppose that the dice used by the players become
worn down in the course of time. Chance changes everything & chance
will change that. And we will suppose that they are worn down in
such a way that every time a man wins, he has a slightly better chance
of winning on subsequent trials. This will make little difference in the
first million bets, but its ultimate effect would be to separate the
players into two classes those who had gained and those who had lost
with few or none who had neither gained nor lost and these classes
would separate themselves more and more, faster and faster.
If on the other hand the wearing down of the dice were to have the
opposite effect and were to tend to make him lose who had heretofore
gained and vice versa, the tendency would be to prevent the separation
of rich and poor. But chance will act in various ways. At one time it
will have one effect at another time another.
If these effects were to be alternated after billions of trials, the effect
would be to make numbers of distinct classes of players.
It would be easy if I had time to state the solutions to a number of
similar problems in probabilities.
Suffice it to say that as everything is subject to change everything
will change after a time by chance, and among these changeable cir­

[page 221]

Design and Chance I 221
cumstances will be the effects of changes on the probability of fur­
ther change. And from this it follows that chance must act to move
things in the long run from a state of homogeneity to a state of het­
erogeneity.
These are unlikely states of things. It is unlikely that a player
should go on winning money billions of times and never be poorer
than he began. But this is the effect of chance. N or can you prevent
it by killing the player whom you see taking such a course. You deprive
chance of one means but it supplies another in the person of another
player and the ultimate result is unaffected.
The operation of chance, therefore, does show a definite tendency
to bring about unlikely events by varying means under varying cir­
cumstances.
I have no time to give more than a slight inkling of the conse­
quences upon science and philosophy of attention to this principle.
You have all heard of the dissipation of energy. It is found that in
all transformations of energy a part is converted into heat and heat is
always tending to equalize its temperature. The consequence is that
the energy of the universe is tending by virtue of its necessary laws
toward a death of the universe in which there shall be no force but heat
and the temperature everywhere the same. This is a truly astounding
result, and the most materialistic the most anti-teleological conceiv­
able.
We may say that we know enough of the forces at work in the
universe to know that there is none that can counteract this tendency
away from every definite end but death.
But although no force can counteract this tendency, chance may
and will have the opposite influence. Force is in the long run dissipa­
tive; chance is in the long run concentrative. The dissipation of energy
by the regular laws of nature is by those very laws accompanied by
circumstances more and more favorable to its reconcentration by
chance. There must therefore be a point at which the two tendencies
are balanced and that is no doubt the actual condition of the whole
universe at the present time.
Certain laws of nature, the laws of Boyle and Charles,7 the second
law of thermodynamics, and some others are known to be results of
chance,— statistical facts so to say. Molecules are so inconceivably
numerous, their encounters so inconceivably frequent, that chance
with them is omnipotent. I cannot help believing that more of the
molecular laws— the principles of chemistry for example— will be
found to involve the same element, especially as almost all these laws
present the peculiarity of not being rigidly exact.
N ow when we take into account that feature of chance which I
have been bringing to your notice we find that this agent, although it

[page 222]

222 I The Essential Peirce
can only work upon the basis of some law or uniformity, or more or
less definite ratio towards a uniformity, has the property of being able
to produce uniformities far more strict than those from which it
works.
It is therefore possible to suppose that not only the laws of chemis­
try but the other known laws of matter are statistical results. Thomson
supposes matter to consist of eddies in fluid. If a fluid is composed
again of molecules its laws will be mainly due to chance. N ow I will
suppose that all known laws are due to chance and repose upon others
far less rigid themselves due to chance and so on in an infinite regress,
the further we go back the more indefinite being the nature of the laws,
and in this way we see the possibility of an indefinite approximation
toward a complete explanation of nature.
Chance is indeterminacy, is freedom. But the action of freedom
issues in the strictest rule of law.
/ D e s i g n a n d C h a n c e (A)/
Epicurus makes the Gods consist of atoms but their superiority is
due to the finer material of which they are composed. Thus, divineness
comes from a special cause & does not originate by chance from ele­
ments not containing it.
Darw in’s view is nearer to mine. Indeed, my opinion is only Dar­
winism analyzed, generalized, and brought into the realm of On­
tology. But Darwin holds the development of Animals and Plants to
be due to certain special characters, Reproduction, Spontaneous Varia­
tion, Heredity, etc.
Herbert Spencer and many other evolutionists hold that the opera­
tion of chance is an important factor in the development of self-con­
sciousness. But they all admit other primordial elements, the conserva­
tion of energy and the like, to be necessary factors. Whereas my
principle is that [. . .]* holds a place in Nature independent of every
accident of matter.
Before I can prove my proposition I must first show what it means.
I must analyze the conception of Design or Intelligence and find what
it consists in.
In the first place, then, to eliminate the element offeeling as being
either no essential element of intelligence or at least only a subsidiary
one. The internal sense, reflection, which makes us aware of what we
think, is, in truth, the main thing which distinguishes us from the
brutes. It is by this means that we control our thoughts, and conquer
impulses which we do not approve. But because it happens to be thus
valuable to us, because it happens to be the instrument by which we
make ourselves rational, it does not follow that it is essential to ratio­

[page 223]

Design and Chance I 223
nality. What is essential is that all our cognitions should be gathered
into a unity and that our actions should proceed from the entirety of
our knowledge. Because our thought is only imperfectly brought to
unity, it requires effort to collect it, and it requires a watchful eye to
be directed to the imperfections of this unity. But were we so happily
constituted that we should always without reflection completely as­
similate everything we learned, so as to take due account of it in every
act, we might well be spared the trouble of reflecting; and we should
be only the more rational if we could thus behave with intelligence by
the first intention of the mind, without reflection,— and knowing no
more of what was going on in our minds than a healthy man does of
what is going on in his stomach.
I have several times shown to my classes how some of the main laws
of cerebration and particularly the formation of habits could be ac­
counted for by the principles of probability, and I have shown by
experiment how a certain regularity of arrangement can be impressed
upon a pack of cards by imitating the action of habit.
The main element of habit is the tendency to repeat any action
which has been performed before. It is a phenomenon at least coexten­
sive with life, and it may cover a still wider real realm. Imagine a large
number of systems in some of which there is a decided tendency
toward doing again what has once been done, in others a tendency
against doing what has once been done, in others elements having one
tendency and elements having the other. Let us consider the effects of
chance upon these different systems. To fix our ideas suppose players
playing with dice, some of their dice are worn down in such a way that
the act of losing tends to make them lose again, others in such a way
that the act of losing tends to make them win. The latter will win or
lose much more slowly, yet after a sufficient length of time they will
be in danger of being ruined and if the game is quite even, they will
eventually be ruined and destroyed. Those whose dice are so worn as
to reproduce the same effects, will be divided into two parts, one of
which w ill quickly be destroyed, the other made stronger and
stronger. For every kind of an organism, system, form, or compound,
there is an absolute limit to a weakening process. It ends in destruc­
tion; there is no limit to strength. The result is that chance in its action
tends to destroy the weak & increase the average strength of the objects
remaining. Systems or compounds which have bad habits are quickly
destroyed, those which have no habits follow the same course; only
those which have good habits tend to survive.
May not the laws of physics be habits gradually acquired by sys­
tems. Why, for instance, do the heavenly bodies tend to attract one
another? Because in the long run bodies that repel or do not attract
will get thrown out of the region of space leaving only the mutually

[page 224]

224 I The Essential Peirce
attracting bodies. Why do they attract inversely as the square of the
distance? This may be only their average law of attraction; we see
how a comet throws away its repulsive material as it approaches the
sun. But in the long run, matter that attracts inversely to a higher
power of the distance tends perhaps to aggregate itself together, so
that the masses of planets which have long been separate tend to
attract in this manner.

[page 225]

16
[from] On the Algebra ofLogic:
A Contribution to the
Philosophy ofNotation
P 296: American Journal of Mathematics 7 (1885)1180-
202. [Alsopublished in W
5:162-90 (with several related manu­
scripts, M SS 506-508 and 538-539 [pp. 107-16 and 191-220])
and in CP3.359-403.] Thispaper, which Peircefirst presented
(at least in part) at the 14-17 October 1884 meeting o f the
National Academy o f Sciences in Newport, RI, consists of
four parts, and it is recognized as a substantial contribution
to modern logic and to the philosophy o f logic and the theory
o f notation. In thefirst part published here, Peirce considers
the different kinds ofsigns requiredfo r afully adequate logic
notation, and he concludes that it is necessary to have tokens
(conventional or general signs, usually called symbols), in­
dexes (demonstrative signs), and icons (signs o f resem­
blance). This is the first published appearance of the icon-
index-symbol trichotomy and Peirce Vfirst application o f his
theory o f signs to his algebraic logic.
I .— T h r e e k i n d s o f S i g n s .
A ny character or proposition either concerns one subject, two
subjects, or a plurality of subjects. For example, one particle has mass,
two particles attract one another, a particle revolves about the line
joining two others. A fact concerning two subjects is a dual character
or relation; but a relation which is a mere combination of two indepen­
dent facts concerning the two subjects may be called degenerate, just as
two lines are called a degenerate conic. In like manner a plural charac­
ter or conjoint relation is to be called degenerate if it is a mere com­
pound of dual characters.
A sign is in a conjoint relation to the thing denoted and to the mind.
If this triple relation is not of a degenerate species, the sign is related
to its object only in consequence of a mental association, and depends
upon a habit. Such signs are always abstract and general, because
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 226]

226 I The Essential Peirce
habits are general rules to which the organism has become subjected.
They are, for the most part, conventional or arbitrary. They include
all general words, the main body of speech, and any mode of conveying
a judgment. For the sake of brevity I will call them tokens. 1
But if the triple relation between the sign, its object, and the mind,
is degenerate, then of the three pairs
sign object
sign mind
object mind
two at least are in dual relations which constitute the triple relation.
One of the connected pairs must consist of the sign and its object, for
if the sign were not related to its object except by the mind thinking
of them separately, it would not fulfil the function of a sign at all.
Supposing, then, the relation of the sign to its object does not lie in a
mental association, there must be a direct dual relation of the sign to
its object independent of the mind using the sign. In the second of the
three cases just spoken of, this dual relation is not degenerate, and the
sign signifies its object solely by virtue of being really connected with
it. O f this nature are all natural signs and physical symptoms. I call
such a sign an index, a pointing finger being the type of the class.
The index asserts nothing; it only says “ There!” It takes hold of our
eyes, as it were, and forcibly directs them to a particular object, and
there it stops. Demonstrative and relative pronouns are nearly pure
indices, because they denote things without describing them; so are the
letters on a geometrical diagram, and the subscript numbers which in
algebra distinguish one value from another without saying what those
values are.
The third case is where the dual relation between the sign and its
object is degenerate and consists in a mere resemblance between them.
I call a sign which stands for something merely because it resembles
it, an icon. Icons are so completely substituted for their objects as
hardly to be distinguished from them. Such are the diagrams of geome­
try. A diagram, indeed, so far as it has a general signification, is not
a pure icon; but in the middle part of our reasonings we forget that
abstractness in great measure, and the diagram is for us the very thing.
So in contemplating a painting, there is a moment when we lose the
consciousness that it is not the thing, the distinction of the real and the
copy disappears, and it is for the moment a pure dream,— not any
particular existence, and yet not general. At that moment we are
contemplating an icon.
I have taken pains to make my distinction* of icons, indices, and
#See Proceedings of the American Academy ofArts and Sciences, Vol. VII, p. 294, May 14,
1867. [Item 1 above, p. 7.]
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 227]

[from] On the Algebra of Logic I 227
tokens clear, in order to enunciate this proposition: in a perfect system
of logical notation signs of these several kinds must all be employed.
Wjfhrvnf Tokens there wcvnJH no gejwj&iity in .the i&aTejraejoiiy .for
they are the only general signs; and generality is essential to reasoning.
Take, for example, the circles by which Euler represents the relations
of terms. They well fulfil the function of icons, but their want of
generality and their incompetence to express propositions must have
been felt by everybody who has used them. Mr. Venn has, therefore,
been led to add shading to them; and this shading is a conventional sign
of the nature of a token.2 In algebra, the letters, both quantitative and
functional, are of this nature. But tokens alone do not state what is the
subject of discourse; and this can, in fact, not be described in general
terms; it can only be indicated. The actual world cannot be distin­
guished from a world of imagination by any description. Hence the
need of pronouns and indices, and the more complicated the subject
the greater the need of them. The introduction of indices into the
algebra of logic is the greatest merit of Mr. M itchell’s system.* He
writes F x to mean that the proposition F is true of every object in the
universe, and F u to mean that the same is true of some object. This
distinction can only be made in some such way as this. Indices are also
required to show in what manner other signs are connected together.
With these two kinds of signs alone any proposition can be expressed;
but it cannot be reasoned upon, for reasoning consists in the observa­
tion that where certain relations subsist certain others are found, and
it accordingly requires the exhibition of the relations reasoned with in
an icon. It has long been a puzzle how it could be that, on the one hand,
mathematics is purely deductive in its nature, and draws its conclu­
sions apodictically, while on the other hand, it presents as rich and
apparently unending a series of surprising discoveries as any observa­
tional science. Various have been the attempts to solve the paradox by
breaking down one or other of these assertions, but without success.
The truth, however, appears to be that all deductive reasoning, even
simple syllogism, involves an element of observation; namely, deduc­
tion consists in constructing an icon or diagram the relations of whose
parts shall present a complete analogy with those of the parts of the
object of reasoning, of experimenting upon this image in the imagina­
tion, and of observing the result so as to discover unnoticed and hidden
relations among the parts. For instance, take the syllogistic formula,
All M is P
S is M
5 is P
*Studies in Logic. By Members of theJohns Hopkins University. Boston: Little, Brown,
: Co., 1883. [“ On a N ew Algebra of Logic,” pp. 72-106.]
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 228]

228 I The Essential Peirce
This is really a diagram of the relations of S, M, and P. The fact that
the middle terrr occurs in the two premises is actually exhibited, and
this must be done or the notation will be of no value. As for algebra,
the very idea of the art is that it presents formulae which can be
manipulated, and that by observing the effects of such manipulation
we find properties not to be otherwise discerned. In such manipula­
tion, we are guided by previous discoveries which are embodied in
general formulae. These are patterns which we have the right to imi­
tate in our procedure, and are the icons par excellence of algebra. The
letters of applied algebra are usually tokens, but the x, y, z, etc. of a
general formula, such as
(x + y)z = xz + yz,
are blanks to be filled up with tokens, they are indices of tokens. Such
a formula might, it is true, be replaced by an abstractly stated rule (say
that multiplication is distributive); but no application could be made
of such an abstract statement without translating it into a sensible
image.
In this paper, I purpose to develope an algebra adequate to the
treatment of all problems of deductive logic, showing as I proceed
what kinds of signs have necessarily to be employed at each stage of
the development. I shall thus attain three objects. The first is the
extension of the power of logical algebra over the whole of its proper
realm. The second is the illustration of principles which underlie all
algebraic notation. The third is the enumeration of the essentially
different kinds of necessary inference; for when the notation which
suffices for exhibiting one inference is found inadequate for explaining
another, it is clear that the latter involves an inferential element not
present to the former. Accordingly, the procedure contemplated
should result in a list of categories of reasoning, the interest of which
is not dependent upon the algebraic way of considering the subject. I
shall not be able to perfect the algebra sufficiently to give facile meth­
ods of reaching logical conclusions: I can only give a method by which
any legitimate conclusion may be reached and any fallacious one
avoided. But I cannot doubt that others, if they will take up the subject,
will succeed in giving the notation a form in which it will be highly
useful in mathematical work. I even hope that what I have done may
prove a first step toward the resolution of one of the main problems
of logic, that of producing a method for the discovery of methods in
mathematics.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 229]

17
An American Plato: Review of
Royces Religious Aspect
of Philosophy
MS 1369. [Published, as MS 341, in W3:221-34 and in CP
8.39-34 (without the opening paragraph).] Written for the
Popular Science Monthly in the summer of 1883 (but re-
jected by the editor, E. L. Youmans), this lengthy review is,
according to Peirce 's28 October 1883 letter to William James,
“something really very good. ” After praising Royce for his
style of reasoning, which is like Plato V
, Peirce criticizes his
idealism as being too much like Hegel's, whose “capital error
. . . which permeates his whole system . . . is that he almost
altogether ignores the Outward Clash. ” Peirce repeats the
thesis of item 16, that three kinds of signs are indispensable
in all reasoning, and emphasizes that indexes are necessary to
refer to individuals: uOne such index must enter into every
proposition, its function being to designate the subject of
discourse. ” (According to Max Fisch, items 16 and 17 mark an
important stage in Peirce's passagefrom a one-category to a
two-category realism.)
When I meet with an opinion held by sane and instructed men,
which is so radically different from my own that it seems strange and
incomprehensible to me how men can believe such a thing, I for my
part (and I suppose others have the same curiosity) am always tempted
to examine the grounds of that opinion with a good deal of care, and
am not satisfied until I have either become a convert to it or at least
can fully understand and feel how it is that others hold to it. Such an
opinion the scientific man finds in Hegelianism; not so much in its
conclusions, which relate for the most part to matters upon which
science does not touch, as in the extraordinary modes of reasoning by
which it professes to reach those conclusions. But, as every one knows,
the system of Hegel is very difficult to understand. A real mastership
of it is what neither Hegel himself nor any of his followers or critics

[page 230]

230 I The Essential Peirce
has possessed. It contains many distinct elements; and the study of
logic has not yet been carried far enough to estimate precisely the
value of all of them.
Dr. Royce has produced a work which will form a good introduc­
tion to Hegel. His language and his thought are equally lucid and
within the capacity of ordinary minds; his style is animated and
readable, and in passages rises without eifort to true philosophical
eloquence. His method is a dialectic one; that is to say, it proceeds by
the criticism of opinions, first, destructively to absolute scepticism,
and then finds hidden in that scepticism itself the highest truth. It
differs, however, very decidedly from the dialectic of Hegel; and in
its simplicity and general tone reminds us rather of the reasoning of
Plato.
But before we examine the method, let us glance at the philosoph­
ical upshot of the book. This is, that the reality of whatever really
exists consists in the real thing being thought by G od.1 Ordinary
people think that things exist by the will of God; and if thought be
taken in so wide a sense as to include volition, they have no difficulty
in admitting the proposition which Dr. Royce has borrowed from
Hegel and Schelling.2 But ordinary people say that not merely the
real but all that can possibly enter into the mind of man must be
within the thought of God in some sense; so that it must be some
particular kind of divine thought which constitutes reality; and that
particular kind of thought must be distinguished by a volitional ele­
ment. In short, ordinary people make, at once, the very same criti­
cism that the profoundest students of philosophy have made, namely,
that the Hegelian school overlooks the importance of the will as an
element of thought.
A certain writer has suggested that reality, the fact that there is
such a thing as a true answer to a question, consists in this: that human
inquiries,— human reasoning and observation,—tend toward the set­
tlement of disputes and ultimate agreement in definite conclusions
which are independent of the particular stand-points from which the
different inquirers may have set out; so that the real is that which any
man would believe in, and be ready to act upon, if his investigations
were to be pushed sufficiently far.3 Upon the luckless putter-forth of
this opinion Dr. Royce is extremely severe. He will not even name him
(perhaps to spare the family), but refers to him by various satirical
nick-names, especially as “ Thrasymachus, ”— a foolish character intro­
duced into the Republic and another dialogue of Plato for the purpose
of showing how vastly such an ignorant pretender to philosophy is
inferior to Socrates (that is, to Plato himself) in every quality of mind
and heart, and especially in good manners.4 But I must with shame
confess that if I understand what the opinion of this poor, Royce-

[page 231]

An American Plato I 231
forsaken Thrasymachus is, I coincide with it exactly. I ask any man,
Suppose you could be miraculously assured that a certain answer to
any question that interests you would be the one in which, were your
life and mental vigor to be indefinitely prolonged, you must eventually
rest, would you not cease all inquiries at once, and be content with that
answer now, as being the very thing you had been striving after? This
question Dr. Royce answers explicitly in the negative. “ N o barely
possible judge,” he says, “ who would see the error, i f he were there,
will do for us.” 5 Yet if I were to represent Dr. Royce as preferring to
believe for a little while that which a certain Being— no matter who—
imagines, rather than to come at once to the belief to which investiga­
tion is destined at last to carry him, I should probably be doing him
injustice; because I suppose he would say that the thing which God
imagines, and the opinion to which investigation would ultimately
lead him, in point of fact coincide. If, however, these two things
coincide, I fail to understand why he should be so cruel to the childish
Thrasymachus; since after all there is no real difference between them,
but only a formal one,—each maintaining as a theorem that which the
other adopts as a definition. As was just remarked, the Hegelian school
do not sufficiently take into account the volitional element of cogni­
tion. Dr. Royce admits in words that belief is what a man will act
from;6but he does not seem to have taken the truth of this proposition
home to him, or else he would see that the whole end of inquiry is the
settlement of belief;7 so that a man shall not war against himself, nor
undo tomorrow that which he begins to do today. Dr. Royce’s main
argument in support of his own opinion, to the confusion of
Thrasymachus, is drawn from the existence of error. Namely, the
subject of an erroneous proposition could not be identified with the
subject of the corresponding true proposition, except by being com­
pletely known, and in that knowledge no error would be possible. The
truth must, therefore, be present to the actual consciousness of a living
being. This is an argument drawn from Formal Logic, for formal logic
it is which inquires how different propositions are made to refer to the
same subject, and the like. German metaphysics has, since Kant,
drawn its best arguments from formal logic; and it is quite right in
doing so, for the conceptions which are proved to be indispensible in
formal logic, must have been already rooted in the nature of the mind
when reasoning first began, and are, so far, a priori. But one would
surely have supposed that when the German philosophers8 were thus
drawing their arguments from formal logic, they would have post­
poned their venturesome flights into the thin air of theology and the
vacuum of pure reason, until they had carefully tried the strength of
every part of that logical machine on which they were to depend.
Instead of that, they have left the great work of creating a true system

[page 232]

232 I The Essential Peirce
of formal logic to English authors, who, while they have done most
excellent work, have (with the insignificant exception of the present
writer) been quite indifferent to the transcendental bearings of their
results. Kant gives a half dozen only of his brief pages to the develop­
ment of the system of logic upon which his whole philosophy rests;9
and though many valuable treatises on the science have appeared in
Germany, there is hardly one of them which is not more or less marred
by some arrant absurdity, acknowledged to be so by all the others;
Grassm ann10 and Schroeder alone pursuing the one method which
will yield positive results properly secured against error. We must not,
therefore, wonder that Dr. Royce’s argument from formal logic over­
looks one of the most important discoveries that have lately resulted
from the study of that exact branch of philosophy. He seems to think
that the real subject of a proposition can be denoted by a general term
of the proposition; that is, that precisely what it is that you are talking
about can be distinguished from other things by giving a general
description of it. Kant already showed, in a celebrated passage of his
cataclysmic w ork,11 that this is not so; and recent studies in formal
logic* have put it in a clearer light. We now find that, besides general
terms, two other kinds of signs are perfectly indispensible in all rea­
soning. One of these kinds is the index, which like a pointing finger,
exercises a real physiological force over the attention, like the power
of a mesmerizer, and directs it to a particular object of sense. One such
index at least must enter into every proposition, its function being to
designate the subject of discourse. N ow observe that Dr. Royce does
not merely say that there are no means by which an erroneous proposi­
tion can be produced; what he says is that the conception of an erro­
neous proposition (without an actual including consciousness) is ab­
surd. If the subject of discourse had to be distinguished from other
things, if at all, by a general term, that is, by its peculiar characters,
it would be quite true that its complete segregation would require a
full knowledge of its characters and would preclude ignorance. But the
index, which in point of fact alone can designate the subject of a
proposition, designates it without implying any characters at all. A
blinding flash of lightning forces my attention and directs it to a
certain moment of time with an emphatic “ N ow !” Directly following
it, I may judge that there will be a terrific peal of thunder, and if it does
not come I acknowledge an error. One instant of time is, in itself,
exactly like any other instant, one point of space like any other point;
nevertheless dates and positions can be approximately distinguished.
And how are they so distinguished? By intuition says Kant;13 perhaps
*Mitchell in Studies in Logic. By Members of theJohns Hopkins University, and Peirce
in The American Journal of Mathematics, vol. vii [item 16 above].12

[page 233]

An American Plato I 233
not in so many words; but it is because of this property that he distin­
guishes Space and Tim e from the general conceptions of the under­
standing and sets them off by themselves under the head of intuition.
But I should prefer to say that it is by volitional acts that dates and
positions are distinguished. The element of feeling is so prominent in
sensations, that we do not observe that something like Will enters into
them, too. You may quarrel with the word volition if you like; I wish
I had a more general one at my hand.14 But what I mean is that that
strong, clear, and voluntary consciousness in which we act upon our
muscles is nothing more than the most marked variety of a kind of
consciousness which enters into many other phenomena of our life, a
consciousness of duality or dual consciousness. Feeling is simple con­
sciousness, the consciousness that can be contained within an instant
of time, the consciousness of the excitation of nerve-cells; it has no
parts and no unity. What I call volition is the consciousness of the
discharge of nerve-cells, either into the muscles, etc., or into other
nerve-cells; it does not involve the sense of time (i.e. not of a con­
tinuum) but it does involve the sense of action and reaction, resistance,
externality, otherness, pair-edness. It is the sense that something has
hit me or that I am hitting something; it might be called the sense of
collision or clash. It has an outward and an inward variety, corre­
sponding to Kant’s outer and inner sense,15 to will and self-control, to
nerve-action and inhibition, to the two logical types A :B and A: A. The
capital error of Hegel which permeates his whole system in every part
of it is that he almost altogether ignores the Outward Clash.* Besides
the lower consciousness of feeling and the higher consciousness of
nutrition, this direct consciousness of hitting and of getting hit enters
into all cognition and serves to make it mean something real. It is
formal logic which teaches us this; not that of a Whately or a Jevons,
but formal logic in its new development, drawing nutriment from
physiology and from history without leaving the solid ground of logi­
cal forms.
An objection different from that of Dr. Royce might be raised.
Nam ely it might be asked how two different men can know they are
speaking of the same thing. Suppose, for instance, one man should say
a flash of lightning was followed by thunder and another should deny
it. How would they know they meant the same flash? The answer is
that they would compare notes somewhat as follows. One would say,
“ I mean that very brilliant flash which was preceded by three slighter
flashes, you know.” The second man would recognize the mark, and
*“ We must be in contact with our subject-matter,” says he in one place, “ whether
it be by means of our external senses, or; what is better; by our profounder mind and our
innermost self-consciousness.” 16

[page 234]

234 I The Essential Peirce
thus by a probable and approximate inference they would conclude
they meant the same flash.
Dr. Royce in describing the opinion of Thrasymachus has selected
the expression “ a barely possible judge.” 17 Is there not an ambiguity in
this mode of speech which is unfair to Thrasymachus? The final opin­
ion which would be sure to result from sufficient investigation may
possibly, in reference to a given question, never be actually attained,
owing to a final extinction of intellectual life or for some other rea­
son.18 In that sense, this final judgment is not certain but only possible.
But when Dr. Royce says “ bare possibility is blank nothingness,” 19 he
would seem to be speaking of mere logical possibility, and not a possi­
bility which differs but by a hair’s-breadth from entire certainty. Let
us consider what probability there is that a given question, say one
capable of being answered by yes or no, will never get answered. Let
us reason upon this matter by inductive logic. Dr. Royce and his
school, I am well aware, consider inductive reasoning to be radically
vicious; so that we unhappily cannot carry them along with us. [They
often deny this, by the way, and say they rest entirely on experience.
This is because they so overlook the Outward Clash, that they do not
know what experience is. They are like Roger Bacon, who after stating
in eloquent terms that all knowledge comes from experience, goes on
to mention spiritual illumination from on high as one of the most
valuable kinds of experiences.]20 But they will not succeed in explod­
ing the method of modern science; and there is no reason why those
who believe in induction at all, should not be willing to apply it to the
subject now in hand. In the first place, then, upon innumerable ques­
tions, we have already reached the final opinion. How do we know
that? Do we fancy ourselves infallible? Not at all; but throwing off as
probably erroneous a thousandth or even a hundredth of all the beliefs
established beyond present doubt, there must remain a vast multitude
in which the final opinion has been reached. Every directory, guide­
book, dictionary, history, and work of science is crammed with such
facts. In the history of science, it has sometimes occurred that a really
wise man has said concerning one question or another that there was
reason to believe it never would be answered. The proportion of these
which have in point of fact been conclusively settled very soon after
the prediction has been surprizingly large. Our experience in this
direction warrants us in saying with the highest degree of empirical
confidence that questions that are either practical or could conceivably
become so are susceptible of receiving final solutions provided the
existence of the human race be indefinitely prolonged and the particu­
lar question excite sufficient interest. As for questions which have no
conceivable practical bearings, as the question whether force is an
entity, they mean nothing, and may be answered as we like, without

[page 235]

An American Plato I 235
error. We may take it as certain that the human race will ultimately
be extirpated; because there is a certain chance of it every year, and
in an indefinitely long time the chance of survival compounds itself
nearer and nearer to zero. But, on the other hand, we may take it as
certain that other intellectual races exist on other planets,— if not of
our solar system, then of others; and also that innumerable new intel­
lectual races have yet to be developed; so that on the whole, it may be
regarded as most certain that intellectual life in the universe will never
finally cease. The problem whether a given question will ever get
answered or not is not so simple; the number of questions asked is
constantly increasing, and the capacity for answering them is also on
the increase. If the rate of the latter increase is greater than that of the
form er21 the probability is unity that any given question will be an­
swered; otherwise the probability is zero. Considerations too long to
be explained here lead me to think that the former state of things is
the actual one. In that case, there is but an infinitesimal proportion of
questions which do not get answered, although the multitude of unan­
swered questions is forever on the increase. It plainly is not fair to call
a judgment which is certain to be made a “ barely possible” one. But
I w ill admit (if the reader thinks the admission has any meaning, and
is not an empty proposition) that some finite number of questions, we
can never know which ones, will escape getting answered forever. N or
must I forget that I have not given the reader my proof that out of the
questions asked at any time the proportion that will never be answered
is infinitesimal; so that he may be in doubt upon this point. That is not
a thing to be regretted; for scepticism about the reality of things,—
provided it be genuine and sincere, and not a sham,— is a healthful and
growing stage of mental development.22 Let us suppose, then, for the
sake of argument, that some questions eventually get settled, and that
some others, indistinguishable from the former by any marks, never
do. In that case, I should say that the conception of reality was rather
a faulty one, for while there is a real so far as a question that w ill get
settled goes, there is none for a question that will never be settled; for
an unknowable reality is nonsense. The non-idealistic reader will start
at this last assertion; but consider the matter from a practical point of
view. You say that real things are manifested by their effects. True; for
example, if the timbers of my house are inwardly rotting, it will some
day fall down, and thus there will be a practical effect for me, whether
I know the beams be rotten or not. Well, but if all the effects consist­
ently point to the theory that the beams are rotting, it w ill come to be
admitted at last that they are so; and if nothing is ever settled about
the matter, it will be because the phenomena do not consistently point
to any theory; and in that case there is a want of that “ uniformity of
nature” (to use a popular but very loose expression) which constitutes

[page 236]

236 I The Essential Peirce
reality, and makes it differ from a dream.23 In that way, if we think that
some questions are never going to get settled, we ought to admit that
our conception of nature as absolutely real is only partially correct.
Still, we shall have to be governed by it practically; because there is
nothing to distinguish the unanswerable questions from the answera­
ble ones, so that investigation will have to proceed as if all were
answerable. In ordinary life, no matter how much we believe in ques­
tions ultimately getting answered, we shall always put aside an innu­
merable throng of them as beyond our powers. We shall not in our day
seek to know whether the centre of the sun is distant from that of the
earth by an odd or an even number of miles on the average; we shall
act as if neither man nor God could ever ascertain it. There is, how­
ever, an economy of thought, in assuming that it is an answerable
question. From this practical and economical point of view, it really
makes no difference whether or not all questions are actually an­
swered, by man or by God, so long as we are satisfied that investigation
has a universal tendency toward the settlement of opinion; and this I
conceive to be the position of Thrasymachus.
If there be any advantage to religion in supposing God to be omni­
scient, this sort of scepticism about reality can do no practical harm.
We can still suppose that He knows all that there is of reality to be
known. On the theory of Dr. Royce, the real existence of God would
consist in his imagining or positing Himself; it would thus be, accord­
ing to him, of the same nature as the reality of anything else. For my
part, I hold another theory, which I intend to take an early opportu­
nity of putting into print. I think that the existence of God, as well as
we can conceive of it, consists in this, that a tendency toward ends is
so necessary a constituent of the universe that the mere action of
chance upon innumerable atoms has an inevitable teleological result.
One of the ends so brought about is the development of intelligence
and of knowledge; and therefore I should say that God’s omniscience,
humanly conceived, consists in the fact that knowledge in its develop­
ment leaves no question unanswered. The scepticism just spoken of
would admit this omniscience as a regulative but not a speculative
conception. I believe that even that view is more religiously fruitful
than the opinion of Dr. Royce.
Let us now turn to the examination of Dr. Royce’s peculiar
method of reasoning; for that is always the most important element
in every system of philosophy. His work is divided into a brief intro­
duction and two books, the first entitled “ The search for a moral
ideal” ; the second “ The search for a religious truth.” These titles
seem to me to point, at the outset, to a fault of method. The pursuit
of a conscience, if one hasn’t one already, or of a religion, which is
the subjective basis of conscience, seems to me an aimless and hypo­
chondriac pursuit. If a man finds himself under no sense of obliga­

[page 237]

An American Plato I 237
tion, let him congratulate himself. For such a man to hanker after a
bondage to conscience, is as if a man with a good digestion should
cast about for a regimen of food. A conscience, too, is not a theorem
or a piece of information which may be acquired by reading a book;
it must be bred in a man from infancy or it will be a poor imitation
of the genuine article. If a man has a conscience, it may be an article
of faith with him that he should reflect upon that conscience, and
thus it may receive a further development. But it never will do him
the least good to get up a make-believe scepticism and pretend to
himself not to believe what he really does believe. In point of fact,
every man born and reared in a Christian community, however little
he may believe the dogmas of the Church, does find himself believing
with the strongest conviction in the moral code of Christendom. He
has a horror of murder and incest, a disapproval of lying, etc., which
he cannot escape from. The modern dialectician (if he will pardon a
touch of exaggeration) would have such a man say to himself, N ow
I am going to be sceptical, but only provisionally so, in order to
return to my faith with renewed conviction! But the whole history
of thought shows that men cannot doubt at pleasure or merely be­
cause they find they have no positive reason for the belief they al­
ready hold. Reasons concern the man who is coming to believe, not
the man who believes already. It has often been remarked that meta­
physics is an imitation of mathematics; and it may be added that the
philosophic doubt is an imitation of the absurd proceedure of ele­
mentary geometry, which begins by giving worthless demonstrations
of propositions nobody ever questions. When Hegel tells me that
thought has three stages, that of naïve acceptance, that of reaction
and criticism, and that of rational conviction;24 in a general sense, I
agree to it. And a down-right living scepticism, without arrière-pensée,
may be beneficial. It is not perhaps easy to see why an imaginary
scepticism might not sometimes serve the same purpose; but experi­
ence shows that in questions of magnitude men haven’t imagination
enough to put themselves in the true doubter’s shoes. But be that as
it may, the idea that the mere reaction of assent and doubt, the mere
play of thought, the heat-lightning of the brain, is going to settle
anything in this real world to which we appertain,— such an idea
only shows again how the Hegelians overlook the facts of volitional
action & reaction in the development of thought. I find m yself in a
world of forces which act upon me, and it is they and not the logical
transformations of my thought which determine what I shall ulti­
mately believe.
Dr. Royce seems to hold that at least in the philosophy of morals
and religion a mere contemplation of our own crude beliefs will lead
us to absolute scepticism and that then a mere contemplation of our
own absolute scepticism will lead us back to rational conviction. N ei­

[page 238]

238 I The Essential Peirce
ther I nor the readers of the Popular Science Monthly can possibly believe
that, in advance. But let us see how the method will work when
applied to the discussion of ethics.
The moral stand-point from which every man with a Christian
training sets out, even if he be a dogmatic atheist, is pretty nearly the
same. He has a horror of certain crimes and a disapproval of certain
lesser sins. He is also more or less touched with the spirit of Christian
love, which he believes should be his beacon, and which in point of
fact, by its power in his heart, shall and will govern him in all ques­
tions of disputed morals. More or less, in all of us, this sentiment
replaces and abolishes conscience; like Huckleberry Finn, we act from
Christian charity without caring very much whether conscience ap­
proves of the act or not.
This is the state of mind of the ordinary man or woman who will
open Dr. Royce’s book. And now Dr. Royce proposes that this person
shall ask himself the question what validity or truth is there in the
distinction of right and wrong. To me, it plainly appears that such a
person, if he have a clear head, will at once reply, right and wrong are
nothing to me except so far as they are connected with certain rules
of living by which I am enabled to satisfy a real impulse which works
in my heart; and this impulse is the love of my neighbor elevated into
a love of an ideal and divine humanity which I identify with the
providence that governs the world. But Dr. Royce says that different
people will answer the question in different ways; some will take the
position of the “ moral realist” and say that moral distinctions are
founded on some matter of fact (say a decree from Sinai), while others
will take the position of the “ moral idealist” and say that these distinc­
tions are founded on an inward sentiment,—an ideal.25 Tw o such
persons come into collision; they find by mutual criticism that both
positions are unsatisfactory; external fact can only determine what is,
not what ought to be; while inward sentiment cannot be a resting-
place, because it is only individual caprice and has no authority for
another man. From this criticism the only outcome is ethical scepti­
cism.
This is a fair specimen of Dr. Royce’s logical method, which is a
mere apotheosis of the dilemma, as the great instrument of thought.
As compared with syllogistic method of the middle ages (which sur­
vives in certain quarters, yet) it is certainly wonderfully superior; but
as compared with the mathematical reasoning upon which modern
science is built, it is inefficacious and restricted.
In the particular case in hand, it appears to me that the ordinary
Christian does not find himself caught in Dr. Royce’s dilemma at all.
He is a moral idealist; yet far from being shaken by the spectacle of
different men having different passions, he feels that every man may

[page 239]

An American Plato I 239
come to the same passion which animates him by a mere enlargement
of his horizon, and that his is the only sentiment in which all others
may be reconciled. For altruism is but a developed egoism; that same
sensitiveness which in its lowest state is selfishness, first transforms
itself into esprit de corps or collective selfishness; then, passing from
feeling for others collectively to feeling for them individually, it be­
comes philanthropy, pity, sympathy tossed hither and thither rudder­
less on the ocean of human misery; finally, steadying itself by the
conception of an ideal humanity and a divine providence, it passes into
Christian charity, which gathers up all selfishnesses and all pities and
is ready to give each its due measure.
The author having stated the above argument with admirable clear­
ness, fills a hundred pages with a perhaps not altogether necessary,
though a charmingly written and highly interesting elaboration and
illustration of it. He here passes in review a goodly number of the
ethical theories which have been proposed at different times. After the
Sophists, Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics, he criticizes what he con­
ceives to be the ethics of Jesus.26 Every Christian will tell him that he
makes the mistake of viewing that as a theory or speculation which is
really a spiritual experience;— another example of his neglect of the
volitional element. For instance, he asks, “ If I feel not the love of God,
how prove to me that I ought to feel it?” 27 The answer to that need
not be pointed out.
In what he says about Herbert Spencer, he seems to forget that Mr.
Spencer is not addressing a body of moral sceptics but readers ani­
mated by the sentiments which, in our day, animate every man who
reads at all.28
At last he takes up the thread of his argument as follows. The
conflict between moral realism and idealism can only lead to moral
scepticism. N ow what is this scepticism? It is the contemplation of
two opposing aims. Here he adduces the testimony of modern psy­
chologists to show that we cannot think of willing without actually
w illing.29 (But for all that, I fancy I notice a difference sometimes in
cold weather between thinking of willing to take my morning dash
of cold water and actually willing to take it.) Scepticism, then, shares
at once these opposing aims, or strives to share them. It has thus
itself an aim, namely, to reconcile opposing aims. So absolute moral
scepticism is self-destructive. “ Possibly this result may be somewhat
unexpected,” says our author.30 Not at all unexpected to one who
does not believe in the dialectical method. You started with a hypo­
chondriac hankering after an aim; and now you have acquired it.
Eurekas! Well, what is it, this aim which you have at last got? Why, to
have an aim! But that is nothing but the old nonsensical longing with
which you set out. Like Kant’s dove,31 you have been winging a vac­

[page 240]

240 I The Essential Peirce
uum, without remarking that you never advanced an inch. I do not
misrepresent the author. “ For behold,” he says, “ made practical,
brought down from its lonesome height, my Ideal very simply means
the Will to direct my acts towards the attainment of universal H ar­
mony.” 32 But this, I must insist, was obviously implied in the origi­
nal fantastic desire to have an aim. When I say that this is a fantastic
desire, I do not of course mean to deny that there may be such an
operation as the choice o f an aim, if by that aim be meant a secondary
or derived one; but I do say that it is absurd to speak of choosing an
original and ultimate aim. That is something which if you haven’t it,
you have nothing to do but wait till the grace of God confers it on
you. I should think, however, that were it once admitted to be a
rational performance to go a-hunting for an ultimate aim or end, the
first preliminary would be to recognize the axiom that such an end
must have unity, after which the hunt might begin. But Royce, call­
ing this axiom the “ ideal of ideals,” as it certainly is, in a sense, ex­
claims “ Here I have the aim I wanted, and the hunt is over.” 33 If one
might be permitted to enliven a dry subject with a little folly, I
should say that it reminded me of the surveyor Phoenix, who after
purchasing 365 solar compasses and a vast amount of other parapher­
nalia, in order to ascertain the distance between San Francisco and
the Mission of Dolores, stepped into a grocery and inquired how far
it was, and returned “ much pleased at so easily acquiring so much
valuable information.” 34 If Dr. Royce merely means that it can be
shown that a man who fancies he has no moral ideal really has one,
I heartily grant it; and I will further admit that dialectic is the
proper instrument to show this. But then a very lowly kind of dialec­
tic will do; and a rather more definite ideal may be pointed out.
The rest of Book I is occupied, as it seems to me, with illicitly
slipping some content into an empty formula. Much of this part of the
book is splendidly said. But other passages seem to me to preach, in
a way quite uncalled for by the premises, an ethics of the evil eye. “ It
is well that we should feel . . . joy whenever pride has a fall. . . . In all
such ways . . . we must show no mercy. ” “ When the hedonist gives us
his picture of a peaceful society, where, in the midst of good humor,
his ideal, the happiness of everybody concerned, is steadfastly pursued,
we find ourselves disappointed and contemptuous. . . . Who cares
whether that wretched set . . . think themselves happy or not?” “ The
appearance of anybody who pretends to be content with himself must
be the signal not for admiration at the sight of his success, but for a
good deal of contempt.” etc.35 Some of the students to whom this ethics
is taught at Harvard may upon reflection think that Christian charity
is not so much lower a frame of mind after all.
In Book II Dr. Royce undertakes by the same dialectic proceedure
to establish the existence of a God. /S7pace does not permit me to enter

[page 241]

An American Plato I 241
into a criticism of the second book; nor is it necessary, for it consists
only of an application of the same method to a subject to which dialec­
tics is far less suited. Besides, to the reader who has had the kindness
and the resolution to follow me to this point I can say, “ You are the
man to enjoy Dr. Royce’s own book, which I can promise you you shall
find, in comparison with harsh and crabbed matter you have been
reading here, to be ‘as musical as is Apollo’s lute.’ ” 36

[page 242]

18
One, Two, Three:
Kantian Categories
MS 89/. [First published, as M S 572, 1» W31292-94; see also
M SS 545, 546, 548, 573, 575, 57#, and 582.] Sometime in 1885,
it occurred to Peirce that he may have found the key to the
secret of the universe, and he wrote to William James on 20
October: “I have something very vast now. . . . It is . . . an
attempt to explain the laws of nature, to show their general
characteristics and to trace them to their origin & predict new
laws by the laws of the laws o f nature. ” He then made his
famous \guess': “three elements are active in the world,first,
chance; second, law; and third, habit-taking. Such is ourguess
o f the secret of the sphynx. ” It remainedfor him to work the
details and consequences o f this grand hypothesis into afull-
fledged theory. The present paper; written in the summer of
1886for a book to be entitled “ One, Two, ” is one of
several attempts to organize the principal claims needed to
support his guess (and is an early version of thefirst chapter
of item 19).
This is the day for doubting axioms. With mathematicians, the
question is settled; there is no reason to believe that the geometrical
axioms are exactly true. Metaphysics is an imitation of geometry, and
with the geometrical axioms the metaphysical axioms must go too.
We have no reason to think that the sum of the three angles of a
triangle is exactly equal to two right-angles. All that we can say is
that the excess or defect is proportional to the area of the triangle,
and that it is excessively minute even for the most enormous trian­
gles of astronomy. The sum of the three angles of a triangle of unit
size is a physical constant nearly equal to 180 degrees; but its exact
value is unknown to us.
Since we have no reason to think that this constant is exactly equal
to 180 degrees, and there is an infinite multitude of other values that
it can equally well have, the odds are at present infinity to one against
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 243]

One, Two, Three: Kantian Categories I 243
its being exactly 180 degrees, so that that hypothesis ought to be en­
tirely dismissed from our minds.
It is difficult for us to believe that any physical constant, any finite
quantity in nature, is primordial. It may be so, but we cannot help at
least asking how it came to have the precise value that it has. Especially
do we feel the need of an explanation when the quantity in question
comes very near to unity, zero, or any other remarkable number. For
then it is suggested that there must have been some cause tending to
change the value of the constant and to bring it nearer and nearer to
the number that it nearly equals. In such a case, therefore, we have a
positive reason for thinking that the quantity is not primordial.
Thus the principles of logic require us to think that space did not
always have its present simple construction, but that this has been
brought about by some gradual process. This is not quite a correct
statement, however, because space, as an individual receptacle of
things, is a fiction. Were it otherwise, absolute position and absolute
velocity in space would mean something, which we have no reason to
think that they do. What is true is that there are certain general laws
of position, but not that there is a receptacle which accounts for those
laws. This is a fiction of geometry.
The same reasoning applies to the axiom that every thing that
happens is completely determined by exact laws. We have no reason
to think that the accordance of phenomena with formulae is absolutely
exact. Whenever we attempt to verify the accordance of fact with law,
we find discrepancies which we rightly enough attribute to errors of
observation. But we cannot be sure that there are not similar, though
much smaller, aberrations in the events themselves. Since we have no
reason to think that the mean aberration of phenomena from law is
equal to zero, it is infinitely more probable that it is not. We must
therefore suppose an element of absolute chance, sporting, spon­
taneity, originality, freedom, in nature.1 We must further suppose that
this element in the ages of the past was indefinitely more prominent
than now, and that the present almost exact conformity of nature to
law is something that has been gradually brought about. We have to
suppose that in looking back into the indefinite past we are looking
back towards times when the element of law played an indefinitely
small part in the universe.
If the universe is thus progressing from a state of all but pure
chance to a state of all but complete determination by law, we must
suppose that there is an original, elemental, tendency of things to
acquire determinate properties, to take habits. This is the Third or
mediating element between chance, which brings forth First and origi­
nal events, and law which produces sequences or Seconds. N ow the
tendency to take habits is something essentially finite in amount, an
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 244]

244 I The Essential Peirce
infinitely strong tendency of this sort [unlike an absolute conformity
to law] is inconceivable and self-contradictory. Consequently this
tendency must itself have been gradually evolved; and it would evi­
dently tend to strengthen itself.2
Here then is a rational physical hypothesis, which is calculated to
account, or all but account for everything in the universe except pure
originality itself. The next step in order would be to attempt to verify
this hypothesis by seeing how far it would account for and explain the
observed characteristics of the laws of nature. But I postpone that to
another chapter3 in order now to sketch the remainder of the theory
of which this hypothesis is but a part.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 245]

19
A Guess at the Riddle
MS pop. [First published in CP 1.354 (the opening outline),
1.1-2 (the next two paragraphs), 1*355-68 (chapter 1), 1.3/3
(chapter 3), 1.374-75 and 37P-83 (chapter 4; missing are the
final sentence o f the second paragraph, the third paragraph,
and the first half of the fourth paragraph), and 1.385-416
(chapters 5, 6, and 7). An earlier opening page has the title
“Notesfo r a Book, to be entitled ‘A Guess at the Riddle, ’ with
a Vignette of the Sphynx below the Title. ”] Although chapters
2, 8, andp are missing (andprobably were never written) and
chapter3 is a mere outline, “A Guess at the Riddle ” isperhaps
Peirce !rgreatest and most original contribution to speculative
philosophy, and it marks his deliberate turn to architectonic
thought. His three categories, which he speculates are iso­
morphic with the three elements that are active in the universe
(chance, law, and habit-taking), serve as the structure for
organizing the branches ofphilosophy and science, and it is
clear that he anticipated a complete reorganization ofhuman
knowledge around his triad of universal conceptions; for as
he wrote, on a variant opening page, “this book, i f ever
written, as it soon will be i f I am in a situation to do it, will
be one of the births o f time. ” Although, unfortunately, Peirce
never was in such a situation, it isfortunate that many of
his major ideas in the “ Guess” would soon appear in the
papers of the Monist Metaphysical Series (items 21-25).
Chapter 1. One, Tw o, Three. Already written.1
Chapter 2. The triad in reasoning. Not touched.2 It is to be made as
follows. 1. Three kinds of signs; as best shown in my last paper in the
Am. Jour. Math.32. Term, proposition, and argument, mentioned in my
paper on a new list of categories.4 3. Three kinds of argument, deduc­
tion, induction, hypothesis, as shown in my paper in Studies in Logic. 5
Also three figures of syllogism, as shown there and in my paper on the
classification of arguments.64. Three kinds of terms, absolute, relative,
and conjugative, as shown in my first paper on Logic of Relatives.7
There are various other triads which may be alluded to. The dual

[page 246]

246 I The Essential Peirce
divisions of logic result from a false way of looking at things abso­
lutely. Thus, besides affirmative and negative, there are really probable
enunciations, which are intermediate. So besides universal and partic­
ular there are all sorts of propositions of numerical quantity. For
example, the particular proposition Some A is B, means At least one
A is B. But we can also say At least 2 A ’s are B ’s. Also, All the A ’s but
one are B ’s, etc. etc. ad infinitum. We pass from dual quantity, or a
system of quantity such as that of Boolian algebra, where there are
only two values, to plural quantity.
Chapter 3. The triad in metaphysics. This chapter one of the best, is
to treat of the theory of cognition.
Chapter 4. The triad in psychology. The greater part is written.
Chapter 5. The triad in physiology. The greater part is written.
Chapter 6. The triad in biology. This is to show the true nature of the
Darwinian hypothesis.
Chapter 7. The triad in physics. The germinal chapter. 1. The necessity
of a natural history of the laws of nature, so that we may get some
notion of what to expect. 2. The logical postulate for explanation
forbids the assumption of any absolute. That is, it calls for the intro­
duction of thirdness. 3. Metaphysics is an imitation of geometry; and
mathematicians having declared against axioms, the metaphysical axi­
oms are destined to fall too. 4. Absolute chance. 5. The universality of
the principle of habit. 6. The whole theory stated. 7. Consequences.
Chapter 8. The triad in sociology or shall I say pneumatology. That
the consciousness is a sort of public spirit among the nerve-cells. Man
as a community of cells; compound animals and composite plants;
society; nature. Feeling implied in firstness.
Chapter 9. The triad in theology. Faith requires to be materialists
without flinching.8
To erect a philosophical edifice that shall outlast the vicissitudes of
time, my care must be, not so much to set each brick with nicest
accuracy, as to lay the foundations deep and massive. Aristotle builded
upon a few deliberately chosen concepts— such as matter and form, act
and power—very broad, and in their outlines vague and rough, but
solid, unshakable, and not easily undermined; and thence it has come
to pass that Aristotelianism is babbled in every nursery, that “ English
Common Sense,” for example, is thoroughly peripatetic, and that ordi­
nary men live so completely within the house of the Stagyrite that
whatever they see out of the windows appears to them incomprehensi­
ble and metaphysical. Long it has been only too manifest that, fondly
habituated though we be to it, the old structure will not do for modern
needs; and accordingly, under Descartes, Hobbes, Kant, and others,
repairs, alterations, and partial demolitions have been carried on for

[page 247]

A Guess at the Riddle I 247
the last three centuries. One system, also, stands upon its own ground;
I mean the new Schelling-Hegel mansion, lately run up in the German
taste, but with such oversights in its construction that, although brand
new, it is already pronounced uninhabitable. The undertaking which
this volume inaugurates is to make a philosophy like that of Aristotle,
that is to say, to outline a theory so comprehensive that, for a long time
to come, the entire work of human reason, in philosophy of every
school and kind, in mathematics, in psychology, in physical science, in
history, in sociology, and in whatever other department there may be,
shall appear as the filling up of its details. The first step toward this
is to find simple concepts applicable to every subject.
But before all else, let me make the acquaintance of my reader, and
express my sincere esteem for him and the deep pleasure it is to me
to address one so wise and so patient. I know his character pretty well,
for both the subject and the style of this book ensure his being one out
of millions. He will comprehend that it has not been written for the
purpose of confirming him in his preconceived opinions, and he would
not take the trouble to read it if it had. He is prepared to meet with
propositions that he is inclined at first to dissent from; and he looks
to being convinced that some of them are true, after all. He will reflect,
too, that the thinking and writing of this book has taken, I won’t say
how long, quite certainly more than a quarter of an hour, and conse­
quently fundamental objections of so obvious a nature that they must
strike everyone instantaneously will have occurred to the author, al­
though the replies to them may not be of that kind whose full force
can be instantly apprehended.
C h a p t e r I. T r i c h o t o m y
Perhaps I might begin by noticing how different numbers have
found their champions. Tw o was extolled by Peter Ramus, Four by
Pythagoras, Five by Sir Thomas Browne, and so on. For my part, I am
a determined foe of no innocent number; I respect and esteem them
all their several ways; but I am forced to confess to a leaning to the
number three in philosophy. In fact, I make so much use of three-fold
divisions in my speculations, that it seems best to commence by mak­
ing a slight preliminary study of the conceptions upon which all such
divisions must rest. I mean no more than the ideas of First, Second,
Third,— ideas so broad that they may be looked upon rather as moods
or tones of thought, than as definite notions, but which have great
significance for all that. Viewed as numerals, to be applied to what
objects we like, they are indeed thin skeletons of thought, if not mere
words. If we only wanted to make enumerations, it would be out of
place to ask for the significations of the numbers we should have to use;

[page 248]

248 I The Essential Peirce
but then the distinctions of philosophy are supposed to attempt some­
thing far more than that; they are intended to go down to the very
essence of things, and if we are to make one single three-fold philo­
sophical distinction, it behooves us to ask beforehand what are the
kinds of objects that are first, second, and third, not as being so
counted, but in their own true characters. That there are such ideas
of the really First, Second, and Third, we shall presently find reason
to admit.
The First is that whose being is simply in itself, not referring to
anything nor lying behind anything. The Second is that which is what
it is by force of something to which it is second. The Third is that
which is what it is owing to things between which it mediates and
which it brings into relation to each other.
The idea of the absolutely First must be entirely separated from all
conception of or reference to anything else; for what involves a second
is itself a second to that second. The First must therefore be present
and immediate, so as not to be second to a representation. It must be
fresh and new, for if old it is second to its former state. It must be
initiative, original, spontaneous, and free; otherwise it is second to a
determining cause. It is also something vivid and conscious; so only it
avoids being the object of some sensation. It precedes all synthesis and
all differentiation: it has no unity and no parts. It cannot be articulately
thought: assert it, and it has already lost its characteristic innocence;
for assertion always implies a denial of something else. Stop to think
of it, and it has flown! What the world was to Adam on the day he
opened his eyes to it, before he had drawn any distinctions, or had
become conscious of his own existence,—that is first, present, immedi­
ate, fresh, new, initiative, original, spontaneous, free, vivid, conscious,
and evanescent. Only, remember that every description of it must be
false to it.
Just as the first is not absolutely first if thought along with a second,
so likewise to think the Second in its perfection we must banish every
third. The Second is therefore the absolute last. But we need not, and
must not, banish the idea of the first from the second; on the contrary,
the Second is precisely that which cannot be without the first. It meets
us in such facts as Another, Relation, Compulsion, Effect, Depen­
dence, Independence, Negation, Occurrence, Reality, Result. A thing
cannot be other, negative, or independent, without a first to or of
which it shall be other, negative, or independent. Still, this is not a very
deep kind of secondness; for the first might in these cases be destroyed
yet leave the real character of the second absolutely unchanged. When
the second suffers some change from the action of the first, and is
dependent upon it, the secondness is more genuine. But the depen­
dence must not go so far that the second is a mere accident or incident

[page 249]

A Guess at the Riddle I 249
of the first; otherwise the secondness again degenerates. The genuine
second suffers and yet resists, like dead matter, whose existence con­
sists in its inertia. Note, too, that for the Second to have the Finality
that we have seen belongs to it, it must be determined by the first
immoveably, and thenceforth be fixed; so that unalterable fixity be­
comes one of its attributes. We find secondness in occurrence, because
an occurrence is something whose existence consists in our knocking
up against it. A hard fact is of the same sort; that is to say, it is
something which is there, and which I cannot think away, but am
forced to acknowledge as an object or second beside myself, the subject
or number one, and which forms material for the exercise of my will.
The idea of second must be reckoned as an easy one to comprehend.
That of first is so tender that you cannot touch it without spoiling it;
but that of second is eminently hard and tangible. It is very familiar,
too; it is forced upon us daily: it is the main lesson of life. In youth,
the world is fresh and we seem free; but limitation, conflict, constraint,
and secondness generally, make up the teaching of experience. With
what firstness
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay;
with what secondness
doth she return,
With overweathered ribs and ragged sails.9
But familiar as the notion is, and compelled as we are to acknowledge
it at every turn, still we never can realize it; we never can be immedi­
ately conscious of finiteness, or of anything but a divine freedom that
in its own original firstness knows no bounds.
First and Second, Agent and Patient, Yes and No, are categories
which enable us roughly to describe the facts of experience, and they
satisfy the mind for a very long time. But at last they are found
inadequate, and the Third is the conception which is then called for.
The Third is that which bridges over the chasm between the absolute
first and last, and brings them into relationship. We are told that every
science has its Qualitative and its Quantitative stage; now its qualita­
tive stage is when dual distinctions,— whether a given subject has a
given predicate or not,— suffice; the quantitative stage comes when, no
longer content with such rough distinctions, we require to insert a
possible half-way between every two possible conditions of the subject
in regard to its possession of the quality indicated by the predicate.
Ancient mechanics recognized forces as causes which produced mo­
tions as their immediate effects, looking no further than the essentially

[page 250]

250 I The Essential Peirce
dual relation of cause and effect. That was why it could make no
progress with dynamics. The work of Galileo and his successors lay
in showing that forces are accelerations by which a state of velocity is
gradually brought about. The words cause and effect still linger, but
the old conceptions have been dropped from mechanical philosophy;
for the fact now known is that in certain relative positions bodies
undergo certain accelerations. N ow an acceleration, instead of being
like a velocity a relation between two successive positions, is a relation
between three; so that the new doctrine has consisted in the suitable
introduction of the conception of Threeness. On this idea, the whole
of modern physics is built. The superiority of modern geometry, too,
has certainly been due to nothing so much as to the bridging over of
the innumerable distinct cases with which the ancient science was
encumbered; and we may go so far as to say that all the great steps in
the method of science in every department have consisted in bringing
into relation cases previously discrete.10
We can easily recognize the man whose thought is mainly in the
dual stage by his unmeasured use of language. In former days, when
he was natural, everything with him was unmitigated, absolute, inef­
fable, utter, matchless, supreme, unqualified, root and branch; but now
that it is the fashion to be depreciatory, he is just as plainly marked
by the ridiculous inadequacy of his expressions. The principle of con­
tradiction is a shibboleth for such minds; to disprove a proposition
they will always try to prove there lurks a contradiction in it, notwith­
standing that it may be as clear and comprehensible as the day. Remark
for your amusement the grand unconcern with which mathematics,
since the invention of the calculus, has pursued its way, caring no more
for the peppering of contradiction-mongers than an ironclad for an
American fort.
We have seen that it is the immediate consciousness that is preemi­
nently first, the external dead thing that is preeminently second. In
like manner, it is evidently the representation mediating between
these two that is preeminently third. Other examples, however, should
not be neglected. The first is agent, the second patient, the third is the
action by which the former influences the latter. Between the begin­
ning as first, and the end as last, comes the process which leads from
first to last.
According to the mathematicians, when we measure along a line,
were our yardstick replaced by a yard marked off on an infinitely long
rigid bar, then in all the shiftings of it which we make for the purpose
of applying it to successive portions of the line to be measured, two
points on that bar would remain fixed and unmoved. To that pair of
points, the mathematicians accord the title of the absolute; they are the
points that are at an infinite distance one way and the other as mea­

[page 251]

A Guess at the Riddle I 251
sured by that yard. These points are either really distinct, coincident,
or imaginary (in which case there is but a finite distance completely
round the line), according to the relation of the mode of measurement
to the nature of the line upon which the measurement is made. These
two points are the absolute first and the absolute last or second, while
every measurable point on the line is of the nature of a third. We have
seen that the conception of the absolute first eludes every attempt to
grasp it; and so in another sense does that of the absolute second; but
there is no absolute third, for the third is of its own nature relative,
and this is what we are always thinking, even when we aim at the first
or second. The starting-point of the universe, God the Creator, is the
Absolute First; the terminus of the universe, God completely revealed,
is the Absolute Second; every state of the universe at a measurable
point of time is the third. If you think the measurable is all there is,
and deny it any definite tendency whence or whither, then you are
considering the pair of points that makes the absolute to be imaginary
and are an Epicurean. If you hold that there is a definite drift to the
course of nature as a whole, but yet believe its absolute end is nothing
but the nirvana from which it set out, you make the two points of the
absolute to be coincident, and are a pessimist. But if your creed is that
the whole universe is approaching in the infinitely distant future a
state having a general character different from that toward which we
look back in the infinitely distant past, you make the absolute to consist
in two distinct real points and are an evolutionist.*
This is one of the matters concerning which a man can only learn
from his own reflections, but I believe that if my suggestions are
followed out, the reader will grant that One, Tw o, Three, are more
than mere count-words like “ eeny, meeny, mony, mi,” but carry vast,
though vague ideas.
But it will be asked, why stop at three? Why not go on to find a
// new conception in / distinct idea for // Four, Five, and so on
indefinitely? The reason is that while it is impossible to form a genuine
three by any modification of the pair, without introducing something
of a different nature from the unit and the pair, four, five, and every
higher number can be formed by mere complications of threes. To
make this clear, I will first show it in an example. The fact that A
presents B with a gift C, is a triple relation, and as such cannot possibly
be resolved into any combination of dual relations. Indeed, the very
*The last view is essentially that of Christian theology, too. The theologians hold
the physical universe to be finite, but considering that universe which they will admit
to have existed from all time, it would appear to be in a different condition in the end
from what it was in the beginning, the whole spiritual creation having been accom­
plished, and abiding.

[page 252]

252 I The Essential Peirce
idea of a combination involves that of thirdness, for a combination is
something which is what it is owing to the parts which it brings into
mutual relationship. But we may waive that consideration, and still we
cannot build up the fact that A presents C to B by any aggregate of
dual relations between A and B, B and C, and C and A. A may enrich
B, B may receive C, and A may part with C, and yet A need not
necessarily give C to B. For that, it would be necessary that these three
dual relations should not only coexist, but be welded into one fact.
Thus, we see that a triad cannot be analyzed into dyads. But now I will
show by an example that a four can be analyzed into threes. Take the
quadruple fact that A sells C to B for the price D. This is a compound
of two facts: ist, that A makes with C a certain transaction, which we
may name E; and 2nd, that this transaction E is a sale of B for the price
D. Each of these two facts is a triple fact, and their combination makes
up as genuine a quadruple fact as can be found. The explanation of this
striking difference is not far to seek. A dual relative term, such as
“ lover” or “ servant,” is a sort of blank form, where there are two places
left blank. I mean that in building a sentence round lover, as the
principal word of the predicate, we are at liberty to make anything we
see fit the subject, and then, besides that, anything we please the object
of the action of loving. But a triple relative term such as “ giver” has
two correlates, and is thus a blank form with three places left blank.
Consequently, we can take two of these triple relatives and fill up one
blank place in each with the same letter, X, which has only the force
of a pronoun or identifying index, and then the two taken together will
form a whole having four blank places; and from that we can go on
in a similar way to any higher number. But when we attempt to
imitate this proceeding with dual relatives, and combine two of them
by means of an X, we find we only have two blank places in the
combination, just as we had in either of the relatives taken by itself.
A road with only three-way forkings may have any number of termini,
but no number of straight roads put end on end will give more than
two termini. Thus any number, however large, can be built out of
triads; and consequently no idea can be involved in such a number,
radically different from the idea of three. I do not mean to deny that
the higher numbers may present interesting special configurations
from which notions may be derived of more or less general applicabil­
ity; but these cannot rise to the height of philosophical categories so
fundamental as those that have been considered.
The argument of this book has been developed in the mind of the
author, substantially as it is presented, as a following out of these three
conceptions, in a sort of game of “ follow my leader” from one field of
thought into another. Their importance was originally brought home
to me in the study of logic, where they play so remarkable a part that
I was led to look for them in psychology. Finding them there again,

[page 253]

A Guess at the Riddle I 253
I could not help asking myself whether they did not enter into the
physiology of the nervous system. By drawing a little on hypothesis,
I succeeded in detecting them there; and then the question naturally
came how they would appear in the theory of protoplasm in general.
Here I seemed to break into an interesting avenue of reflections giving
instructive aperçus both into the nature of protoplasm and into the
conceptions themselves; though it was not till later that I mapped out
my thoughts on the subject as they are presented in Chapter V .111had
no difficulty in following the lead into the domain of natural selection;
and once arrived at that point, I was irresistibly carried on to specula­
tions concerning physics. One bold saltus landed me in a garden of
fruitful and beautiful suggestions, the exploration of which long pre­
vented my looking further.12 As soon, however, as I was induced to
look further, and to examine the application of the three ideas to the
deepest problems of the soul, nature, and God, I saw at once that they
must carry me far into the heart of those primeval mysteries. That is
the way the book has grown in my mind: it is also the order in which
I have written it; and only this first chapter is more or less an after­
thought, since at an earlier stage of my studies I should have looked
upon the matter here set down as too vague to have any value. I should
have discerned in it too strong a resemblance to many a crack-brained
book that I had laughed over. A deeper study has taught me that even
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings strength may be brought
forth, and that weak metaphysical trash has sometimes contained the
germs of conceptions capable of growing up into important and posi­
tive doctrines.
Thus, the whole book being nothing but a continual exemplifica­
tion of the triad of ideas, we need linger no longer upon this prelimi­
nary exposition of them. There is, however, one feature of them upon
which it is quite indispensible to dwell. It is that there are two distinct
grades of secondness and three grades of thirdness. There is a close
analogy to this in geometry. Conic sections are either the curves usu­
ally so called, or they are pairs of straight lines. A pair of straight lines
is called a degenerate conic. So plane cubic curves are either the genu­
ine curves of the third order, or they are conics paired with straight
lines, or they consist of three straight lines; so that there are two orders
of degenerate cubics. N early in this same way, besides genuine second­
ness, there is a degenerate sort which does not exist as such, but is only
so conceived. The medieval logicians (following a hint of Aristotle)
distinguished between real relations and relations of reason. A real
relation subsists in virtue of a fact which would be totally impossible
were either of the related objects destroyed; while a relation of reason
subsists in virtue of two facts, one only of which would disappear on
the annihilation of either of the relates. Such are all resemblances: for
any two obiects in nature resemble each other, and indeed in them­

[page 254]

254 I The Essential Peirce
selves just as much as any other two; it is only with reference to our
senses and needs that one resemblance counts for more than another.
Rumford and Franklin resembled one another by virtue of being both
Am ericans;13 but either would have been just as much an American if
the other had never lived. On the other hand, the fact that Cain killed
Abel cannot be stated as a mere aggregate of two facts one concerning
Cain and the other concerning Abel. Resemblances are not the only
relations of reason, though they have that character in an eminent
degree. Contrasts and comparisons are of the same sort. Resemblance
is an identity of characters; and this is the same as to say that the mind
gathers the resembling ideas together into one conception. Other rela­
tions of reason arise from ideas being connected by the mind in other
ways; they consist in the relation between two parts of one complex
concept, or, as we may say, in the relation of a complex concept to
itself, in respect to two of its parts. This brings us to consider a sort
of degenerate secondness that does not fulfill the definition of a rela­
tion of reason. Identity is the relation that everything bears to itself:
Lucullus dines with Lucullus. Again, we speak of allurements and
motives in the language of forces, as though a man suffered compulsion
from within. So with the voice of conscience: and we observe our own
feelings by a reflective sense. An echo is my own voice coming back
to answer itself. So also, we speak of the abstract quality of a thing as
if it were some second thing that the first thing possesses. But the
relations of reason and these self-relations are alike in this, that they
arise from the mind setting one part of a notion into relation to an­
other. All degenerate seconds may be conveniently termed Internal, in
contrast to External seconds, which are constituted by external fact,
and are true actions of one thing upon another.
Among thirds, there are two degrees of degeneracy. The first is
where there is in the fact itself no thirdness or mediation, but where
there is true duality; the second degree is where there is not even true
secondness in the fact itself.
Consider, first, the thirds degenerate in the first degree. A pin
fastens two things together by sticking through one and also through
the other: either might be annihilated, and the pin would continue to
stick through the one which remained. A mixture brings its ingredi­
ents together by containing each. We may term these accidental thirds.
“ How did I slay thy son?” asked the merchant, and the genie replied,
“ When thou threwest away the date-stone, it smote my son who was
passing at the time, on the breast, and he died forthright.” Here there
were two independent facts, first that the merchant threw away the
date-stone, and second that the date-stone struck and killed the genie’s
son. Had it been aimed at him, the case would have been different; for
then there would have been a relation of aiming which would have
connected together the aimer, the thing aimed, and the object aimed

[page 255]

A Guess at the Riddle I 255
at, in one fact. What monstrous injustice and inhumanity on the part
of that genie to hold that poor merchant responsible for such an acci­
dent! I remember how I wept at it, as I lay in my father’s arms and
he first told me the story. It is certainly just that a man, even though
he had no evil intention, should be held responsible for the immediate
effects of his actions; but not for such as might result from them in a
sporadic case here and there, but only for such as might have been
guarded against by a reasonable rule of prudence. Nature herself often
supplies the place of the intention of a rational agent in making a
thirdness genuine and not merely accidental; as when a spark, as third,
falling into a barrel of gunpowder, as first, causes an explosion, as
second. But how does nature do this? By virtue of an intelligible law
according to which she acts. If two forces are combined according to
the parallelogram of forces, their resultant is a real third. Yet any force
may, by the parallelogram of forces be mathematically resolved into
the sum of two others, in an infinity of different ways. Such compo­
nents, however, are mere creations of the mind. What is the difference?
As far as one isolated event goes, there is none; the real forces are no
more present in the resultant than any components that the mathema­
tician may imagine. But what makes the real forces really there is the
general law of nature which calls for them, and not for any other
components of the resultant. Thus, intelligibility, or reason objecti­
fied, is what makes thirdness genuine.
We now come to thirds degenerate in the second degree. The
dramatist Marlowe had something of that character of diction in
which Shakespeare and Bacon agree. This is a trivial example; but the
mode of relation is important. In natural history, intermediate types
serve to bring out the resemblance between forms whose similarity
might otherwise escape attention, or not be duly appreciated. In por­
traiture, photographs mediate between the original and the likeness.
In science, a diagram or analogue of the observed fact leads on to a
further analogy. The relations of reason which go to the formation of
such a triple relation need not be all resemblances. Washington was
eminently free from the faults in which most great soldiers resemble
one another. A centaur is a mixture of a man and a horse. Philadelphia
lies between N ew York and Washington. Such thirds may be called
Intermediate thirds or Thirds of comparison.
Nobody will suppose that I wish to claim any originality in reckon­
ing the triad important in philosophy. Since Hegel, almost every fanci­
ful thinker has done the same. Originality is the last of recommenda­
tions for fundamental conceptions. On the contrary, the fact that the
minds of men have ever been inclined to threefold divisions is one of
the considerations in favor of them. Other numbers have been objects
of predilection to this philosopher and that, but three has been promi­
nent at all times and with all schools. M y whole method w ill be found

[page 256]

256 I The Essential Peirce
to be in profound contrast with that of Hegel; I reject his philosophy
in toto.14 Nevertheless, I have a certain sympathy with it, and fancy
that if its author had only noticed a very few circumstances he would
himself have been led to revolutionize his system. One of these is the
double division or dichotomy of the second idea of the triad. He has
usually overlooked external secondness, altogether. In other words, he
has committed the trifling oversight of forgetting that there is a real
world with real actions and reactions. Rather a serious oversight that.
Then Hegel had the misfortune to be unusually deficient in mathemat­
ics. He shows this in the very elementary character of his reasoning.
Worse still, while the whole burden of his song is that philosophers
have neglected to take thirdness into account, which is true enough of
the theological kind, with whom alone he was acquainted (for I do not
call it acquaintance to look into a book without comprehending it), he
unfortunately did not know, what it would have been of the utmost
consequence for him to know, that the mathematical analysts had in
great measure escaped this great fault, and that the thorough-going
pursuit of the ideas and methods of the differential calculus would be
sure to cure it altogether. Hegel’s dialectical method is only a feeble
and rudimentary application of the principles of the calculus to meta­
physics. Finally Hegel’s plan of evolving everything out of the ab-
stractest conception by a dialectical procedure, though far from being
so absurd as the experientialists think, but on the contrary represent­
ing one of the indispensible parts of the course of science, overlooks
the weakness of individual man, who wants the strength to wield such
a weapon as that.
C h a p t e r III. T h e T r ia d i n M e t a p h y s i c s
I will run over all the conceptions that played an important [ro\e]
in the pre-Socratic philosophy and see how far they can be expressed
in terms of one, two, three.
i. The first of all the conceptions of philosophy is that of a primal
matter out of which the world is made.15 Thales and the early Ionian
philosophers busied themselves mainly with this. They called it the
arche, the beginning; so that the conception of First was the quintes­
sence of it. Nature was a wonder to them, and they asked its explana­
tion; from what did it come? That was a good question, but it was
rather stupid to suppose that they were going to learn much even if
they could find out from what sort of matter it was made. But to ask
how it had been formed, as they doubtless did, was not an exhaustive
question, it would only carry them back a little way; they wished to
go to the very beginning at once, and in the beginning there must have
been a homogeneous something, for where there was variety they

[page 257]

A Guess at the Riddle I 257
supposed there must be always an explanation to be sought. The first
must be indeterminate, and the indeterminate first of anything is the
material of which it is formed. Besides, their idea was that they could
not tell how the world was formed unless they knew from what to
begin their account. The inductive /methody of explaining phenomena
by tracing them back step by step to their causes was foreign not only
to them but to all ancient and medieval philosophy; that is the
Baconian idea. Indeterminacy is really a character of the first. But not
the indeterminacy of homogeneity. The first is full of life and variety.
Yet that variety is only potential; it is not definitely there. Still, the
notion of explaining the variety of the world, which was what they
mainly wondered at, by non-variety was quite absurd. How is variety
to come out of the womb of homogeneity; only by a principle of
spontaneity, which is just that virtual variety that is the First.
C h a p t e r IV. T h e T r ia d in P s y c h o l o g y
The line of reasoning which I propose to pursue is peculiar, and
will need some careful study to estimate the strength of it. I shall
review it critically in the last chapter, but meantime I desire to point
out that the step I am about to take, which is analogous to others that
will follow, is not so purely of the nature of a guess as might be
supposed by persons expert in judging of scientific evidence. We have
seen that the ideas of One, Tw o, Three, are forced upon us in logic,
and really cannot be dispensed with. They meet us not once but at
every turn. And we have found reason to think that they are equally
important in metaphysics. How is the extraordinary prominence of
these conceptions to be explained? Must it not be that they have their
origin in the nature of the mind? This is the Kantian form of inference,
which has been found so cogent in the hands of that hero of philoso­
phy; and I do not know that modern studies have done anything to
discredit it. It is true we no longer regard such a psychological explana­
tion of a conception to be as final as Kant thought. It leaves further
questions to be asked; but as far as it goes it seems to be satisfactory.
We find the ideas of First, Second, Third, constant ingredients of our
knowledge. It must then either be that they are continually given to
us in the presentations of sense, or that it is the peculiar nature of the
mind to mix them with our thoughts. N ow we certainly cannot think
that these ideas are given in sense. First, Second, and Third, are not
sensations. They can only be given in sense by things appearing la­
belled as first, second, and third, and such labels things do not usually
bear. They ought therefore to have a psychological origin. A man must
be a very uncompromising partisan of the theory of the tabula rasa to
deny that the ideas of first, second, and third are due to congenital

[page 258]

258 I The Essential Peirce
tendencies of the mind. So far there is nothing in my argument to
distinguish it from that of many a Kantian. The noticeable thing is that
I do not rest here, but seek to put the conclusion to the test by an
independent examination of the facts of psychology, to see whether we
can find any traces of the existence of three parts or faculties of the soul
or modes of consciousness, which might confirm the result just
reached.
Now, three departments of the mind have been generally recog­
nized since Kant; they are: Feeling, Knowing, and Willing. The
unanimity with which this trisection of the mind has been accepted
is, indeed, quite surprising. The division did not have its genesis in the
peculiar ideas of Kant. On the contrary, it was borrowed by him from
dogmatic philosophers, and his acceptance of it was, as has been well
remarked, a concession to dogmatism. It has been allowed even by
psychologists to whose general doctrines it seems positively hostile.
This evidence that there is something true in it, is strengthened by the
fact that it is impossible to make a critical examination of it, with [out]
coming to the conclusion that it is but a rough approximation to the
truth, at best; and this has generally been conceded.
Where did this three-fold division of the functions of the mind
come from? Kant took it ready made from the Leibnitzian writer
Tetens. He drew a suggestion from the rhetoricians of the sixteenth
century and they found it in an imperfect form in their idolized Plato.
In Plato, it appears under a poetical garb and distorted mien which we
cannot believe to have been the original one; and it is easy to credit the
statement of Diogenes Laertius that it came from the school of Py­
thagoras. N ow in the doctrine of Pythagoras everything was con­
nected with number, which was taken to be the foundation of the
world. There is a hint in its history, then, that the three-fold division
of the mind may be connected with the ideas of one, two, three.
By feelings, as constituting one of the great classes of mental activi­
ties, are meant according to Kant and most psychologists feelings of
pleasure and pain. This is not, however, the original doctrine of T e­
tens, who includes under this head all that is immediately present, or
at least the subjective element of it. Kant’s modification suits his pecu­
liar system better than the truth of nature. There is no good reason for
giving such a peculiar place to pleasure and pain; as if they had no
resemblance to anything else that we can feel. Pleasure and pain are
nothing but secondary sensations, or feelings produced by feelings,
whenever the latter reach a certain degree of subjective intensity, that
is, produce a certain amount of commotion in the organism. If we
could pay attention enough, we should probably recognize that every
exertion and every cognition produces pleasure or pain. There is plea­
sure in the contemplation of a theorem of geometry. Pain is perhaps

[page 259]

A Guess at the Riddle I 259
essential to the consciousness of exertion; what we do without pain we
do without effort. But that peculiarity of feelings which makes them
one of the great branches of mental phenomena is that they form the
sum total of all of which we have in immediate and instantaneous
consciousness; they are what is present. We cannot be immediately
conscious of what is past and gone; we only remember it, though it be
past by but the hundredth of a second. N o more can we be immedi­
ately conscious of what is yet to come, however close at hand it may
be. We can only infer it. O f nothing but the fleeting instant can /we7
have absolutely immediate consciousness, or feeling, whether much or
little; and this instant is no sooner present than it is gone. In it we can
be conscious of no change; because we do that by making a little
rehearsal of the process or imitation of it, and that occupies time. We
can draw no inference in an instant, nor can we recognize any inferen­
tial conclusion. We can neither divide nor synthetise; we can only feel.
When an instant has once past, that immediate consciousness can
never be recovered. It is totally and absolutely gone. We cannot com­
pare any subsequent feeling with it, as immediate feeling, because we
cannot have the second in our mind until the first has utterly gone
from us. We remember it; that is to say, we have another cognition
which professes to reproduce it; but we know that there is no resem­
blance between the memory and the sensation, because, in the first
place, nothing can resemble an immediate feeling, for resemblance
supposes a dismemberment and recomposition which is totally foreign
to the immediate, and in the second place, memory is an articulated
complex and worked-over product which differs infinitely and immea­
surably from feeling. Look at a red surface, and try to feel what the
sensation is, and then shut your eyes and remember it. N o doubt
different persons are different in this respect; to some the experiment
will seem to yield an opposite result but I have convinced m yself that
there is nothing in my memory that is in the least like the vision of
the red. When red is not before my eyes, I do not see it at all. Some
people tell me they see it faintly;— a most inconvenient kind of mem­
ory, which would lead to remembering bright red as pale or dingy. I
remember colours with unusual accuracy, because I have had much
training in observing them; but my memory does not consist in any
vision but in a habit by virtue of which I can recognize a newly
presented colour as like or unlike one I had seen before. But even if
the memory of some persons is of the nature of an hallucination,
enough arguments remain to show that immediate consciousness or
feeling is absolutely unlike anything else.
There are grave objections to making a whole third of the mind of
the will alone. One great psychologist has said that the will is nothing
but the strongest desire.16 I cannot grant that; it seems to me to over­

[page 260]

260 I The Essential Peirce
look that fact which of all that we observe is quite the most obtrusive,
namely the difference between dreaming and doing. This is not a
question of defining, but of noticing what we experience; and surely
he who can confound desiring with willing must be a day-dreamer.
The evidence, however, seems to be pretty strong that the conscious­
ness of willing does not differ, at least not very much, from a sensation.
The sense of hitting and of getting hit are nearly the same, and should
be classed together. The common element is the sense of an actual
occurrence, of actual action and reaction. There is an intense reality
about this kind of experience, a sharp sundering of subject and object.
While I am seated calmly in the dark, the lights are suddenly turned
on, and at that instant I am conscious, not of a process of change, but
yet of something more than can be contained in an instant. I have a
sense of a saltus, of there being two sides to that instant. A conscious­
ness of polarity would be a tolerably good phrase to describe what
occurs. For will, then, as one of the great types of consciousness, we
ought to substitute the polar sense.
But by far the most confused of the three members of the division,
in its ordinary statement, is Cognition. In the first place every kind of
consciousness enters into cognition. Feelings, in the sense in which
alone they can be admitted as a great branch of mental phenomena
form the warp and woof of cognition and even in the objectionable
sense of pleasure and pain, they are constituents of cognition. The will,
in the form of attention, constantly enters, and the sense of reality or
objectivity, which is what we have found ought to take the place of
will, in the division of consciousness, is even more essential yet, if
possible. But that element of cognition which is neither feeling nor the
polar sense, is the consciousness of a process, and this in the form of
the sense of learning, of acquiring, of mental growth is eminently
characteristic of cognition. This is a kind of consciousness which can­
not be immediate, because it covers a time, and that not merely because
it continues through every instant of that time, but because it cannot
be contracted into an instant. It differs from immediate consciousness,
as a melody does from one prolonged note. Neither can the conscious­
ness of the two sides of an instant, of a sudden occurrence, in its
individual reality, possibly embrace the consciousness of a process.
This is the consciousness that binds our life together. It is the con­
sciousness of synthesis.
Here then, we have indubitably three radically different elements
of consciousness, these and no more. And they are evidently connected
with the ideas of one-two-three. Immediate feeling is the consciousness
of the first; the polar sense is the consciousness of the second; and
synthetical consciousness is the consciousness of a Third or medium.
Note, too, that just as we have seen that there are two orders of

[page 261]

A Guess at the Riddle I 261
secondness, so the polar sense splits into two, and that in two ways:
for first, there is an active and a passive kind, or Will and Sense, and
second, there are External Will and Sense, in opposition to Internal
Will (self-control, inhibitory will) and Internal Sense (introspection).
In like manner, just as there are three orders of thirdness, so there are
three kinds of synthetical consciousness. The undegenerate and really
typical form has not been made so familiar to us as the others, which
have been more completely studied by psychologists; I shall therefore
mention that last. Synthetical consciousness degenerate in the first
degree, corresponding to accidental thirdness, is where there is an
external compulsion upon us to think things together. Association by
contiguity is an instance of this; but a still better instance is that in our
first apprehension of our experiences, we cannot choose how we will
arrange our ideas in reference to time and space, but are compelled to
think certain things as nearer together than others. It would be putting
the cart before the horse to say that we are compelled to think certain
things together because they are together in time and space; the true
way of stating it is that there is an exterior compulsion upon us to put
them together in our construction of time and space, in our perspec­
tive. Synthetical consciousness degenerate in the second degree, corre­
sponding to intermediate thirds, is where we think different feelings
to be alike or different, which, since feelings in themselves cannot be
compared and therefore cannot be alike, so that to say they are alike
is merely to say that the synthetic consciousness regards them so,
comes to this, that we are internally compelled to synthetise them or
to sunder them. This kind of synthesis appears in a secondary form in
association by resemblance. But the highest kind of synthesis is what
the mind is compelled to make neither by the inward attractions of the
feelings or representations themselves, nor by a transcendental force
of haecceity, but in the interest of intelligibility, that is, in the interest
of the synthetising “ I think” itself; and this it does by introducing an
idea not contained in the data, which gives connections which they
would not otherwise have had. This kind of synthesis has not been
sufficiently studied and especially the intimate relationship of its dif­
ferent varieties has not been duly considered. The work of the poet or
novelist is not so utterly different from that of the scientific man. The
artist introduces a fiction; but it is not an arbitrary one; it exhibits
affinities to which the mind accords a certain approval in pronouncing
them beautiful, which if it is not exactly the same as saying that the
synthesis is true, is something of the same general kind. The geometer
draws a diagram, which if not exactly a fiction, is at least a creation,
and by means of observation of that diagram he is able to synthetise
and show relations between elements which before seemed to have no
necessary connection. The realities compel us to put some things into

[page 262]

262 I The Essential Peirce
very close relation and others less so, in a highly complicated, and in
the sense17 itself unintelligible manner; but it is the genius of the mind,
that takes up all these hints of sense, adds immensely to them, makes
them precise, and shows them in intelligible form in the intuitions of
space and time. Intuition is the regarding of the abstract in a concrete
form, by the realistic hypostatisation of relations; that is the one sole
method of valuable thought. V ery shallow is the prevalent notion that
this is something to be avoided. You might as well say at once that
reasoning is to be avoided because it has led to so much error; quite
in the same philistine line of thought would that be and so well in
accord with the spirit of nominalism that I wonder some one does not
put it forward. The true precept is not to abstain from hypostatisation,
but to do it intelligently.
C h a p t e r V. T h e T r ia d i n P h y s i o l o g y
Granted that there are three fundamentally different kinds of con­
sciousness, it follows as a matter of course that there must be some­
thing threefold in the physiology of the nervous system to account for
them. N o materialism is implied in this, further than that intimate
dependence of the action of the mind upon the body, which every
student of the subject must and does now acknowledge. Once more a
prediction, as it were, is made by the theory; that is to say, certain
consequences, not contemplated in the construction thereof, necessar­
ily result from it; and these are of such a character that their truth or
falsehood can be independently investigated. Were we to find them
strikingly and certainly true, a remarkable confirmation of the theory
would be afforded. So much as this, however, I cannot promise; I can
only say that they are not certainly false; and we must be content to
trace out these consequences, and see what they are, and leave them
to the future judgment of physiologists.
Tw o of the three kinds of consciousness, indeed, the simple and
dual, receive an instant physiological explanation. We know that the
protoplasmic content of every nerve-cell has its active and passive
conditions, and argument is unnecessary to show that Feeling, or
immediate consciousness, arises in an active state of nerve-cells. E x­
periments on the effects of cutting the nerves show that there is no
feeling after communication with the central nerve-cells is severed, so
that the phenomenon has certainly some connection with the nerve-
cells; and feeling is excited by just such stimuli as would be likely to
throw protoplasm into an active condition. Thus, though we cannot
say that every nerve-cell in its active condition has feeling (which we
cannot deny, however), there is scarce room to doubt that the activity
of nerve-cells is the main physiological requisite for consciousness. On
the other hand, the sense of action and reaction, or the polar sense, as

[page 263]

A Guess at the Riddle I 263
we agreed to call it, is plainly connected with the discharge of nervous
energy through the nerve-fibres. External volition, the most typical
case of it, involves such a discharge into muscle cells. In external
sensation, where the polar sense enters in a lower intensity, there is
a discharge from the terminal nerve-cell through the afferent nerve
upon a cell or cells in the brain. In internal volition, or self-control,
there is some inhibitory action of the nerves, which is also known to
involve the movement of nervous force; and in internal observation,
or visceral sensation, there are doubtless transfers of energy from one
central cell to another. Remembering that the polar sense is the sense
of the difference between what was before and what is after a dividing
instant, or the sense of an instant as having sides, we see clearly that
the physiological concomitant of it must be some event which happens
very quickly and leaves a more abiding effect, and this description suits
the passage of a nervous discharge over a nerve-fibre so perfectly, that
I do not think we need hesitate to set this phenomenon down as the
condition of dual consciousness.
Synthetic consciousness offers a more difficult problem. Yet the
explanation of the genuine form of that consciousness, the sense of
learning, is easy enough; it is only the degenerate modes, the sense of
similarity, and the sense of real connection, which oblige us to hesitate.
With regard to these two degenerate forms, I am driven to make
hypotheses.
When two ideas resemble one another, we say that they have some­
thing in common; a part of the one is said to be identical with a part
of the other. In what does that identity consist? Having closed both
eyes, I open first one and then shut it and open the other, and I say
that the two sensations are alike. How can the impressions of two
nerves be judged to be alike? It appears to me that in order that that
should become possible, the two nerve-cells must probably discharge
themselves into one common nerve-cell. In any case, it seems to me
that the first supposition to make, for scientific observation to confirm
or reject, is that two ideas are alike so far as the same nerve-cells have
been concerned in the production of them. In short, the hypothesis is
that resemblance consists in the identity of a common element, and
that that identity lies in a part of the one idea and a part of the other
idea being the feeling peculiar to the excitation of one or more nerve-
cells.
When we find ourselves under a compulsion to think that two
elements of experience which do not particularly resemble one an­
other are, nevertheless, really connected, that connection must, I
think, be due in some way, to a discharge of nerve-energy; for the
whole sense of reality is a determination of polar consciousness, which
is itself due to such discharges. For example, I recognize that a certain
surface, on one side of a certain boundary is red, and on the other side

[page 264]

264 I The Essential Peirce
is blue; or that any two qualities are immediately contiguous in space
or time. If the contiguity is in time, it is by the polar sense directly that
we are conscious of a dividing instant with its difference on the two
sides. If the contiguity is in space, I think we have at first a completely
confused feeling of the whole, as yet unanalysed and unsynthetised,
but afterward, when the analysis has been made, we find ourselves
compelled, in recomposing the elements, to pass directly from what is
on one side of the boundary to what is on the other. I suppose then
that we are compelled to think the two feelings as contiguous because
the nerve-cell whose excitation produces the feeling of one recalled
sensation discharges itself into the nerve-cell whose excitation makes
the feeling of the other recalled sensation.
The genuine synthetic consciousness, or the sense of the process of
learning, which is the preeminent ingredient and quintessence of rea­
son, has its physiological basis quite evidently in the most characteris­
tic property of the nervous system, the power of taking habits. This
depends on five principles, as follows, ist, when a stimulus or irritation
is continued for some time, the excitation spreads from the cells di­
rectly affected to those that are associated with it, and from those to
others, and so on, and at the same time increases in intensity. 2nd, after
a time, fatigue begins to set in. N ow beside the utter fatigue which
consists in the cell’s losing all excitability, and the nervous system
refusing to react to the stimulus at all, there is a gentler fatigue, which
plays a very important part in adapting the brain to serving as an organ
of reason, this form of fatigue consisting in the reflex action or dis­
charge of the nerve-cell ceasing to go on one path and either beginning
on a path where there had been no discharge, or increasing the inten­
sity of the discharge along a path on which there had been previously
only a slight discharge. For example, a frog whose cerebrum or brain
has been removed, and whose hind leg has been irritated by putting
a drop of acid upon it, after repeatedly rubbing the place with the
other foot, as if to wipe off the acid, may at length be observed to give
several hops, the first avenue of nervous discharge having become
fatigued. 3rd, when from any cause the stimulus to a nerve-cell is
removed, the excitation quickly subsides. That it does not do so in­
stantly is well-known, and the phenomenon goes among physicists by
the name of persistence of sensation. All noticeable feeling subsides in
a fraction of a second, but a very small remnant continues for a much
longer time. 4th, if the same cell which was once excited, and which
by some chance had happened to discharge itself along a certain path
or paths, comes to get excited a second time, it is more likely to
discharge itself the second time along some or all of those paths along
which it had previously discharged itself than it would have been had
it not so discharged itself before. This is the central principle of habit;
and the striking contrast of its modality to that of any mechanical law

[page 265]

A Guess at the Riddle I 265
is most significant. The laws of physics know nothing of tendencies or
probabilities; whatever they require at all they require absolutely and
without fail, and they are never disobeyed. Were the tendency to take
habits replaced by an absolute requirement that the cell should dis­
charge itself always in the same way, or according to any rigidly fixed
condition whatever, all possibility of habit developing into intelli­
gence would be cut off at the outset; the virtue of thirdness would be
absent. It is essential that there should be an element of chance in some
sense as to how the cell shall discharge itself; and then that this chance
or uncertainty shall not be entirely obliterated by the principle of
habit, but only somewhat affected. 5th, when a considerable time has
elapsed without a nerve having reacted in any particular way, there
comes in a principle of forgetfulness or negative habit rendering it the
less likely to react in that way. N ow let us see what will be the result
of these five principles taken in combination. When a nerve is stimu­
lated, if the reflex activity is not at first of the right sort to remove the
source of irritation, it will change its character again and again until
the cause of irritation is removed, when the activity will quickly sub­
side. When the nerve comes to be stimulated a second time in the same
way, probably some of the other movements which had been made on
the first occasion will be repeated; but, however this may be, one of
them must ultimately be repeated, for the activity will continue until
this does happen: I mean that movement which removes the source of
irritation. On a third occasion, the process of forgetfulness will have
been begun in regard to any tendency to repeat any of the actions of
the first occasion which were not repeated on the second. O f those
which were repeated, some will probably be repeated again, and some
not; but always there remains that one which must be repeated before
the activity comes to an end. The ultimate effect of this will inevitably
be that a habit gets established of at once reacting in the way which
removes the source of irritation; for this habit alone will be strength­
ened at each repetition of the experiment, while every other will tend
to become weakened at an accelerated rate.
I have invented a little game or experiment with playing-cards to
illustrate the working of these principles; and I can promise the reader
that if he will try it half a dozen times he will be better able to estimate
the value of the account of habit here proposed. The rules of this game
are as follows. Take a good many cards of four suits, say a pack of 52,
though fewer w ill do. The four suits are supposed to represent four
modes in which a cell may react. Let one suit, say spades, represent
that mode of reaction which removes the source of irritation and
brings the activity to an end. In order readily to find a card of any suit
as wanted, you had better lay all the cards down face up and dis­
tributed into four packets, each containing the cards of one suit only.
N ow take 2 spades, 2 diamonds, 2 clubs, and 2 hearts, to represent the

[page 266]

266 I The Essential Peirce
original disposition of the nerve-cell, which is supposed to be equally
likely to react in any of the four ways. You turn these 8 cards face down
and shuffle them with extreme thoroughness.* Then turn up cards
from the top of this pack, one by one until a spade is reached. This
process represents the reaction of the cell. Take up the cards just dealt
off, and add to the pack held in the hand one card of each of those suits
that have just been turned up (for habit) and remove from the pack one
card of each suit not turned up (for forgetfulness). Shuffle, and go
through with this operation 13 times or until the spades are exhausted.
It will then generally be found that you hold nothing but spades in
your hand.
Thus we see how these principles not only lead to the establish­
ment of habits, but to habits directed to definite ends, namely the
removal of sources of irritation. N ow it is precisely action according
to final causes which distinguishes mental from mechanical action; and
the general formula of all our desires may be taken as this: to remove
a stimulus. Every man is busily working to bring to an end that state
of things which now excites him to work.
But we are led yet deeper into physiology. The three fundamental
functions of the nervous system, namely, 1st, the excitation of cells,
2nd, the transfer of excitation over fibres, 3rd, the fixing of definite
tendencies under the influence of habit, are plainly due to three prop­
erties of the protoplasm or life-slime itself. Protoplasm has its active
and its passive condition, its active state is transferred from one part
of it to another, and it also exhibits the phenomena of habit. But these
three facts do not seem to sum up the main properties of protoplasm,
as our theory would lead us to expect them to do. Still, this may be
because the nature of this strange substance is so little understood; and
if we had the true secret of its constitution we might see that qualities
that now appear unrelated really group themselves into one, so that it
may be after all that it accords with our theory better than it seems
to do. There have been at least two attempts to explain the properties
of protoplasm by means of chemical suppositions; but inasmuch as
chemical forces are as far as possible themselves from being under­
stood, such hypotheses, even if they were known to be correct, would
be of little avail. As for what a physicist would understand by a molec­
ular explanation of protoplasm, such a thing seems hardly to have been
thought of; yet I cannot see that it is any more difficult than the
*Cards are almost never shuffled enough to illustrate fairly the principles of proba­
bilities; but if after being shuffled in any of the usual ways, they are dealt into three packs
and taken up again, and then passed from one hand into the other one by one, every
other one going to the top and every other to the bottom of the pack that thus accumu­
lates in the second hand, and finally cut, the shuffling may be considered as sufficient
for the purpose of this game. Whenever the direction is to shuffle, shuffling as thorough
as this is meant.

[page 267]

A Guess at the Riddle I 267
constitution of inorganic matter. The properties of protoplasm are
enumerated as follows: contractility, irritability, automatism, nutri­
tion, metabolism, respiration, and reproduction; but these can all be
summed up under the heads of sensibility, motion, and growth. These
three properties are respectively first, second, and third. Let us, how­
ever, draw up a brief statement of the facts which a molecular theory
of protoplasm would have to account for. In the first place, then,
protoplasm is a definite chemical substance, or class of substances,
recognizable by its characteristic reactions. “ We do not at present,”
says Dr. Michael Foster (1879), “ know anything definite about the
molecular composition of active living protoplasm; but it is more than
probable that its molecule is a large and complex one in which a
proteid substance is peculiarly associated with a complex fat and with
some representative of the carbohydrate group, i.e. that each molecule
of protoplasm contains residues of each of these three great classes.
The whole animal body is modified protoplasm.” 18 The chemical com­
plexity of the protoplasm molecule must be amazing. A proteid is only
one of its constituents, and doubtless very much simpler. Yet chemists
do not attempt to infer from their analyses the ultimate atomic consti­
tution of any of the proteids, the number of atoms entering into them
being so great as almost to nullify the law of multiple proportions. I
do find in the book just quoted the following formula for nuclein, a
substance allied to the proteids. It is C 29H 49N 9P 30 22. But as the sum
of the numbers of atoms of hydrogen, nitrogen, and phosphorus ought
to be even, this formula must be multiplied by some even number; so
that the number of atoms in nuclein must be 224 at the very least. We
can hardly imagine, then, that the number of atoms in protoplasm is
much less than a thousand, and if one considers the very minute
proportions of some necessary ingredients of animal and vegetable
organisms, one is somewhat tempted to suspect that 50000 might do
better, or even come to/be7 looked upon in the future as a ridiculously
small guess. Protoplasm combines with water in all proportions, the
mode of combination being apparently intermediate between solution
and mechanical mixture. According to the amount of water it contains,
it passes from being brittle, to being pliable, then gelatinous, then
slimy, then liquid. Generally, it has the character of being elastico-
viscous; that is to say, it springs back partially after a long strain, and
wholly after a short one; but its viscosity is much more marked than
its elasticity. It is generally full of granules, by which we can see slow
streaming motions in it, continuing for some minutes in one way and
then generally reversed. The effect of this streaming is to cause protu­
berances in the mass, often very long and slender. They occasionally
stick up against gravity; and their various forms are characteristic of
the different kinds of protoplasm. When a mass of it is disturbed by
a jar, a poke, an electric shock, heat, etc., the streams are arrested and

[page 268]

268 I The Essential Peirce
the whole contracts into a ball; or if it were very much elongated
sometimes breaks up into separate spheres. When the external excita­
tion is removed, the mass sinks down into something like its former
condition. Protoplasm also grows; it absorbs material and converts it
into the like of its own substance; and in all its growth and reproduc­
tion, it preserves its specific characters.
Such are the properties that have to be accounted for. What first
arrests our attention as likely to afford the key to the problem, is the
contraction of the mass of protoplasm on being disturbed. This is
obviously due to a vast and sudden increase of what the physicists call
“ surface tension,” or the pulling together of the outer parts, which
phenomenon is always observed in liquids, and is the cause of their
making drops. This surface tension is due to the cohesion, or attraction
between neighboring molecules. The question is, then, how can a
body, on having its equilibrium deranged, suddenly increase the at­
tractions between its neighboring molecules? These attractions must
increase rapidly as the distance is diminished; and thus the answer
suggests itself that the distance between neighboring molecules is
diminished. True, the average distance must remain nearly the same,
but if the distances which had previously been nearly equal are ren­
dered unequal, the attractions between the molecules that are brought
nearer to one another will be much more increased than those between
those that are removed from one another will be diminished. We are
thus led to the supposition that in the ordinary state of the substance,
its particles are moving for the most part in complicated orbital or
quasi-orbital systems, instead of in the chemical molecules or more
definite systems of atoms of less complex substances, these particles
thus moving in orbits not being, however, atoms but chemical mole­
cules. But we must suppose that the forces between these particles are
just barely sufficient to hold them in their orbits and that in fact, as
long as the protoplasm is in an active condition, they are not all so held,
but that one and another get occasionally thrown out of their orbits
and wander about until they are drawn into some other system. We
must suppose that these systems have some approximate composition,
about so many of one kind of particles and so many of another kind,
etc., entering into them. This is necessary to account for the nearly
constant chemical composition of the whole. On the other hand, we
cannot suppose that the number of the different kinds is rigidly exact;
for in that case we should not know how to account for the power of
assimilation. We must suppose then that there is considerable range in
the numbers of particles that go to form an orbital system, and that the
somewhat exact chemical composition of the whole is the exactitude
of a statistical average; just as there is a close equality between the
proportions of the two sexes in any nation or province, though there
is considerable inequality in each of the different households. Owing

[page 269]

A Guess at the Riddle I 269
to the complexity of this arrangement, the moment that there is any
molecular disturbance, producing perturbations, large numbers of the
particles are thrown out of their orbits, the systems are more or less
deranged in the immediate neighborhood of the disturbance, and the
harmonic relations between the different revolutions are somewhat
broken up. In consequence of this, the distances between neighboring
particles, which had presented a systematic regularity, now become
extremely unequal, and their average attractions, upon which the co­
hesion depends, is increased. At the same time, the particles thrown
out of their systems shoot into other systems and derange these in their
turn, and so the disturbance is propagated throughout the entire mass.
The source of disturbance, however, being removed, interchanges of
energy take place, in which there is a tendency to equalise the vis viva19
of the different particles, and they consequently tend to sink down into
orbital motions again, and gradually something very like the original
state of things is reestablished, the original orbital systems remaining,
for the most part, and the wandering particles in large proportion
finding places in these systems or forming new ones. Some of these
particles will not find any places, and thus there will be a certain
amount of wasting of the protoplasmic mass. If the same disturbance
is repeated, so far as the orbital systems remain the same as they were
before, there will [be] a repetition of almost exactly the same events.
The same kinds of particles (the same I mean in mass, velocities,
directions of movement, attractions, etc.) which were thrown out of
the different systems before will generally get thrown out again, until,
if the disturbance is repeated several times, there gets to be rather a
deficiency of those kinds of particles in the different systems, when
some new kinds will begin to be thrown out. These new kinds will
differently perturb the systems into which they fly, tending to cause
classes of particles like themselves to be thrown out, and, in that way,
the direction of propagation of the disturbance, as well as its velocity
and intensity, may be altered, and, in short, the phenomenon of fatigue
w ill be manifested. Even when the protoplasmic mass is left to itself,
there will be some wandering of particles, producing regions of slight
disturbance, and so inequalities of tension; and thus, streams w ill be
set up, movements of the mass will take place, and slender processes
w ill be formed. If, however, the mass be left to itself for a very long
time, all the particles that are readily thrown out, will, in all the
changes that are rung on the combinations of situations and velocities
in the orbital systems, get thrown out; while the others will constantly
tend to settle down into more stable relations; and so the protoplasm
will gradually take a passive state from which its orbital systems are
not easily deranged. The food for those kinds of protoplasm that are
capable of marked reaction has to be presented in chemically complex
form. It must doubtless present particles just like those that revolve in

[page 270]

270 I The Essential Peirce
the orbital systems of the protoplasm. In order to be drawn into an
orbital system, a particle whether of food matter or just thrown off
from some other system, must have the right mass, must present itself
at the right point, and move with the right velocity in the right direc­
tion and be subject to the right attraction. It will be right in all these
respects, if it comes to take the place of a particle which has just been
thrown off; and thus, particles taken in are particularly likely to be of
the same material and masses and to take the same places in the orbits
as those that have been shortly before thrown off. N ow these particles
being the exact representatives of those thrown off, will be likely to be
thrown off by the same disturbances, in the same directions, and with
the same results, as those which were thrown off before; and this
accounts for the principle of habit. All the higher kinds of protoplasm,
those for example which have any marked power of contraction, are
fed with matter chemically highly complex.
C h a p t e r V I. T h e T r ia d i n B i o l o g i c a l D e v e l o p m e n t
Whether the part played by natural selection and the survival of the
fittest in the production of species be large or small, there remains little
doubt that the Darwinian theory indicates a real cause, which tends
to adapt animal and vegetable forms to their environment. A very
remarkable feature of it is that it shows how merely fortuitous varia­
tions of individuals together with merely fortuitous mishaps to them
would, under the action of heredity, result, not in mere irregularity,
nor even in a statistical constancy, but in continual and indefinite
progress toward a better adaptation of means to ends. How can this
be? What, abstractly stated, is the peculiar factor in the conditions of
the problem which brings about this singular consequence?
Suppose a million persons, each provided with one dollar, to sit
down to play a simple and fair game of chance, betting for example
on whether a die turns up an odd or even number. The players are
supposed to make their bets independently of one another, and each
to bet on the result of each throw one dollar against a dollar on the part
of the bank. O f course, at the very first bet, one half of them would
lose their only dollar and go out of the game, for it is supposed that
no credit is allowed, while the other half would win each a dollar and
so come to be worth $2. O f these 500000 players, after the second throw,
250000 would have lost, and so be worth only $1 each, while the other
250000 would have won, and so be worth $3. After the third throw,
125000, or one half of those who had had $1 each, would be ruined;
250000 would be worth $2 (namely one half the 250000 who had had $1
each, and one half the 250000 who had had $3 each) and 125000 would
be worth $4 each. The further progress of the game is illustrated by

[page 271]

the following table, where the numbers of players are given having
each possible sum after the ist, 2nd, 3rd, etc. throws.
A Guess at the Riddle I 271
1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 16th
$1 250000 125000 78125 546871 41015-i
8 21820
2 500000 250000 156250 109375 8 2 0 3 U
3 250000 187500 140625 109375 878901
8 52368
4 125000 125000 109375 93750
5 62500 78125 78125 73242-L
16
55542
6 31250 46875 527341
7 15625 2 734 31 3417911
16
38880
8 7 8 12 1 15625
9 39061
8?89l6
19226
10 19531
11 976-1
16
6714
12
13 1587
14
IS 229
16
17 15
It will be seen by the table,20 that at the end of the 4th throw, the most
usual fortune is $3, at the end of the 9th $4, at the end of the 16th $5,
and in like manner at the end of the 25th it would be $6, at the end of
the 36th $7, and so forth. Here then, would be a continual increase of
wealth, which is a sort of “ adaptation to one’s environment,” produced
by a survival of the fittest, that is, by the elimination from the game
of every player who has lost his last dollar. It is easy to see that the
increase of average and usual wealth comes about by the subtraction
of all those small fortunes which would be in the hands of men who
had once been bankrupt had they been allowed to continue betting.
N ow the adaptation of a species to its environment consists, for the
purposes of natural selection, in a power of continuing to exist, that
is to say, in the power of one generation to bring forth another, for as
long as another generation is brought forth the species will continue
and as soon as this ceases it is doomed after one lifetime. This repro­
ductive faculty, then, depending partly on direct fecundity, and partly

[page 272]

272 I The Essential Peirce
on the animal’s living through the age of procreation, is precisely what
the Darwinian theory accounts for. This character plainly is one of
those which has an absolute minimum, for no animal can produce
fewer offspring than none at all and it has no apparent upper limit, so
that it is quite analogous to the wealth of those players. It is to be
remarked that the phrase “ survival of the fittest” in the formula of the
principle does not mean the survival of the fittest individuals, but the
survival of the fittest types; for the theory does not at all require that
individuals ill-adapted to their environment should die at an earlier
age than others, so long only as they do not reproduce so many off­
spring as others; and indeed it is not necessary that this should go so
far as to extinguish the line of descent, provided there be some reason
why the offspring of ill-adapted parents are less likely than others to
inherit those parents’ characteristics. It seems likely that the process,
as a general rule, is something as follows. A given individual is in some
respect ill-adapted to his environment, that is to say, he has characters
which are generally unfavorable to the production of numerous off­
spring. These characters will be apt to weaken the reproductive sys­
tem of that individual, for various reasons, so that its offspring are not
up to the average strength of the species. This second generation will
couple with other individuals, but owing to their weakness, their
offspring will be more apt to resemble the other parent, and so the
unfavorable character will gradually be eliminated, not merely by
diminished numbers of offspring, but also by the offspring more
resembling the stronger parent. There are other ways in which the
unfavorable characters will disappear. When the procreative power is
weakened, there are many examples to show that the principle of
heredity becomes relaxed, and the race shows more tendency to sport­
ing. This sporting will go on until in the course of it the unfavorable
character has become obliterated. The general power of reproduction
thereupon becomes strengthened, with it the direct procreative force
is reinforced, the hereditary transmission of characters again becomes
more strict, and the improved type is hardened.
But all these different cases are but so many different modes of one
and the same principle, which is, the elimination of unfavorable char­
acters. We see then that there are just three factors in the process of
natural selection; to wit: ist, the principle of individual variation or
sporting; 2nd, the principle of hereditary transmission, which wars
against the first principle; and 3rd, the principle of the elimination of
unfavorable characters.
Let us see how far these principles correspond with the triads that
we have already met with. The principle of sporting is the principle
of irregularity, indeterminacy, chance. It corresponds with the irregu­
lar and manifold wandering of particles in the active state of the
protoplasm. It [\s] the bringing in of something fresh and first. The

[page 273]

A Guess at the Riddle I 273
principle of heredity is the principle of the determination of some­
thing by what went before, the principle of compulsion, correspond­
ing to will and sense. The principle of the elimination of unfavorable
characters is the principle of generalization by a casting out of sporadic
cases, corresponding particularly to the principle of forgetfulness in
the action of the nervous system. We have, then, here, a somewhat
imperfect reproduction of the same triad as before. Its imperfection
may be the imperfection of the theory of development.
C h a p t e r V II. T h e T r ia d i n P h y s i c s
Metaphysical philosophy may almost be called the child of geome­
try. O f the three schools of early Greek philosophers, two, the Ionic
and the Pythagorean, were all geometers, and the interest of the Eleat-
ics in geometry is often mentioned. Plato was a great figure in the
history of both subjects; and Aristotle derived from the study of space
some of his most potent conceptions. Metaphysics depends in great
measure on the idea of rigid demonstration from first principles; and
this idea, as well in regard to the process as the axioms from which it
sets out, bears its paternity on its face. Moreover, the conviction that
any metaphysical philosophy is possible has been upheld at all times,
as Kant well says, by the example in geometry of a similar science.
The unconditional surrender, then, by the mathematicians of our
time of the absolute exactitude of the axioms of geometry cannot prove
an insignificant event for the history of philosophy.21 Gauss, the great­
est of geometers, declares that “ there is no reason to think that the sum
of the three angles of a triangle is exactly equal to two right angles.” 22
It is true, experience shows that the deviation of that sum from that
amount is so excessively small that language must be ingeniously used
to express the degree of approximation: but experience never can show
any truth to be exact, nor so much as give the least reason to think it
to be so, unless it be supported by some other considerations. We can
only say that the sum of the three angles of any given triangle cannot
be much greater or less than two right angles; but that exact value is
only one among an infinite number of others each of which is as
possible as that. So say the mathematicians with unanimity.
The absolute exactitude of the geometrical axioms is exploded; and
the corresponding belief in the metaphysical axioms, considering the
dependence of metaphysics on geometry, must surely follow it to the
tomb of extinct creeds. The first to go must be the proposition that
every event in the universe is precisely determined by causes accord­
ing to inviolable law. We have no reason to think that this is absolutely
exact. Experience shows that it is so to a wonderful degree of approxi­
mation, and that is all. This degree of approximation will be a value
for future scientific investigation to determine; but we have no more

[page 274]

274 I The Essential Peirce
reason to think that the error of the ordinary statement is precisely
zero, than any one of an infinity of values in that neighborhood. The
odds are infinity to one that it is not zero; and we are bound to think
of it as a quantity of which zero is only one possible value. Phoenix,
in his Lectures on Astronom y,23 referring to Joshua’s commanding the
sun to stand still, said that he could not help suspecting that it might
have wiggled a very little when Joshua was not looking directly at it.
We know that when we try to verify any law of nature by experiment,
we always find discrepancies between the observations and the theory.
These we rightly refer to errors of observation; but why may there not
be similar aberrations due to the imperfect obedience of the facts to
law?
Grant that this is conceivable and there can be nothing in experi­
ence to negative it. Strange to say, there are many people who will
have a difficulty in conceiving of an element of lawlessness in the
universe, and who may perhaps be tempted to reckon the doctrine of
the perfect rule of causality as one of the original instinctive beliefs,
like that of space having three dimensions. Far from that, it is histori­
cally altogether a modern notion, a loose inference from the discover­
ies of science. Aristotle often lays it down that some things are deter­
mined by causes while others happen by chance.24 Lucretius,
following Democritus, supposes his primordial atoms to deviate from
their rectilinear trajectories just fortuitously, and without any reason
at all. To the ancients, there was nothing strange in such notions; they
were matters of course; the strange thing would have been to have said
that there was no chance. So we are under no inward necessity of
believing/m7 perfect causality if we do not find any facts to bear it out.
I am very far from holding that experience is our only light; Whe-
w ell’s views of scientific method seem to me truer than M ill’s; so much
so that I should pronounce the known principles of physics to be but
a development of original instinctive beliefs. Yet I cannot help ac­
knowledging that the whole history of thought shows that our instinc­
tive beliefs, in their original condition are so mixed up with error, that
they can never be trusted till they have been corrected by experiment.
N ow the only thing that the inference from experience can ever teach
us is the approximate value of a ratio. It all rests on the principle of
sampling; we take a handful of coffee from a bag, and we judge that
there is about the same proportion of sound beans in the whole bag
that there is in that sample. At this rate, every proposition which we
can be entitled to make about the real world must be an approximate
one; we never can have the right to hold any truth to be exact. Approx­
imation must be the fabric out of which our philosophy has to be built.
I come now to another point. Most systems of philosophy maintain
certain facts or principles as ultimate. In truth, any fact is in one sense
ultimate,— that is to say, in its isolated aggressive stubbornness and

[page 275]

A Guess at the Riddle I 275
individual reality. What Scotus calls the haecceities of things, the
hereness and nowness of them, are indeed ultimate. Why this which
is here is such as it is, how, for instance, if it happens to be a grain of
sand it came to be so small and so hard, we can ask; we can also ask
how it got carried here, but the explanation in this case merely carries
us back to the fact that it was once in some other place, where similar
things might naturally be expected to be. Why IT , independently of
its general characters, comes to have any definite place in the world,
is not a question to be asked; it is simply an ultimate fact. There is also
another class of facts of which it is not reasonable to expect an explana­
tion, namely, facts of indeterminacy or variety. Why one definite kind
of event is frequent and another rare, is a question to be asked, but a
reason for the general fact that of events some kinds are common and
some rare, it would be unfair to demand. If all births took place on a
given day of the week, or if there were always more on Sundays than
on Mondays, that would be a fact to be accounted for, but that they
happen in about equal proportions on all the days requires no particu­
lar explanation. If we were to find that all the grains of sand on a
certain beach separated themselves into two or more sharply discrete
classes, as spherical and cubical ones, there would be something to be
explained, but that they are of various sizes and shapes, of no definable
character, can only be referred to the general manifoldness of nature.
Indeterminacy, then, or pure firstness, and haecceity, or pure second­
ness, are facts not calling for and not capable of explanation. Indeter­
minacy affords us nothing to ask a question about; haecceity is the
ultima ratio, the brutal fact that will not be questioned. But every fact
of a general or orderly nature calls for an explanation; and logic forbids
us to assume in regard to any given fact of that sort that it is of its own
nature absolutely inexplicable. This is what Kant* calls a regulative
principle, that is to say, an intellectual hope.25 The sole immediate
purpose of thinking is to render things intelligible; and to think and
yet in that very act to think a thing unintelligible is a self-stultification.
It is as though a man furnished with a pistol to defend himself against
an enemy were, on finding that enemy very redoubtable, to use his
pistol to blow his own brains out to escape being killed by his enemy.
Despair is insanity. True, there may be facts that will never get ex­
plained; but that any given fact is of the number, is what experience
can never give us reason to think; far less can it show that any fact is
of its own nature unintelligible. We must therefore be guided by the
rule of hope, and consequently we must reject every philosophy or
general conception of the universe, which could ever lead to the con­
clusion that any given general fact is an ultimate one. We must look
*After the scholastics. See Eckius in Petr. Hisp. 48 b nota 1.

[page 276]

276 I The Essential Peirce
forward to the explanation, not of all things, but of any given thing
whatever. There is no contradiction here, any more than there is in
our holding each one of our opinions, while we are ready to admit that
it is probable that not all are true; or any more than there is in saying
that any future time will sometime be passed, though there never will
be a time when all time is past.
Among other regular facts that have to be explained is Law or
regularity itself. We enormously exaggerate the part that law plays in
the universe. It is by means of regularities that we understand what
little we do understand of the world, and thus there is a sort of mental
perspective which brings regular phenomena to the foreground. We
say that every event is determined by causes according to law. But
apart from the fact that this must not be regarded as absolutely true,
it does not mean so much as it seems to do. We do not mean, for
example, that if a man and his antipode both sneeze at the same instant,
that event comes under any general law. That is merely what we call
a coincidence. But what we mean is there was a cause for the first
man’s sneezing, and another cause for the second man’s sneezing; and
the aggregate of these two events make up the first event about which
we began by inquiring. The doctrine is that the events of the physical
universe are merely motions of matter, and that these obey the laws
of dynamics. But this only amounts to saying that among the countless
systems of relationship existing among things we have found one that
is universal and at the same time is subject to law. There is nothing
except this singular character which makes this particular system of
relationship any more important than the others. From this point of
view, uniformity is seen to be really a highly exceptional phenomenon.
But we pay no attention to irregular relationships, as having no inter­
est for us.
We are brought, then, to this: conformity to law exists only within
a limited range of events and even there is not perfect, for an element
of pure spontaneity or lawless originality mingles, or at least, must be
supposed to mingle, with law everywhere. Moreover, conformity with
law is a fact requiring to be explained; and since Law in general cannot
be explained by any law in particular, the explanation must consist in
showing how law is developed out of pure chance, irregularity, and
indeterminacy.
T o this problem we are bound to address ourselves; and it is partic­
ularly needful to do so in the present state of science. The theory of
the molecular constitution of matter has now been carried as far as
there are clear indications to direct us, and we are now in the mists.
To develope the mathematical consequences of any hypothesis as to
the nature and laws of the minute parts of matter, and then to test it
by physical experiment, will take fifty years; and out of the innumera­
ble hypotheses that might be framed, there seems to be nothing to

[page 277]

A Guess at the Riddle I 277
make one more antecedently probable than another. At this rate how
long will it take to make any decided advance? We need some hint as
to how molecules may be expected to behave; whether for instance,
they would be likely to attract or repel one another inversely as the
fifth power of the distance, so that we may be saved from many false
suppositions, if we are not at once shown the way to the true one. Tell
us how the laws of nature came about, and we may distinguish in some
measure between laws that might and laws that could not have re­
sulted from such a process of development.
T o find that out is our task. I will begin the work with this guess.
Uniformities in the modes of action of things have come about by their
taking habits. At present, the course of events is approximately deter­
mined by law. In the past that approximation was less perfect; in the
future it will be more perfect. The tendency to obey laws has always
been and always will be growing. We look back toward a point in the
infinitely distant past when there was no law but mere indeterminacy;
we look forward to a point in the infinitely distant future when there
will be no indeterminacy or chance but a complete reign of law. But
at any assignable date in the past, however early, there was already
some tendency toward uniformity; and at any assignable date in the
future there will be some slight aberrancy from law. Moreover, all
things have a tendency to take habits. For atoms and their parts,
molecules and groups of molecules, and in short every conceivable real
object, there is a greater probability of acting as on a former like
occasion than otherwise. This tendency itself constitutes a regularity,
and is continually on the increase. In looking back into the past we are
looking towards periods when it was a less and less decided tendency.
But its own essential nature is to grow. It is a generalizing tendency;
it causes actions in the future to follow some generalization of past
actions; and this tendency is itself something capable of similar gener­
alization; and thus, it is self-generative. We have therefore only to
suppose the smallest spur of it in the past, and that germ would have
been bound to develope into a mighty and over-ruling principle, until
it supersedes itself by strengthening habits into absolute laws regulat­
ing the action of all things in every respect in the indefinite future.
According to this, three elements are active in the world, first,
chance; second, law; and third, habit-taking.
Such is our guess of the secret of the sphynx. T o raise it from the
rank of a philosophical speculation to that of a scientific hypothesis,
we must show that consequences can be deduced from it with more
or less probability which can be compared with observation. We must
show that there is some method of deducing the characters of the laws
which could result in this way by the action of habit-taking on purely
fortuitous occurrences, and a method of ascertaining whether such
characters belong to the actual laws of nature.

[page 278]

278 I The Essential Peirce
The existence of things consists in their regular behaviour. If an
atom had no regular attractions and repulsions, if its mass was at one
instant nothing, at another a ton, at another a negative quantity, if its
motion instead of being continuous, consisted in a series of leaps from
one place to another without passing through any intervening places,
and if there were no definite relations between its different positions,
velocities and directions of displacement, if it were at one time in one
place and at another time in a dozen, such a disjointed plurality of
phenomena would not make up any existing thing. Not only sub­
stances, but events, too, are constituted by regularities. The flow of
time, for example, in itself is a regularity. The original chaos, there­
fore, where there was no regularity, was in effect a state of mere
indeterminacy, in which nothing existed or really happened.
Our conceptions of the first stages of the development, before time
yet existed, must be as vague and figurative as the expressions of the
first chapter of Genesis. Out of the womb of indeterminacy we must
say that there would have come something by the principle of firstness,
which we may call a flash. Then by the principle of habit there would
have been a second flash. Though time would not yet have been, this
second flash was in some sense after the first, because resulting from
it. Then there would have come other successions ever more and more
closely connected, the habits and the tendency to take them ever
strengthening themselves, until the events would have been bound
together into something like a continuous flow. We have no reason to
think that even now time is quite perfectly continuous and uniform
in its flow. The quasi-flow which would result would, however, differ
essentially from time in this respect, that it would not necessarily be
in a single stream. Different flashes might start different streams, be­
tween which there should be no relations of contemporaneity or suc­
cession. So one stream might branch into two, or two might coalesce.
But the further result of habit would inevitably be to separate utterly
those that were long separated, and to make those which presented
frequent common points coalesce into perfect union. Those that were
completely separated would be so many different worlds which would
know nothing of one another; so that the effect would be just what we
actually observe.
But secondness is of two types. Consequently, besides flashes genu­
inely second to others, so as to come after them, there will be pairs of
flashes, or, since time is now supposed to be developed, we had better
say pairs of states, which are reciprocally second, each member of the
pair to the other. This is the first germ of spatial extension. These
states will undergo changes; and habits will be formed of passing from
certain states to certain others, and of not passing from certain states
to certain others. Those states to which a state will immediately pass,
will be adjacent to it; and thus habits will be formed which will

[page 279]

A Guess at the Riddle I 279
constitute a spatial continuum, but differing from our space by being
very irregular in its connections, having one number of dimensions in
one place and another number in another place, and being different for
one moving state from what it is for another.
Pairs of states will also begin to take habits, and thus each state
having different habits with reference to the different other states, will
give rise to bundles of habits, which will be substances.* Some of these
states will chance to take habits of persistency, and will get to be less
and less liable to disappear; while those that fail to take such habits will
fall out of existence. Thus, substances will get to be permanent.
In fact, habits, from the mode of their formation necessarily consist
in the permanence of some relation, and therefore on this theory, each
law of nature would consist in some permanence, such as the perma­
nence of mass, momentum, and energy. In this respect, the theory suits
the facts admirably.
The substances carrying their habits with them in their motions
through space, will tend to render the different parts of space alike.
Thus, the dimensionality of space w ill tend gradually to uniformity;
and multiple connections, except at infinity, where substances never
go, will be obliterated. At the outset, the connections of space were
probably different for one substance and part of a substance from what
they were for another; that is to say, points adjacent or near one
another for the motions of one body would not be so for another; and
this may possibly have contributed to break substances into little
pieces or atoms. But the mutual actions of bodies would have tended
to reduce their habits to uniformity in this respect; and besides there
must have arisen conflicts between the habits of bodies and the habits
of parts of space, which would never have ceased till they were
brought into conformity.
#I use substance, here, in the old sense of a thing, not in the modern chemical sense.

[page 280]

20
Trichotomic
MS 1600. [Previously unpublished.] Written (probably for
oral presentation) in early i888yshortly after the completion
of item 19, this three-page typescript (found in one o f the
thirteen boxes o f MS 1600) is a sort o f summary o f some of
the main points of “A Guess at the Riddle. ” In addition, it
includes a discussion of Peirce's categories applied to signs (a
topic that had beenprojectedfo r the unwritten second chapter
of the “G u e ssan d a comparison o f his views, on the subject
o f dramatic expression and theprinciples of being, with those
o f the New York playwright and theater manager Steele
MacKaye. The title of the paper is one of the alternatives
Peirce had considered for his projected “One, Two, Three, ”
which then became “A Guess at the Riddle. ”
T R IC H O T O M IC is the art of making three-fold divisions. Such
division depends on the conceptions of 1st, 2nd, 3rd. First is the begin­
ning, that which is fresh, original, spontaneous, free. Second is that
which is determined, terminated, ended, correlative, object, neces­
sitated, reacting. Third is the medium, becoming, developing, bring­
ing about.
A thing considered in itself is a unit. A thing considered as a
correlate or dependent, or as an effect, is second to something else. A
thing which in any way brings one thing into relation with another
is a third or medium between the two.
Firstness or freshness may have manifold varieties, or rather arbi­
trariness and variety is its essence, but it is absolute and unsusceptible
of differences of degree. It may be present more or less, but it has no
different orders of complication in itself. Secondness, on the other
hand, may be genuine or degenerate. Degenerate secondness has two
varieties, for a single object considered as second to itself is a degener­
ate second, and an object considered as second to another with which
it has no real connection, so that were that other taken away it would
still have those same characters which are implied in the relation, is
also a degenerate second. Genuine secondness is dynamical connec­
tion; degenerate secondness is a relation of reason, as a mere resem­

[page 281]

Trichotomic I 281
blance. Thirdness has two different orders of degeneracy. Genuine
thirdness is where of the three terms A, B, C, each is related to each
of the others, but by a relation which only subsists by virtue of the
third term, and each has a character which belongs to it only so long
as the others really influence it. It would not be enough to say that the
connection between the terms is dynamical, for forces only subsist
between pairs of objects; we had better use the word “ vital” to express
the mode of connection, for wherever there is life, generation, growth,
development, there and there alone is such genuine thirdness. Third­
ness of the first order of degeneracy is where two of the three terms
are identical, so that the other only mediates between two aspects of
the same object or where in some other way there is no vital connec­
tion between A, B, and C, but only a dynamical connection between
A and B, and another between B and C, thus bringing about a dynami­
cal connection between A and C. The second order of degeneracy is
where there is not even any dynamical connection between the terms,
or at least where the thirdness does not consist in that [although it may
be necessary for the establishment of the thirdness] but where all three
terms are virtually identical or are connected by mere relations of
reason.
Expression is a kind of representation or signification. A sign is a
third mediating between the mind addressed and the object repre­
sented. If the thirdness is undegenerate, the relation of the sign to the
thing signified is one which only subsists by virtue of the relation of
the sign to the mind addressed; that is to say, the sign is related to its
object by virtue of a mental association. Conventional modes of expres­
sion, and other modes dependent on the force of association, enter
largely into every art. They make up the bulk of language. If the
thirdness is degenerate in the first degree, the sign mediates between
the object and the mind by virtue of dynamical connections with the
object on the one hand and with the mind on the other. This is the only
kind of sign which can demonstrate the reality of things, or distinguish
between things exactly alike. As I am walking alone on a dark night,
a man suddenly jumps out of a corner with a “ Boh!” and thus brings
his presence home to me in a particularly forcible manner. It would
be impossible to follow a geometrical proof without the letters which
are attached to the different parts of the figure and thus forcibly direct
the attention to the right object. So a desired frame of mind on the part
of the audience is often brought about by the dramatist in a forcible
way by directly affecting the nervous system, without appealing to
association; or the attention of the audience may be awakened, as a
clergyman shouts out the commencement of a new head to his sermon,
or may be directed to a particular part of the stage, as the jugglers do.
If the thirdness is degenerate in the second1 degree, the idea in the
mind addressed, the object represented, and the representation of it,

[page 282]

282 I The Essential Peirce
are only connected by a mutual resemblance. The sign is a likeness;
and this is the main mode of representation in all art. Here there is no
sharp discrimination between the sign and the thing signified, the
mind floats in an ideal world and does not ask or care whether it be
real or not. This character makes a striking point of difference between
this kind of representation and the second; and that is why the use of
the second mode of representation is so unartistic. Again, the third
mode of representation is unanalytic, it presents the total object as it
exists in the concrete, and not merely abstract relations and points in
that object; and this constitutes a marked contrast from the first mode
of representation; and this is what makes the first mode of representa­
tion unartistic. Mr. Mackaye divides dramatic expression into panto­
mime, voice, and language.2 A person would at first glance make the
division into speech and gesture, and this would doubtless answer
some purposes better. But with reference to the value of the different
instruments at our command it is important to make a division which
shall correspond as nearly as may be with the different kinds of repre­
sentation. N ow language is in the main representation by the force of
association; it involves the analysis of whatever is to be conveyed [on
the part of the hearer as well as on the part of the author] and the
separate expression of abstract points. Voice, on the other hand,
awakes attention, directs it to particular channels, calls up feelings,
and modifies consciousness generally, in a physiological way in the
main; and is therefore a mode of expression of the second kind. Panto­
mime alone is mainly representation of the purely artistic kind, to be
contemplated without analysis and without discrimination of the sign
from the thing signified. Pantomime may itself be divided, on the same
principle, into three varieties; artistic pantomime which merely exhib­
its the man, his general disposition and what there is uppermost in him
at the moment, and is to be contemplated without analysis; dynamical
pantomime, as where one points with finger or shakes or holds up the
finger to impress what one is saying, or when one shakes the fist, or
knocks the interlocutor down; and sign-language, mostly (owing to the
peculiar nature of pantomime) of an imitative kind but yet involving
analysis and being really rather language than pantomime proper.
C O N SC IO U SN E SS has three elements, Single, Dual, and Plural
consciousness. Single or simple consciousness is consciousness as it can
exist in a single instant, the consciousness of all that is immediately
present, for which all that is not immediately present is an absolute
blank. This is the pure Feeling which forms the warp and woof of
consciousness, or in Kant’s phrase its matter.3 In this kind of con­
sciousness subject and object are nowise discriminated, in fact there is
no discrimination, no parts, no analysis, there is no considering a thing
for anything else, no relation, no representation, but just a pure inde­
scribable quale which is gone in the twinkling of an eye and which

[page 283]

Trichotomic I 283
bears no resemblance to any memory of it. It is just the quality of the
immediately present, which is continually pouring through us, always
here but never stopping to be examined. It is always fresh, always new,
sporting in unbounded manifoldness. Dual consciousness is a sense of
another, not present, a sense of hitting and of getting hit, of action and
reciprocal reaction, of energy. This is the most wide-awake kind of
consciousness; it strenuously sets object over against subject, in place
of the dreamy failure to recognize the situation which belongs to
Feeling. Dual consciousness includes Will, but the consciousness of
hitting and /that/ of being hit have been shown by conclusive experi­
ments not to differ, and Sense in its direct reference to an object is
likewise consciousness of action and reaction. It is the energetic and
real character of the dual consciousness that principally distinguishes
it. It consists of a sense of “ can” which is at the same time a sense of
“ cannot.” Force implies resistance, and power limitation. There is
always an opposite, always a but, always a second, in the dual con­
sciousness. It has nothing to do with may-be’s; it is always right there.
Plural or synthetic consciousness, is not the mere feeling of what is
immediately present, nor yet the mere sense of something without, but
is the being aware of the bridge which unites the present and the
absent, of a Process as such. Zeno showed how motion is impossible
if you refuse to open the eyes of the synthetic consciousness. It is the
perception of motion and change. I am soundly asleep and my bed­
clothes take fire. At first, the warmth merely tinges my consciousness,
so to speak; that is pure Feeling; then I become energetically conscious
of something and start up without knowing what it is; that is Dual
consciousness, Sense with Will; last I begin to collect myself, I am
aware of a process of learning, I put things together; that is Perception
and Synthetic consciousness, which collects present and absent into a
whole.
Dual consciousness, because it is consciousness of a second, has two
degrees, the dynamical and the statical or degenerate form. Dynamical
dual consciousness consists of outward action and reaction, External
Sense and Volition; statical dual consciousness consists of inward ac­
tion and reaction, Self-consciousness and Self-control. Plural con­
sciousness because it is consciousness of a third, has two degrees of
degeneracy. The genuine synthetic consciousness, the consciousness
of that which has its being in its thirdness, is Reason. The dynamical
variety is a consciousness of a coordination between acts of sense and
will, it is the looking upon the phenomena of sense and will as rational,
which we may call Desire, though that does not precisely define it. The
statical variety is the comparison of feelings, and may be called esthetic
understanding.
Mr. Mackaye’s division of the principles of being has considerable
resemblance with this. What he calls the vital or passional principle,

[page 284]

284 I The Essential Peirce
which sustains life, seems to be nearly what I call the simple conscious­
ness of Feeling; what he calls the affectional or impulsive principle is
my dual consciousness plus Desire and minus Sense; what he calls
Reflection is probably Reason with the esthetic understanding.4
The functions of the Nervous System are three, corresponding to
the three kinds of consciousness. They are, first, Irritability, for the
capacity of a nerve-cell to be thrown into an excited condition is
undoubtedly the physiological ground of feeling; second, the power of
conveying nervous disturbance over the nerve-fibres, for it is by this
property of the nerves that we are placed in relation with the outward
world; and third, power of acquiring habits, which is the ground of our
faculty of learning.
The properties of protoplasm in general are three, first, its capacity
of being thrown into a state in which it is more liquid and at the same
time has a stronger cohesion and surface-tension; second, the tendency
of this condition to spread throughout the entire mass; and third, its
power, when passing into or out of this condition, of assimilating new
material, provided this is presented so as to be subject to the same
forces as that which is deranged,— in other words the power of growth
with all that that implies.

[page 285]

21
The Architecture of Theories
P 439: The Monist 1 (January 1891)1161-/6. [Also published
in CP 6.7-34.] This is theJirst o fJive papers (although at least
one more had been projected, and “ The Reply to the Neces­
sitarians'” mentioned in the headnote to item 22 should be
considered a companion piece to that item) in the Monist
Metaphysical Series, in which Peirce fully applied to meta­
physical questions the evolutionary philosophy developed in
“A Guess at the Riddle. ” (The chapter on metaphysics in item
19 is a mere outline.) The architectonic approach of the
“Guess” is here explained and defended, and Peirce examines
a number o f conceptions to determine which ones “ought to
form the brick and mortar ofaphilosophical system. ” He then
reviews many of the essential ideas o f the “Guess, ” again
using his categories to organize his examination of different
sciences, and demonstrates that philosophy requires thorough­
going evolutionism, that mental phenomena fa ll into three
classes (feelings, sensations of reaction, and general concep­
tions), that the fundamental law of mental action is that
feelings and ideas tend to spread, and that “the one intelligi­
ble theory o f the universe is that o f objective idealism, that
matter is effete mind. ” Peirce concludes that chance and conti­
nuity are two of the most fundamental ideas on which to
build a philosophical theory that is compatible with modern
science.
O f the fifty or hundred systems of philosophy that have been ad­
vanced at different times of the world’s history, perhaps the larger
number have been, not so much results of historical evolution, as
happy thoughts which have accidentally1 occurred to their authors.
An idea which has been found interesting and fruitful has been
adopted, developed, and forced to yield explanations of all sorts of
phenomena. The English have been particularly given to this way of
philosophising; witness, Hobbes, Hartley, Berkeley, James Mill. N or
has it been by any means useless labor; it shows us what the true nature
and value of the ideas developed are, and in that way affords service­

[page 286]

286 I The Essential Peirce
able materials for philosophy. Just as if a man, being seized with the
conviction that paper was a good material to make things of, were to
go to work to build a papier mâché house, with roof of roofing-paper,
foundations of pasteboard, windows of paraffined paper, chimneys,
bath tubs, locks, etc., all of different forms of paper, his experiment
would probably afford valuable lessons to builders, while it would
certainly make a detestable house, so those one-idea’d philosophies are
exceedingly interesting and instructive, and yet are quite unsound.
The remaining systems of philosophy have been of the nature of
reforms, sometimes amounting to radical revolutions, suggested by
certain difficulties which have been found to beset systems previously
in vogue; and such ought certainly to be in large part the motive of any
new theory. This is like partially rebuilding a house. The faults that
have been committed are, first, that the dilapidations have generally
not been sufficiently thoroughgoing, and second, that not sufficient
pains has been taken to bring the additions into deep harmony with
the really sound parts of the old structure.
When a man is about to build a house, what a power of thinking
he has to do, before he can safely break ground! With what pains he
has to excogitate the precise wants that are to be supplied! What a
study to ascertain the most available and suitable materials, to deter­
mine the mode of construction to which those materials are best
adapted, and to answer a hundred such questions! N ow without riding
the metaphor too far, I think we may safely say that the studies prelim­
inary to the construction of a great theory should be at least as deliber­
ate and thorough as those that are preliminary to the building of a
dwelling-house.
That systems ought to be constructed architectonically has been
preached since Kant, but I do not think the full import of the maxim
has by any means been apprehended. What I would recommend is that
every person who wishes to form an opinion concerning fundamental
problems, should first of all make a complete survey of human knowl­
edge, should take note of all the valuable ideas in each branch of
science, should observe in just what respect each has been successful
and where it has failed, in order that in the light of the thorough
acquaintance so attained of the available materials for a philosophical
theory and of the nature and strength of each, he may proceed to the
study of what the problem of philosophy consists in, and of the proper
way of solving it. I must not be understood as endeavoring to state
fully all that these preparatory studies should embrace; on the con­
trary, I purposely slur over many points, in order to give emphasis to
one special recommendation, namely, to make a systematic study of
the conceptions out of which a philosophical theory may be built, in
order to ascertain what place each conception may fitly occupy in such
a theory, and to what uses it is adapted.

[page 287]

The Architecture o f Theories I 287
The adequate treatment of this single point would fill a volume, but
I shall endeavor to illustrate my meaning by glancing at several
sciences and indicating conceptions in them serviceable for philoso­
phy. As to the results to which long studies thus commenced have led
me, I shall just give a hint at their nature.
We may begin with dynamics,—field in our day of perhaps the
grandest conquest human science has ever made,— I mean the law of
the conservation of energy. But let us revert to the first step taken by
modern scientific thought,— and a great stride it was,— the inaugura­
tion of dynamics by Galileo. A modern physicist on examining
Galileo’s works is surprised to find how little experiment had to do
with the establishment of the foundations of mechanics. His principal
appeal is to common sense and il lume naturale.2 He always assumes
that the true theory will be found to be a simple and natural one. And
we can see why it should indeed be so in dynamics. For instance, a
body left to its own inertia, moves in a straight line, and a straight line
appears to us the simplest of curves. In itself no curve is simpler than
another. A system of straight lines has intersections precisely corre­
sponding to those of a system of like parabolas similarly placed, or to
those of any one of an infinity of systems of curves. But the straight
line appears to us simply, because, as Euclid says, it lies evenly be­
tween its extremities; that is, because viewed endwise it appears as a
point. That is, again, because light moves in straight lines. Now, light
moves in straight lines because of the part which the straight line plays
in the laws of dynamics. Thus it is that our minds having been formed
under the influence of phenomena governed by the laws of mechanics,
certain conceptions entering into those laws become implanted in our
minds, so that we readily guess at what the laws are. Without such a
natural prompting, having to search blindfold for a law which would
suit the phenomena, our chance of finding it would be as one to
infinity. The further physical studies depart from phenomena which
have directly influenced the growth of the mind, the less we can expect
to find the laws which govern them “ simple,” that is, composed of a
few conceptions natural to our minds.
The researches of Galileo, followed up by Huygens and others, led
to those modern conceptions of Force and Law, which have revolutio­
nised the intellectual world. The great attention given to mechanics
in the seventeenth century soon so emphasised these conceptions as to
give rise to the Mechanical Philosophy, or doctrine that all the phe­
nomena of the physical universe are to be explained upon mechanical
principles. N ew ton’s great discovery imparted a new impetus to this
tendency. The old notion that heat consists in an agitation of corpus­
cles was now applied to the explanation of the chief properties of gases.
The first suggestion in this direction was that the pressure of gases is
explained by the battering of the particles against the walls of the

[page 288]

288 I The Essential Peirce
containing vessel, which explained Boyle’s law of the compressibility
of air.3 Later, the expansion of gases, Avogadro’s chemical law,4 the
diffusion and viscosity of gases, and the action of Crookes’s radiome­
ter5 were shown to be consequences of the same kinetical theory; but
other phenomena, such as the ratio of the specific heat at constant
volume to that at constant pressure, require additional hypotheses,
which we have little reason to suppose are simple, so that we find
ourselves quite afloat. In like manner with regard to light, that it
consists of vibrations was almost proved by the phenomena of diffrac­
tion, while those of polarisation showed the excursions of the particles
to be perpendicular to the line of propagation; but the phenomena of
dispersion, etc., require additional hypotheses which may be very
complicated. Thus, the further progress of molecular speculation ap­
pears quite uncertain. If hypotheses are to be tried haphazard, or
simply because they will suit certain phenomena, it will occupy the
mathematical physicists of the world say half a century on the average
to bring each theory to the test, and since the number of possible
theories may go up into the trillions, only one of which can be true,
we have little prospect of making further solid additions to the subject
in our time. When we come to atoms, the presumption in favor of a
simple law seems very slender. There is room for serious doubt
whether the fundamental laws of mechanics hold good for single
atoms, and it seems quite likely that they are capable of motion in more
than three dimensions.
To find out much more about molecules and atoms, we must search
out a natural history of laws of nature, which may fulfill that function
which the presumption in favor of simple laws fulfilled in the early
days of dynamics, by showing us what kind of laws we have to expect
and by answering such questions as this: Can we with reasonable
prospect of not wasting time,6 try the supposition that atoms attract
one another inversely as the seventh power of their distances, or can
we not? T o suppose universal laws of nature capable of being appre­
hended by the mind and yet having no reason for their special forms,
but standing inexplicable and irrational, is hardly a justifiable position.
Uniformities are precisely the sort of facts that need to be accounted
for. That a pitched coin should sometimes turn up heads and some­
times tails calls for no particular explanation; but if it shows heads
every time, we wish to know how this result has been brought about.
Law is par excellence the thing that wants a reason.
N ow the only possible way of accounting for the laws of nature and
for uniformity in general is to suppose them results of evolution. This
supposes them not to be absolute, not to be obeyed precisely. It makes
an element of indeterminacy, spontaneity, or absolute chance in na­
ture. Just as, when we attempt to verify any physical law, we find our

[page 289]

The Architecture of Theories I 289
observations cannot be precisely satisfied by it, and rightly attribute
the discrepancy to errors of observation, so we must suppose far more
minute discrepancies to exist owing to the imperfect cogency of the
law itself, to a certain swerving of the facts from any definite formula.
Mr. Herbert Spencer wishes to explain evolution upon mechanical
principles.7This is illogical, for four reasons. First, because the princi­
ple of evolution requires no extraneous cause; since the tendency to
growth can be supposed itself to have grown from an infinitesimal
germ accidentally started. Second, because law ought more than any­
thing else to be supposed a result of evolution. Third, because exact
law obviously never can produce heterogeneity out of homogeneity;
and arbitrary heterogeneity is the feature of the universe the most
manifest and characteristic. Fourth, because the law of the conserva­
tion of energy is equivalent to the proposition that all operations
governed by mechanical laws are reversible; so that an immediate
corollary from it is that growth is not explicable by those laws, even
if they be not violated in the process of growth. In short, Spencer
is not a philosophical evolutionist, but only a half-evolutionist,— or,
if you will, only a semi-Spencerian.8 N ow philosophy requires
thorough-going evolutionism or none.
The theory of Darwin was that evolution had been brought about
by the action of two factors: first, heredity, as a principle making
offspring nearly resemble their parents, while yet giving room for
“ sporting,” or accidental variations,—for very slight variations often,
for wider ones rarely; and, second, the destruction of breeds or races
that are unable to keep the birth rate up to the death rate. This Dar­
winian principle is plainly capable of great generalisation. Wherever
there are large numbers of objects, having a tendency to retain certain
characters unaltered, this tendency, however, not being absolute but
giving room for chance variations, then, if the amount of variation is
absolutely limited in certain directions by the destruction of every­
thing which reaches those limits, there will be a gradual tendency to
change in directions of departure from them. Thus, if a million players
sit down to bet at an even game, since one after another will get ruined,
the average wealth of those who remain will perpetually increase.9
Here is indubitably a genuine formula of possible evolution, whether
its operation accounts for much or little in the development of animal
and vegetable species.
The Lamarckian theory also supposes that the development of
species has taken place by a long series of insensible changes, but it
supposes that those changes have taken place during the lives of the
individuals, in consequence of effort and exercise, and that reproduc­
tion plays no part in the process except in preserving these modifica­
tions.10 Thus, the Lamarckian theory only explains the development

[page 290]

290 I The Essential Peirce
of characters for which individuals strive, while the Darwinian theory
only explains the production of characters really beneficial to the race,
though these may be fatal to individuals.* But more broadly and philo­
sophically conceived, Darwinian evolution is evolution by the opera­
tion of chance, and the destruction of bad results, while Lamarckian
evolution is evolution by the effect of habit and effort.
A third theory of evolution is that of Mr. Clarence K ing.11 The
testimony of monuments and of rocks is that species are unmodified
or scarcely modified, under ordinary circumstances, but are rapidly
altered after cataclysms or rapid geological changes. Under novel cir­
cumstances, we often see animals and plants sporting excessively in
reproduction, and sometimes even undergoing transformations dur­
ing individual life, phenomena no doubt due partly to the enfeeble-
ment of vitality from the breaking up of habitual modes of life, partly
to changed food, partly to direct specific influence of the element in
which the organism is immersed. If evolution has been brought about
in this way, not only have its single steps not been insensible, as both
Darwinians and Lamarckians suppose, but they are furthermore nei­
ther haphazard on the one hand, nor yet determined by an inward
striving on the other, but on the contrary are effects of the changed
environment, and have a positive general tendency to adapt the orga­
nism to that environment, since variation will particularly affect or­
gans at once enfeebled and stimulated. This mode of evolution, by
external forces and the breaking up of habits, seems to be called for by
some of the broadest and most important facts of biology and paleon­
tology; while it certainly has been the chief factor in the historical
evolution of institutions as in that of ideas; and cannot possibly be
refused a very prominent place in the process of evolution of the
universe in general.
Passing to psychology, we find the elementary phenomena of mind
fall into three categories. First, we have Feelings, comprising all that
is immediately present, such as pain, blue, cheerfulness, the feeling
that arises when we contemplate a consistent theory, etc. A feeling is
a state of mind having its own living quality, independent of any other
state of mind. Or, a feeling is an element of consciousness which might
conceivably override every other state until it monopolised the mind,
although such a rudimentary state cannot actually be realized, and
would not properly be consciousness. Still, it is conceivable, or suppos-
able, that the quality of blue should usurp the whole mind, to the
exclusion of the ideas of shape, extension, contrast, commencement
and cessation, and all other ideas, whatsoever. A feeling is necessarily
perfectly simple, in itself, for if it had parts these would also be in the
*The neo-Darwinian, Weismann, has shown that mortality would almost necessar­
ily result from the action of the Darwinian principle.12

[page 291]

The Architecture of Theories I 291
mind, whenever the whole was present, and thus the whole could not
monopolise the mind.*
Besides Feelings, we have Sensations of reaction; as when a person
blindfold suddenly runs against a post, when we make a muscular
effort, or when any feeling gives way to a new feeling. Suppose I had
nothing in my mind but a feeling of blue, which were suddenly to give
place to a feeling of red; then, at the instant of transition there would
be a shock, a sense of reaction, my blue life being transmuted into red
life. If I were further endowed with a memory, that sense would
continue for some time, and there would also be a peculiar feeling or
sentiment connected with it. This last feeling might endure (conceiv­
ably I mean) after the memory of the occurrence and the feelings of
blue and red had passed away. But the sensation of reaction cannot exist
except in the actual presence of the two feelings blue and red to which
it relates. W herever we have two feelings and pay attention to a rela­
tion between them of whatever kind, there is the sensation of which
I am speaking. But the sense of action and reaction has two types: it
may either be a perception of relation between two ideas, or it may be
a sense of action and reaction between feeling and something out of
feeling. And this sense of external reaction again has two forms; for
it is either a sense of something happening to us, by no act of ours, we
being passive in the matter, or it is a sense of resistance, that is, of our
expending feeling upon something without. The sense of reaction is
thus a sense of connection or comparison between feelings, either, A ,
between one feeling and another, or B, between feeling and its absence
or lower degree; and under B we have, First, the sense of the access
of feeling, and Second, the sense of remission of feeling.
V ery different both from feelings and from reaction-sensations or
disturbances of feeling are general conceptions. When we think, we
are conscious that a connection between feelings is determined by a
general rule, we are aware of being governed by a habit. Intellectual
power is nothing but facility in taking habits and in following them
in cases essentially analogous to, but in non-essentials widely remote
from, the normal cases of connections of feelings under which those
habits were formed.
The one primary and fundamental law of mental action consists in
a tendency to generalisation. Feeling tends to spread; connections
between feelings awaken feelings; neighboring feelings become assim­
ilated; ideas are apt to reproduce themselves. These are so many for­
mulations of the one law of the growth of mind. When a disturbance
of feeling takes place, we have a consciousness of gain, the gain of
experience; and a new disturbance will be apt to assimilate itself to the
*A feeling may certainly be compound, but only in virtue of a perception which
is not that feeling nor any feeling at all.

[page 292]

292 I The Essential Peirce
one that preceded it. Feelings, by being excited, become more easily
excited, especially in the ways in which they have previously been
excited. The consciousness of such a habit constitutes a general con­
ception.
The cloudiness of psychological notions may be corrected by con­
necting them with physiological conceptions. Feeling may be sup­
posed to exist, wherever a nerve-cell is in an excited condition. The
disturbance of feeling, or sense of reaction, accompanies the transmis­
sion of disturbance between nerve-cells or from a nerve-cell to a mus­
cle-cell or the external stimulation of a nerve-cell. General conceptions
arise upon the formation of habits in the nerve-matter, which are
molecular changes consequent upon its activity and probably con­
nected with its nutrition.
The law of habit exhibits a striking contrast to all physical laws in
the character of its commands. A physical law is absolute. What it
requires is an exact relation. Thus, a physical force introduces into a
motion a component motion to be combined with the rest by the
parallelogram of forces; but the component motion must actually take
place exactly as required by the law of force. On the other hand, no
exact conformity is required by the mental law. Nay, exact conformity
would be in downright conflict with the law; since it would instantly
crystallise thought and prevent all further formation of habit. The law
of mind only makes a given feeling more likely to arise. It thus resem­
bles the “ non-conservative” forces of physics, such as viscosity and the
like, which are due to statistical uniformities in the chance encounters
of trillions of molecules.
The old dualistic notion of mind and matter, so prominent in
Cartesianism, as two radically different kinds of substance, will hardly
find defenders to-day. Rejecting this, we are driven to some form of
hylopathy, otherwise called monism. Then the question arises
whether physical laws on the one hand, and the psychical law on the
other are to be taken—
(A) as independent, a doctrine often called monism, but which I
would name neutralism; or,
(B) the psychical law as derived and special, the physical law alone
as primordial, which is materialism; or,
(C) the physical law as derived and special, the psychical law alone
as primordial, which is idealism.
The materialistic doctrine seems to me quite as repugnant to scien­
tific logic as to common sense; since it requires us to suppose that a
certain kind of mechanism will feel, which would be a hypothesis
absolutely irreducible to reason,—an ultimate, inexplicable regularity;
while the only possible justification of any theory is that it should make
things clear and reasonable.
Neutralism is sufficiently condemned by the logical maxim known

[page 293]

The Architecture of Theories I 293
as Ockham’s razor, i.e., that not more independent elements are to be
supposed than necessary. By placing the inward and outward aspects
of substance on a par, it seems to render both primordial.
The one intelligible theory of the universe is that of objective
idealism, that matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physi­
cal laws. But before this can be accepted it must show itself capable
of explaining the tridimensionality of space, the laws of motion, and
the general characteristics of the universe, with mathematical clear­
ness and precision; for no less should be demanded of every Philoso-
phy.
Modern mathematics is replete with ideas which may be applied to
philosophy. I can only notice one or two. The manner in which mathe­
maticians generalise is very instructive. Thus, painters are accustomed
to think of a picture as consisting geometrically of the intersections of
its plane by rays of light from the natural objects to the eye. But
geometers use a generalised perspective. For instance, in the figure let
0 be the eye, let A B C D E be the edgewise view of any plane, and
let af eD c be the edgewise view of another plane. The geometers draw
rays through 0 cutting both these planes, and treat the points of
intersection of each ray with one plane as representing the point of
intersection of the same ray with the other plane. Thus, e represents
E, in the painter’s way. D represents itself. C is represented by c,
which is further from the eye; and A is represented by a which is on
the other side of the eye. Such generalisation is not bound down to
sensuous images. Further, according to this mode of representation
every point on one plane represents a point on the other, and every
point on the latter is represented by a point on the former. But how
about the point/ which is in a direction from 0 parallel to the repre­
sented plane, and how about the point B which is in a direction parallel

[page 294]

294 I The Essential Peirce
to the representing plane? Some will say that these are exceptions; but
modern mathematics does not allow exceptions which can be annulled
by generalisation. As a point moves from C to D and thence to E and
off toward infinity, the corresponding point on the other plane moves
from c to D and thence to e and toward f But this second point can
pass through / to a, and when it is there the first point has arrived at
A. We therefore say that the first point has passed through infinity, and
that every line joins in to itself somewhat like an oval. Geometers talk
of the parts of lines at an infinite distance as points. This is a kind of
generalisation very efficient in mathematics.
Modern views of measurement have a philosophical aspect. There
is an indefinite number of systems of measuring along a line; thus, a
perspective representation of a scale on one line may be taken to
measure another, although of course such measurements will not agree
with what we call the distances of points on the latter line. T o establish
a system of measurement on a line we must assign a distinct number
to each point of it, and for this purpose we shall plainly have to
suppose the numbers carried out into an infinite number of places of
decimals. These numbers must be ranged along the line in unbroken
sequence. Further, in order that such a scale of numbers should be of
any use, it must be capable of being shifted into new positions, each
number continuing to be attached to a single distinct point. N ow it is
found that if this is true for “ im aginary” as well as for real points (an
expression which I cannot stop to elucidate), any such shifting will
necessarily leave two numbers attached to the same points as before.
So that when the scale is moved over the line by any continuous series
of shiftings of one kind, there are two points which no numbers on the
scale can ever reach, except the numbers fixed there. This pair of
points, thus unattainable in measurement, is called the Absolute.
These two points may be distinct and real, or they may coincide, or
they may be both imaginary. As an example of a linear quantity with
a double absolute we may take probability, which ranges from an
unattainable absolute certainty against a proposition to an equally
unattainable absolute certainty fo r it. A line, according to ordinary
notions, we have seen is a linear quantity where the two points at
infinity coincide. A velocity is another example. A train going with
infinite velocity from Chicago to N ew York would be at all the points
on the line at the very same instant, and if the time of transit were
reduced to less than nothing it would be moving in the other direction.
An angle is a familiar example of a mode of magnitude with no real
immeasurable values. One of the questions philosophy has to consider
is whether the development of the universe is like the increase of an
angle, so that it proceeds forever without tending toward anything
unattained, which I take to be the Epicurean view, or whether the
universe sprang from a chaos in the infinitely distant past to tend

[page 295]

The Architecture of Theories I 295
toward something different in the infinitely distant future, or whether
the universe sprang from nothing in the past to go on indefinitely
toward a point in the infinitely distant future, which, were it attained,
would be the mere nothing from which it set out.
The doctrine of the absolute applied to space comes to this, that
either—
First, space is, as Euclid teaches, both unlimited and immeasurable,
so that the infinitely distant parts of any plane seen in perspective
appear as a straight line, in which case the sum of the three angles of
a triangle amounts to i8o°; or,
Second, space is immeasurable but limited, so that the infinitely dis­
tant parts of any plane seen in perspective appear as a circle, beyond
which all is blackness, and in this case the sum of the three angles of
a triangle is less than i8o° by an amount proportional to the area of the
triangle; or,
Third, space is unlimited but finite (like the surface of a sphere), so
that it has no infinitely distant parts; but a finite journey along any
straight line would bring one back to his original position, and looking
off with an unobstructed view one would see the back of his own head
enormously magnified, in which case the sum of the three angles of a
triangle exceeds i8o° by an amount proportional to the area.
Which of these three hypotheses is true we know not. The largest
triangles we can measure are such as have the earth’s orbit for base,
and the distance of a fixed star for altitude. The angular magnitude
resulting from subtracting the sum of the two angles at the base of such
a triangle from i8o° is called the star’s parallax. The parallaxes of only
about forty stars have been measured as yet. Tw o of them come out
negative, that of Arided (a Cycni), a star of magnitude i\, which is
—o."o82, according to C. A. F. Peters, and that of a star of magnitude
7!, known as Piazzi III 422, which is —o."o45 according to R. S. Ball.13
But these negative parallaxes are undoubtedly to be attributed to er­
rors of observation; for the probable error of such a determination is
about ±o."o75, and it would be strange indeed if we were to be able to
see, as it were, more than half way round space, without being able to
see stars with larger negative parallaxes. Indeed, the very fact that of
all the parallaxes measured only two come out negative would be a
strong argument that the smallest parallaxes really amount to +o."i,
were it not for the reflexion that the publication of other negative
parallaxes may have been suppressed. I think we may feel confident
that the parallax of the furthest star lies somewhere between —o."o5
and -f o."i5, and within another century our grandchildren will surely
know whether the three angles of a triangle are greater or less than
180°,— that they are exactly that amount is what nobody ever can be
justified in concluding. It is true that according to the axioms of geom­
etry the sum of the three angles of a triangle is14 precisely 180°; but

[page 296]

296 I The Essential Peirce
these axioms are now exploded, and geometers confess that they, as
geometers, know not the slightest reason for supposing them to be
precisely true. They are expressions of our inborn conception of space,
and as such are entitled to credit, so far as their truth could have
influenced the formation of the mind. But that affords not the slightest
reason for supposing them exact.
Now, metaphysics has always been the ape of mathematics. Geom­
etry suggested the idea of a demonstrative system of absolutely certain
philosophical principles; and the ideas of the metaphysicians have at
all times been in large part drawn from mathematics. The metaphysi­
cal axioms are imitations of the geometrical axioms; and now that the
latter have been thrown overboard, without doubt the former will be
sent after them. It is evident, for instance, that we can have no reason
to think that every phenomenon in all its minutest details is precisely
determined by law. That there is an arbitrary element in the universe
we see,— namely, its variety. This variety must be attributed to spon­
taneity in some form.
Had I more space, I now ought to show how important for philoso­
phy is the mathematical conception of continuity.15 Most of what is
true in Hegel is a darkling glimmer of a conception which the mathe­
maticians had long before made pretty clear, and which recent re­
searches have still further illustrated.
Among the many principles of Logic which find their application
in Philosophy, I can here only mention one. Three conceptions are
perpetually turning up at every point in every theory of logic, and in
the most rounded systems they occur in connection with one another.
They are conceptions so very broad and consequently indefinite that
they are hard to seize and may be easily overlooked. I call them the
conceptions of First, Second, Third. First is the conception of being
or existing independent of anything else. Second is the conception of
being relative to, the conception of reaction with, something else.
Third is the conception of mediation, whereby a first and second are
brought into relation. To illustrate these ideas, I will show how they
enter into those we have been considering. The origin of things, con­
sidered not as leading to anything, but in itself, contains the idea of
First, the end of things that of Second, the process mediating between
them that of Third. A philosophy which emphasises the idea of the
One, is generally a dualistic philosophy in which the conception of
Second receives exaggerated attention; for this One (though of course
involving the idea of First) is always the other of a manifold which is
not one. The idea of the Many, because variety is arbitrariness and
arbitrariness is repudiation of any Secondness, has for its principal
component the conception of First. In psychology Feeling is First,
Sense of reaction Second, General conception Third, or mediation. In
biology, the idea of arbitrary sporting is First, heredity is Second, the

[page 297]

The Architecture of Theories I 297
process whereby the accidental characters become fixed is Third.
Chance is First, Law is Second, the tendency to take habits is Third.
Mind is First, Matter is Second, Evolution is Third.
Such are the materials out of which chiefly a philosophical theory
ought to be built, in order to represent the state of knowledge to which
the nineteenth century has brought us. Without going into other im­
portant questions of philosophical architectonic, we can readily fore­
see what sort of a metaphysics would appropriately be constructed
from those conceptions. Like some of the most ancient and some of the
most recent speculations it would be a Cosmogonic Philosophy. It
would suppose that in the beginning,— infinitely remote,—there was
a chaos of unpersonalised feeling, which being without connection or
regularity would properly be without existence. This feeling, sporting
here and there in pure arbitrariness, would have started the germ of
a generalising tendency. Its other sportings would be evanescent, but
this would have a growing virtue. Thus, the tendency to habit would
be started; and from this with the other principles of evolution all the
regularities of the universe would be evolved. At any time, however,
an element of pure chance survives and will remain until the world
becomes an absolutely perfect, rational, and symmetrical system, in
which mind is at last crystallised in the infinitely distant future.
That idea has been worked out by me with elaboration. It accounts
for the main features of the universe as we know it,—the characters
of time, space, matter, force, gravitation, electricity, etc. It predicts
many more things which new observations can alone bring to the test.
May some future student go over this ground again, and have the
leisure to give his results to the world.

[page 298]

22
The Doctrine of
Necessity Examined
P 474: The Monist 2 (April 1892)1321-37. [Also published in
CP 6.35-65; see also the companion piece to this itemyPeirce's
lengthy “Reply to the Necessitarians ” (6.588-618), a reply to
two articles published in theJuly and October 1892 issues by
Paul Carus, editor of the Monist.7 In this paper, Peirce
considers—and then rejects— the main arguments for deter­
minism, and he concludes that an element o f absolute chance
prevails in the world. He names his anti-necessitarian doc­
trine ‘tychism' and argues that “ tychism must give birth to
an evolutionary cosmology, in which all the regularities of
nature and mind are regarded as products of growth. ”
In The Monist for January 1891, I endeavored to show what elemen­
tary ideas ought to enter into our view of the universe.1 1 may mention
that on those considerations I had already grounded a cosmical theory,
and from it had deduced a considerable number of consequences capa­
ble of being compared with experience. This comparison is now in
progress, but under existing circumstances must occupy many years.
I propose here to examine the common belief that every single fact
in the universe is precisely determined by law. It must not be supposed
that this is a doctrine accepted everywhere and at all times by all
rational men. Its first advocate appears to have been Democritus the
atomist, who was led to it, as we are informed, by reflecting upon the
“ impenetrability, translation, and impact of matter (
«
a v r i T V i r i a K a i
<f>opá K a i 7rX7]yr¡ rrjq That is to say, having restricted his
attention to a field where no influence other than mechanical con­
straint could possibly come before his notice, he straightway jumped
to the conclusion that throughout the universe that was the sole princi­
ple of action,— a style of reasoning so usual in our day with men not
unreflecting as to be more than excusable in the infancy of thought.
But Epicurus, in revising the atomic doctrine and repairing its de­
fences, found himself obliged to suppose that atoms swerve from their
courses by spontaneous chance; and thereby he conferred upon the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 299]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 299
theory life and entelechy.3 For we now see clearly that the peculiar
function of the molecular hypothesis in physics is to open an entry for
the calculus of probabilities. Already, the prince of philosophers had
repeatedly and emphatically condemned the dictum of Democritus
(especially in the Physics, Book II, chapters iv, v, vi), holding that events
come to pass in three ways, namely, (i) by external compulsion, or the
action of efficient causes, (2) by virtue of an inward nature, or the
influence of final causes, and (3) irregularly without definite cause, but
just by absolute chance; and this doctrine is of the inmost essence of
Aristotelianism. It affords, at any rate, a valuable enumeration of the
possible ways in which anything can be supposed to have come about.
The freedom of the will, too, was admitted both by Aristotle and by
Epicurus.4 But the Stoa, which in every department seized upon the
most tangible, hard, and lifeless element, and blindly denied the exis­
tence of every other, which, for example, impugned the validity of the
inductive method and wished to fill its place with the reductio ad absur-
dum, very naturally became the one school of ancient philosophy to
stand by a strict necessitarianism, thus returning to the single princi­
ple of Democritus that Epicurus had been unable to swallow.5 Neces­
sitarianism and materialism with the Stoics went hand in hand, as by
affinity they should. At the revival of learning, Stoicism met with
considerable favor, partly because it departed just enough from A ris­
totle to give it the spice of novelty, and partly because its superficiali­
ties well adapted it for acceptance by students of literature and art who
wanted their philosophy drawn mild. Afterwards, the great discover­
ies in mechanics inspired the hope that mechanical principles might
suffice to explain the universe; and though without logical justification,
this hope has since been continually stimulated by subsequent ad­
vances in physics. Nevertheless, the doctrine was in too evident con­
flict with the freedom of the will and with miracles to be generally
acceptable, at first. But meantime there arose that most widely spread
of philosophical blunders, the notion that associationalism belongs
intrinsically to the materialistic family of doctrines; and thus was
evolved the theory of motives; and libertarianism became weakened.
At present, historical criticism has almost exploded the miracles, great
and small; so that the doctrine of necessity has never been in so great
vogue as now.
The proposition in question is that the state of things existing at
any time, together with certain immutable laws, completely determine
the state of things at every other time (for a limitation to future time
is indefensible). Thus, given the state of the universe in the original
nebula, and given the laws of mechanics, a sufficiently powerful mind
could deduce from these data the precise form of every curlicue of
every letter I am now writing.
Whoever holds that every act of the will as well as every idea of the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 300]

300 I The Essential Peirce
mind is under the rigid governance of a necessity coordinated with
that of the physical world, will logically be carried to the proposition
that minds are part of the physical world in such a sense that the laws
of mechanics determine everything that happens according to immu­
table attractions and repulsions. In that case, that instantaneous state
of things from which every other state of things is calculable consists
in the positions and velocities of all the particles at any instant. This,
the usual and most logical form of necessitarianism, is called the me­
chanical philosophy.
When I have asked thinking men what reason they had to believe
that every fact in the universe is precisely determined by law, the first
answer has usually been that the proposition is a “ presupposition” or
postulate of scientific reasoning. Well, if that is the best that can be said
for it, the belief is doomed. Suppose it be “ postulated” : that does not
make it true, nor so much as afford the slightest rational motive for
yielding it any credence. It is as if a man should come to borrow
money, and when asked for his security, should reply he “ postulated”
the loan. To “ postulate” a proposition is no more than to hope it is
true. There are, indeed, practical emergencies in which we act upon
assumptions of certain propositions as true, because if they are not so,
it can make no difference how we act. But all such propositions I take
to be hypotheses of individual facts. For it is manifest that no universal
principle can in its universality be comprised6 in a special case or can
be requisite for the validity of any ordinary inference. To say, for
instance, that the demonstration by Archimedes of the property of the
lever would fall to the ground if men were endowed with free will, is
extravagant; yet this is implied by those who make a proposition in­
compatible with the freedom of the will the postulate of all inference.
Considering, too, that the conclusions of science make no pretence to
being more than probable, and considering that a probable inference
can at most only suppose something to be most frequently, or other­
wise approximately, true, but never that anything is precisely true
without exception throughout the universe, we see how far this propo­
sition in truth is from being so postulated.
But the whole notion of a postulate being involved in reasoning
appertains to a by-gone and false conception of logic. Non-deductive,
or ampliative inference is of three kinds: induction, hypothesis, and
analogy. If there be any other modes, they must be extremely unusual
and highly complicated, and may be assumed with little doubt to be
of the same nature as those enumerated. For induction, hypothesis,
and analogy, as far as their ampliative character goes, that is, so far as
they conclude something not implied in the premises, depend upon
one principle and involve the same procedure. All are essentially infer­
ences from sampling. Suppose a ship arrives in Liverpool laden with
wheat in bulk. Suppose that by some machinery the whole cargo be
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 301]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 301
stirred up with great thoroughness. Suppose that twenty-seven thim­
blefuls be taken equally from the forward, midships, and aft parts,
from the starboard, centre, and larboard parts, and from the top, half
depth, and lower parts of her hold, and that these being mixed and the
grains counted, four-fifths of the latter are found to be of quality A.
Then we infer, experientially and provisionally, that approximately
four-fifths of all the grain in the cargo is of the same quality. I say we
infer this experientially and provisionally. By saying that we infer it
experientially, I mean that our conclusion makes no pretension to
knowledge of wheat-in-itself, our ahrjQeia, as the derivation of that
word implies, has nothing to do with latent wheat. We are dealing only
with the matter of possible experience,—experience in the full accep­
tation of the term as something not merely affecting the senses but also
as the subject of thought. If there be any wheat hidden on the ship, so
that it can neither turn up in the sample nor be heard of subsequently
from purchasers,—or if it be half-hidden, so that it may, indeed, turn
up, but is less likely to do so than the rest,—or if it can affect our senses
and our pockets, but from some strange cause or causelessness cannot
be reasoned about,— all such wheat is to be excluded (or have only its
proportional weight) in calculating that true proportion of quality A ,
to which our inference seeks to approximate. By saying that we draw
the inference provisionally, I mean that we do not hold that we have
reached any assigned degree of approximation as yet, but only hold
that if our experience be indefinitely extended, and if every fact of
whatever nature, as fast as it presents itself, be duly applied, according
to the inductive method, in correcting the inferred ratio, then our
approximation will become indefinitely close in the long run; that is
to say, close to the experience to come (not merely close by the exhaus­
tion of a finite collection) so that if experience in general is to fluctuate
irregularly to and fro, in a manner to deprive the ratio sought of all
definite value, we shall be able to find out approximately within what
limits it fluctuates, and if, after having one definite value, it changes
and assumes another, we shall be able to find that out, and in short,
whatever may be the variations of this ratio in experience, experience
indefinitely extended will enable us to detect them, so as to predict
rightly, at last, what its ultimate value may be, if it have any ultimate
value, or what the ultimate law of succession of values may be, if there
be any such ultimate law, or that it ultimately fluctuates irregularly
within certain limits, if it do so ultimately fluctuate. N ow our infer­
ence, claiming to be no more than thus experiential and provisional,
manifestly involves no postulate whatever.
For what is a postulate? It is the formulation of a material fact
which we are not entitled to assume as a premise, but the truth of
which is requisite to the validity of an inference. Any fact, then, which
might be supposed postulated, must either be such that it would ulti­
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 302]

302 I The Essential Peirce
mately present itself in experience, or not. If it will present itself, we
need not postulate it now in our provisional inference, since we shall
ultimately be entitled to use it as a premise. But if it never would
present itself in experience, our conclusion is valid but for the possibil­
ity of this fact being otherwise than assumed, that is, it is valid as far
as possible experience goes, and that is all that we claim. Thus, every
postulate is cut off, either by the provisionality or by the ¿xperiential-
ity of our inference. For instance, it has been said that induction
postulates that, if an indefinite succession of samples be drawn, exam­
ined, and thrown back each before the next is drawn, then in the long
run every grain will be drawn as often as any other, that is to say
postulates that the ratio of the numbers of times in which any two are
drawn will indefinitely approximate to unity. But no such postulate
is made; for if, on the one hand, we are to have no other experience
of the wheat than from such drawings, it is the ratio that presents itself
in those drawings and not the ratio which belongs to the wheat in its
latent existence that we are endeavoring to determine; while if, on the
other hand, there is some other mode by which the wheat is to come
under our knowledge, equivalent to another kind of sampling, so that
after all our care in stirring up the wheat, some experiential grains will
present themselves in the first sampling operation more often than
others in the long run, this very singular fact will be sure to get
discovered by the inductive method, which must avail itself of every
sort of experience; and our inference, which was only provisional,
corrects itself at last. Again, it has been said that induction postulates
that under like circumstances like events will happen, and that this
postulate is at bottom the same as the principle of universal causation.
But this is a blunder, or bevue, due to thinking exclusively of induc­
tions where the concluded ratio is either i or o. If any such proposition
were postulated, it would be that under like circumstances (the cir­
cumstances of drawing the different samples) different events occur in
the same proportions in all the different sets,— a proposition which is
false and even absurd. But in truth no such thing is postulated, the
experiential character of the inference reducing the condition of valid­
ity to this, that if a certain result does not occur, the opposite result
will be manifested, a condition assured by the provisionality of the
inference. But it may be asked whether it is not conceivable that every
instance of a certain class destined to be ever employed as a datum of
induction should have one character, while every instance destined not
to be so employed should have the opposite character. The answer is
that in that case, the instances excluded from being subjects of reason­
ing would not be experienced in the full sense of the word, but would
be among these latent individuals of which our conclusion does not
pretend to speak.
To this account of the rationale of induction I know of but one
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 303]

The Doctrine o f Necessity Examined I 303
objection worth mention: it is that I thus fail to deduce the full degree
of force which this mode of inference in fact possesses; that according
to my view, no matter how thorough and elaborate the stirring and
mixing process had been, the examination of a single handful of grain
would not give me any assurance, sufficient to risk money upon, that
the next handful would not greatly modify the concluded value of the
ratio under inquiry, while, in fact, the assurance would be very high
that this ratio was not greatly in error. If the true ratio of grains of
quality A were 0.80 and the handful contained a thousand grains, nine
such handfuls out of every ten would contain from 780 to 820 grains
of quality A. The answer to this is that the calculation given is correct
when we know that the units of this handful and the quality inquired
into have the normal independence of one another, if for instance the
stirring has been complete and the character sampled for has been
settled upon in advance of the examination of the sample. But in so far
as these conditions are not known to be complied with, the above
figures cease to be applicable. Random sampling and predesignation of
the character sampled for should always be striven after in inductive
reasoning, but when they cannot be attained, so long as it is conducted
honestly, the inference retains some value. When we cannot ascertain
how the sampling has been done or the sample-character selected,
induction still has the essential validity which my present account of
it shows it to have.
I do not think a man who combines a willingness to be convinced
with a power of appreciating an argument upon a difficult subject can
resist the reasons which have been given to show that the principle of
universal necessity cannot be defended as being a postulate of reason­
ing. But then the question immediately arises whether it is not proved
to be true, or at least rendered highly probable, by observation of
nature.
Still, this question ought not long to arrest a person accustomed to
reflect upon the force of scientific reasoning. For the essence of the
necessitarian position is that certain continuous quantities have cer­
tain exact values. Now, how can observation determine the value of
such a quantity with a probable error absolutely nil? T o one who is
behind the scenes, and knows that the most refined comparisons of
masses, lengths, and angles, far surpassing in precision all other mea­
surements, yet fall behind the accuracy of bank-accounts, and that the
ordinary determinations of physical constants, such as appear from
month to month in the journals, are about on a par with an uphol­
sterer’s measurements of carpets and curtains, the idea of mathemati­
cal exactitude being demonstrated in the laboratory will appear simply
ridiculous. There is a recognised method of estimating the probable
magnitudes of errors in physics,—the method of least squares. It is
universally admitted that this method makes the errors smaller than
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 304]

304 I The Essential Peirce
they really are; yet even according to that theory an error indefinitely
small is indefinitely improbable; so that any statement to the effect that
a certain continuous quantity has a certain exact value, if well-founded
at all, must be founded on something other than observation.
Still, I am obliged to admit that this rule is subject to a certain
qualification. Namely, it only applies to continuous* quantity. Now,
certain kinds of continuous quantity are discontinuous at one or at two
limits, and for such limits the rule must be modified. Thus, the length
of a line cannot be less than zero. Suppose, then, the question arises
how long a line a certain person had drawn from a marked point on
a piece of paper. If no line at all can be seen, the observed length is
zero; and the only conclusion this observation warrants is that the
length of the line is less than the smallest length visible with the optical
power employed. But indirect observations,— for example, that the
person supposed to have drawn the line was never within fifty feet of
the paper,— may make it probable that no line at all was made, so that
the concluded length will be strictly zero. In like manner, experience
no doubt would warrant the conclusion that there is absolutely no
indigo in a given ear of wheat, and absolutely no attar in a given lichen.
But such inferences can only be rendered valid by positive experiential
evidence, direct or remote, and cannot rest upon a mere inability to
detect the quantity in question. We have reason to think there is no
indigo in the wheat, because we have remarked that wherever indigo
is produced it is produced in considerable quantities, to mention only
one argument. We have reason to think there is no attar in the lichen,
because essential oils seem to be in general peculiar to single species.
If the question had been whether there was iron in the wheat or the
lichen, though chemical analysis should fail to detect its presence, we
should think some of it probably was there, since iron is almost every­
where. Without any such information, one way or the other, we could
only abstain from any opinion as to the presence of the substance in
question. It cannot, I conceive, be maintained that we are in any better
position than this in regard to the presence of the element of chance
or spontaneous departures from law in nature.
Those observations which are generally adduced in favor of me­
chanical causation simply prove that there is an element of regularity
in nature, and have no bearing whatever upon the question of whether
such regularity is exact and universal, or not. N ay, in regard to this
exactitude, all observation is directly opposed to it; and the most that can
be said is that a good deal of this observation can be explained away.
T ry to verify any law of nature, and you will find that the more precise
your observations, the more certain they will be to show irregular
*Continuous is not exactly the right word, but I let it go to avoid a long and
irrelevant discussion.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 305]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 305
departures from the law. We are accustomed to ascribe these, and I do
not say wrongly, to errors of observation; yet we cannot usually ac­
count for such errors in any antecedently probable way. Trace their
causes back far enough, and you will be forced to admit they are always
due to arbitrary determination, or chance.
But it may be asked whether if there were an element of real chance
in the universe it must not occasionally be productive of signal effects
such as could not pass unobserved. In answer to this question, without
stopping to point out that there is an abundance of great events which
one might be tempted to suppose were of that nature, it will be sim­
plest to remark that physicists hold that the particles of gases are
moving about irregularly, substantially as if by real chance, and that
by the principles of probabilities there must occasionally happen to be
concentrations of heat in the gases contrary to the second law of
thermodynamics, and these concentrations, occurring in explosive
mixtures, must sometimes have tremendous effects. Here, then, is in
substance the very situation supposed; yet no phenomena ever have
resulted which we are forced to attribute to such chance concentration
of heat, or which anybody, wise or foolish, has ever dreamed of ac­
counting for in that manner.
In view of all these considerations, I do not believe that anybody,
not in a state of case-hardened ignorance respecting the logic of sci­
ence, can maintain that the precise and universal conformity of facts
to law is clearly proved, or even rendered particularly probable, by
any observations hitherto made. In this way, the determined advocate
of exact regularity will soon find himself driven to a priori reasons to
support his thesis. These received such a socdolager from Stuart M ill
in his Examination o fHamilton, 7 that holding to them now seems to me
to denote a high degree of imperviousness to reason; so that I shall pass
them by with little notice.
T o say that we cannot help believing a given proposition is no
argument, but it is a conclusive fact if it be true; and with the substitu­
tion of “ I” for “ we,” it is true in the mouths of several classes of minds,
the blindly passionate, the unreflecting and ignorant, and the person
who has overwhelming evidence before his eyes. But that which has
been inconceivable to-day has often turned out indisputable on the
morrow. Inability to conceive is only a stage through which every man
must pass in regard to a number of beliefs,—unless endowed with
extraordinary obstinacy and obtuseness. His understanding is en­
slaved to some blind compulsion which a vigorous mind is pretty sure
soon to cast off.
Some seek to back up the a priori position with empirical argu­
ments. They say that the exact regularity of the world is a natural
belief, and that natural beliefs have generally been confirmed by expe­
rience. There is some reason in this. Natural beliefs, however, if they
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 306]

306 I The Essential Peirce
generally have a foundation of truth, also require correction and
purification from natural illusions. The principles of mechanics are
undoubtedly natural beliefs; but, for all that, the early formulations of
them were exceedingly erroneous. The general approximation to truth
in natural beliefs is, in fact, a case of the general adaptation of genetic
products to recognisable utilities or ends. Now, the adaptations of
nature, beautiful and often marvellous as they verily are, are never
found to be quite perfect; so that the argument is quite against the
absolute exactitude of any natural belief, including that of the princi­
ple of causation.
Another argument, or convenient commonplace, is that absolute
chance is inconceivable. This word has eight current significations. The
Century Dictionary enumerates six.8 Those who talk like this will
hardly be persuaded to say in what sense they mean that chance is
inconceivable. Should they do so, it would easily be shown either that
they have no sufficient reason for the statement or that the inconceiva­
bility is of a kind which does not prove that chance is non-existent.
Another a priori argument is that chance is unintelligible; that is
to say, while it may perhaps be conceivable, it does not disclose to the
eye of reason the how or why of things; and since a hypothesis can only
be justified so far as it renders some phenomenon intelligible, we never
can have any right to suppose absolute chance to enter into the produc­
tion of anything in nature. This argument may be considered in con­
nection with two others. Namely, instead of going so far as to say that
the supposition of chance can never properly be used to explain any
observed fact, it may be alleged merely that no facts are known which
such a supposition could in any way help in explaining. Or again, the
allegation being still further weakened, it may be said that since depar­
tures from law are not unmistakably observed, chance is not a vera
causa, and ought not unnecessarily to be introduced into a hypothesis.
These are no mean arguments, and require us to examine the mat­
ter a little more closely. Come, my superior opponent, let me learn
from your wisdom. It seems to me that every throw of sixes with a pair
of dice is a manifest instance of chance.
“ While you would hold a throw of deuce-ace to be brought about
by necessity?” [The opponent’s supposed remarks are placed in quota­
tion marks.]
Clearly one throw is as much chance as another.
“ Do you think throws of dice are of a different nature from other
events?”
I see that I must say that all the diversity and specificalness of
events is attributable to chance.
“ Would you, then, deny that there is any regularity in the world?”
That is clearly undeniable. I must acknowledge there is an approxi­
mate regularity, and that every event is influenced by it. But the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 307]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 307
diversification, specificalness, and irregularity of things I suppose is
chance. A throw of sixes appears to me a case in which this element
is particularly obtrusive.
“ If you reflect more deeply, you will come to see that chance is only
a name for a cause that is unknown to us.”
Do you mean that we have no idea whatever what kind of causes
could bring about a throw of sixes?
“ On the contrary, each die moves under the influence of precise
mechanical laws.”
But it appears to me that it is not these laws which made the die
turn up sixes; for these laws act just the same when other throws come
up. The chance lies in the diversity of throws; and this diversity cannot
be due to laws which are immutable.
“ The diversity is due to the diverse circumstances under which the
laws act. The dice lie differently in the box, and the motion given to
the box is different. These are the unknown causes which produce the
throws, and to which we give the name of chance; not the mechanical
law which regulates the operation of these causes. You see you are
already beginning to think more clearly about this subject.”
Does the operation of mechanical law not increase the diversity?
“ Properly not. You must know that the instantaneous state of a
system of particles is defined by six times as many numbers as there
are particles, three for the coordinates of each particle’s position, and
three more for the components of its velocity. This number of num­
bers, which expresses the amount of diversity in the system, remains
the same at all times. There may be, to be sure, some kind of relation
between the coordinates and component velocities of the different
particles, by means of which the state of the system might be expressed
by a smaller number of numbers. But, if this is the case, a precisely
corresponding relationship must exist between the coordinates and
component velocities at any other time, though it may doubtless be a
relation less obvious to us. Thus, the intrinsic complexity of the system
is the same at all times.”
V ery well, my obliging opponent, we have now reached an issue.
You think all the arbitrary specifications of the universe were intro­
duced in one dose, in the beginning, if there was a beginning, and that
the variety and complication of nature has always been just as much
as it is now. But I, for my part, think that the diversification, the
specification, has been continually taking place. Should you conde­
scend to ask me why I so think, I should give my reasons as follows:
i) Question any science which deals with the course of time. Con­
sider the life of an individual animal or plant, or of a mind. Glance at
the history of states, of institutions, of language, of ideas. Examine the
successions of forms shown by paleontology, the history of the globe
as set forth in geology, of what the astronomer is able to make out
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 308]

308 I The Essential Peirce
concerning the changes of stellar systems. Everywhere the main fact
is growth and increasing complexity. Death and corruption are mere
accidents or secondary phenomena. Among some of the lower orga­
nisms, it is a moot point with biologists whether there be anything
which ought to be called death. Races, at any rate, do not die out except
under unfavorable circumstances. From these broad and ubiquitous
facts we may fairly infer, by the most unexceptionable logic, that there
is probably in nature some agency by which the complexity and diver­
sity of things can be increased; and that consequently the rule of
mechanical necessity meets in some way with interference.
2) By thus admitting pure spontaneity or life as a character of the
universe, acting always and everywhere though restrained within nar­
row bounds by law, producing infinitesimal departures from law con­
tinually, and great ones with infinite infrequency, I account for all the
variety and diversity of the universe, in the only sense in which the
really suigeneris and new can be said to be accounted for. The ordinary
view has to admit the inexhaustible mulitudinous variety of the world,
has to admit that its mechanical law cannot account for this in the least,
that variety can spring only from spontaneity, and yet denies without
any evidence or reason the existence of this spontaneity, or else shoves
it back to the beginning of time and supposes it dead ever since. The
superior logic of my view appears to me not easily controverted.
3) When I ask the necessitarian how he would explain the diversity
and irregularity of the universe, he replies to me out of the treasury
of his wisdom that irregularity is something which from the nature of
things we must not seek to explain. Abashed at this, I seek to cover my
confusion by asking how he would explain the uniformity and regular­
ity of the universe, whereupon he tells me that the laws of nature are
immutable and ultimate facts, and no account is to be given of them.
But my hypothesis of spontaneity does explain irregularity, in a cer­
tain sense; that is, it explains the general fact of irregularity, though
not, of course, what each lawless event is to be. At the same time, by
thus loosening the bond of necessity, it gives room for the influence
of another kind of causation, such as seems to be operative in the mind
in the formation of associations, and enables us to understand how the
uniformity of nature could have been brought about. That single
events should be hard and unintelligible, logic will permit without
difficulty: we do not expect to make the shock of a personally experi­
enced earthquake appear natural and reasonable by any amount of
cogitation. But logic does expect things general to be understandable.
To say that there is a universal law, and that it is a hard, ultimate,
unintelligible fact, the why and wherefore of which can never be
inquired into, at this a sound logic will revolt; and will pass over at
once to a method of philosophising which does not thus barricade the
road of discovery.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 309]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 309
4) Necessitarianism cannot logically stop short of making the
whole action of the mind a part of the physical universe. Our notion
that we decide what we are going to do, if as the necessitarian says, it
has been calculable since the earliest times, is reduced to illusion.
Indeed, consciousness in general thus becomes a mere illusory aspect
of a material system. What we call red, green, and violet are in reality
only different rates of vibration. The sole reality is the distribution of
qualities of matter in space and time. Brain-matter is protoplasm in a
certain degree and kind of complication,— a certain arrangement of
mechanical particles. Its feeling is but an inward aspect, a phantom.
For, from the positions and velocities of the particles at any one in­
stant, and the knowledge of the immutable forces, the positions at all
other times are calculable; so that the universe of space, time, and
matter is a rounded system uninterfered with from elsewhere. But
from the state of feeling at any instant, there is no reason to suppose
the states of feeling at all other instants are thus exactly calculable; so
that feeling is, as I said, a mere fragmentary and illusive aspect of the
universe. This is the way, then, that necessitarianism has to make up
its accounts. It enters consciousness under the head of sundries, as a
forgotten trifle; its scheme of the universe would be more satisfactory
if this little fact could be dropped out of sight. On the other hand, by
supposing the rigid exactitude of causation to yield, I care not how
little,— be it but by a strictly infinitesimal amount,—we gain room to
insert mind into our scheme, and to put it into the place where it is
needed, into the position which, as the sole self-intelligible thing, it is
entitled to occupy, that of the fountain of existence; and in so doing
we resolve the problem of the connection of soul and body.
5) But I must leave undeveloped the chief of my reasons, and can
only adumbrate it. The hypothesis of chance-spontaneity is one whose
inevitable consequences are capable of being traced out with mathe­
matical precision into considerable detail. Much of this I have done
and find the consequences to agree with observed facts to an extent
which seems to me remarkable. But the matter and methods of reason­
ing are novel, and I have no right to promise that other mathematicians
shall find my deductions as satisfactory as I m yself do, so that the
strongest reason for my belief must for the present remain a private
reason of my own, and cannot influence others. I mention it to explain
my own position; and partly to indicate to future mathematical specu­
lators a veritable gold-mine, should time and circumstances and the
abridger of all joys prevent my opening it to the world.
If now I, in my turn, inquire of the necessitarian why he prefers
to suppose that all specification goes back to the beginning of things,
he will answer me with one of those last three arguments which I left
unanswered.
First, he may say that chance is a thing absolutely unintelligible,
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 310]

310 I The Essential Peirce
and therefore that we never can be entitled to make such a supposition.
But does not this objection smack of naïve impudence? It is not mine,
it is his own conception of the universe which leads abruptly up to
hard, ultimate, inexplicable, immutable law, on the one hand, and to
inexplicable specification and diversification of circumstances on the
other. M y view, on the contrary, hypothetises nothing at all, unless it
be hypothesis to say that all specification came about in some sense,
and is not to be accepted as unaccountable. To undertake to account
for anything by saying baldly that it is due to chance would, indeed,
be futile. But this I do not do. I make use of chance chiefly to make
room for a principle of generalisation, or tendency to form habits,
which I hold has produced all regularities. The mechanical philoso­
pher leaves the whole specification of the world utterly unaccounted
for, which is pretty nearly as bad as to boldly attribute it to chance.
I attribute it altogether to chance, it is true, but to chance in the form
of a spontaneity which is to some degree regular. It seems to me clear
at any rate that one of these two positions must be taken, or else
specification must be supposed due to a spontaneity which develops
itself in a certain and not in a chance way, by an objective logic like
that of Hegel. This last way I leave as an open possibility, for the
present; for it is as much opposed to the necessitarian scheme of exis­
tence as my own theory is.
Secondly, the necessitarian may say there are, at any rate, no ob­
served phenomena which the hypothesis of chance could aid in ex­
plaining. In reply, I point first to the phenomenon of growth and
developing complexity, which appears to be universal, and which
though it may possibly be an affair of mechanism perhaps, certainly
presents all the appearance of increasing diversification. Then, there
is variety itself, beyond comparison the most obtrusive character of the
universe: no mechanism can account for this. Then, there is the very
fact the necessitarian most insists upon, the regularity of the universe
which for him serves only to block the road of inquiry. Then, there
are the regular relationships between the laws of nature,— similarities
and comparative characters, which appeal to our intelligence as its
cousins, and call upon us for a reason. Finally, there is consciousness,
feeling, a patent fact enough, but a very inconvenient one to the
mechanical philosopher.
Thirdly, the necessitarian may say that chance is not a vera causa,
that we cannot know positively there is any such element in the uni­
verse. But the doctrine of the vera causa has nothing to do with elemen­
tary conceptions. Pushed to that extreme, it at once cuts off belief in
the existence of a material universe; and without that necessitarianism
could hardly maintain its ground. Besides, variety is a fact which must
be admitted; and the theory of chance merely consists in supposing
this diversification does not antedate all time. Moreover, the avoidance
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 311]

The Doctrine of Necessity Examined I 311
of hypotheses involving causes nowhere positively known to act— is
only a recommendation of logic, not a positive command. It cannot be
formulated in any precise terms without at once betraying its untena­
ble character,— I mean as rigid rule, for as a recommendation it is
wholesome enough.
I believe I have thus subjected to fair examination all the important
reasons for adhering to the theory of universal necessity, and have
shown their nullity. I earnestly beg that whoever may detect any flaw
in my reasoning will point it out to me, either privately or publicly;
for if I am wrong, it much concerns me to be set right speedily.9If my
argument remains unrefuted, it will be time, I think, to doubt the
absolute truth of the principle of universal law; and when once such
a doubt has obtained a living root in any man’s mind, my cause with
him, I am persuaded, is gained.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 312]

23
The Law ofMind
P 477: The Monist 2 (July 1892)1533-39. [Also published in
CP 6.102-63.] In thispaper, Peirce develops his synechism, the
doctrine that continuity is uo fprime importance in philoso­
phy ” and, according to which, the one law of mind is that
ideas tend to spread and to affect other ideas but that, in
spreading, they lose intensity as they gain generality. From
synechism, doctrines of logical realism, objective idealism,
tychismfollow. Peirce also considers continuityfrom the
standpoint of mathematics (with reference to Cantor), and he
isolates two fundamental properties o f a continuous series:
Aristotelicity (every continuum contains its limits) and Kan-
ticity (every continuum is infinitely divisible); applying the
former to philosophy, he finds that consciousness essentially
occupies time. He also claims that the three principal types of
mental action correspond to the three main classes of logical
inference.
In an article published in The Monist for January 1891, I endeav­
ored to show what ideas ought to form the warp of a system of phi­
losophy, and particularly emphasised that of absolute chance. In the
number of April 1892, I argued further in favor of that way of think­
ing, which it will be convenient to christen tychism (from rvx?),
chance).1 A serious student of philosophy will be in no haste to ac­
cept or reject this doctrine; but he will see in it one of the chief
attitudes which speculative thought may take, feeling that it is not
for an individual, nor for an age, to pronounce upon a fundamental
question of philosophy. That is a task for a whole era to work out. I
have begun by showing that tychism must give birth to an evolution­
ary cosmology, in which all the regularities of nature and of mind
are regarded as products of growth, and to a Schelling-fashioned ide­
alism which holds matter to be mere specialised and partially dead­
ened mind. I may mention, for the benefit of those who are curious
in studying mental biographies, that I was born and reared in the
neighborhood of Concord,— I mean in Cambridge,— at the time
when Emerson, Hedge, and their friends were disseminating the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 313]

The Law of Mind I 313
ideas that they had caught from Schelling, and Schelling from Ploti­
nus, from Boehm, or from God knows what minds stricken with the
monstrous mysticism of the East. But the atmosphere of Cambridge
held many an antiseptic against Concord transcendentalism; and I
am not conscious of having contracted any of that virus. Neverthe­
less, it is probable that some cultured bacilli, some benignant form of
the disease was implanted in my soul, unawares, and that now, after
long incubation, it comes to the surface, modified by mathematical
conceptions and by training in physical investigations.
The next step in the study of cosmology must be to examine the
general law of mental action. In doing this, I shall for the time drop
my tychism out of view, in order to allow a free and independent
expansion to another conception signalised in my first Monist- paper as
one of the most indispensible to philosophy, though it was not there
dwelt upon; I mean the idea of continuity. The tendency to regard
continuity, in the sense in which I shall define it, as an idea of prime
importance in philosophy may conveniently be termed synechism. The
present paper is intended chiefly to show what synechism is, and what
it leads to. I attempted, a good many years ago, to develop this doctrine
in the Journal o f Speculative Philosophy (Vol. II.); but I am able now to
improve upon that exposition, in which I was a little blinded by
nominalistic prepossessions. I refer to it, because students may possi­
bly find that some points not sufficiently explained in the present
paper are cleared up in those earlier ones.2
W h a t T h e L a w Is
Logical analysis applied to mental phenomena shows that there is
but one law of mind, namely, that ideas tend to spread continuously
and to affect certain others which stand to them in a peculiar relation
of affectibility. In this spreading they lose intensity, and especially the
power of affecting others, but gain generality and become welded with
other ideas.
I set down this formula at the beginning, for convenience; and now
proceed to comment upon it.
I n d i v i d u a l i t y o f I d e a s
We are accustomed to speak of ideas as reproduced, as passed from
mind to mind, as similar or dissimilar to one another, and, in short,
as if they were substantial things; nor can any reasonable objection be
raised to such expressions. But taking the word “ idea” in the sense of
an event in an individual consciousness, it is clear that an idea once
past is gone forever, and any supposed recurrence of it is another idea.
These two ideas are not present in the same state of consciousness, and
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 314]

314 I The Essential Peirce
therefore cannot possibly be compared. To say, therefore, that they are
similar can only mean that an occult power from the depths of the soul
forces us to connect them in our thoughts after they are both no more.
We may note, here, in passing that of the two generally recognised
principles of association, contiguity and similarity, the former is a
connection due to a power without, the latter a connection due to a
power within.
But what can it mean to say that ideas wholly past are thought of
at all, any longer? They are utterly unknowable. What distinct mean­
ing can attach to saying that an idea in the past in any way affects an
idea in the future, from which it is completely detached? A phrase
between the assertion and the denial of which there can in no case be
any sensible difference is mere gibberish.
I will not dwell further upon this point, because it is a common­
place of philosophy.
C o n t i n u i t y o f I d e a s
We have here before us a question of difficulty, analogous to the
question of nominalism and realism. But when once it has been clearly
formulated, logic leaves room for one answer only. How can a past idea
be present? Can it be present vicariously? T o a certain extent, perhaps;
but not merely so; for then the question would arise how the past idea
can be related to its vicarious representation. The relation, being be­
tween Ideas, can only exist in some consciousness: now that past idea
was in no consciousness but that past consciousness that alone con­
tained it; and that did not embrace the vicarious idea.
Some minds will here jump to the conclusion that a past idea
cannot in any sense be present. But that is hasty and illogical. How
extravagant, too, to pronounce our whole knowledge of the past to be
mere delusion! Yet it would seem that the past is as completely beyond
the bonds of possible experience as a Kantian thing-in-itself.
How can a past idea be present? Not vicariously. Then, only by
direct perception. In other words, to be present, it must be ipsofacto
present. That is, it cannot be wholly past; it can only be going, in-
finitesimally past, less past than any assignable past date. We are thus
brought to the conclusion that the present is connected with the past
by a series of real infinitesimal steps.
It has already been suggested by psychologists that consciousness
necessarily embraces an interval of time. But if a finite time be meant,
the opinion is not tenable. If the sensation that precedes the present
by half a second were still immediately before me, then, on the same
principle, the sensation preceding that would be immediately present,
and so on ad infinitum. N ow, since there is a time, say a year, at the
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 315]

The Law of Mind I 315
end of which an idea is no longer ipsofacto present, it follows that this
is true of any finite interval, however short.
But yet consciousness must essentially cover an interval of time; for
if it did not, we could gain no knowledge of time, and not merely no
veracious cognition of it, but no conception whatever. We are, there­
fore, forced to say that we are immediately conscious through an
infinitesimal interval of time.
This is all that is requisite. For, in this infinitesimal interval, not
only is consciousness continuous in a subjective sense, that is, consid­
ered as a subject or substance having the attribute of duration; but also,
because it is immediate consciousness, its object is ipso facto continu­
ous. In fact, this infinitesimally spread-out consciousness is a direct
feeling of its contents as spread out. This will be further elucidated
below. In an infinitesimal interval we directly perceive the temporal
sequence of its beginning, middle, and end,— not, of course, in the way
of recognition, for recognition is only of the past, but in the way of
immediate feeling. N ow upon this interval follows another, whose
beginning is the middle of the former, and whose middle is the end of
the former. Here, we have an immediate perception of the temporal
sequence of its beginning, middle, and end, or say of the second, third,
and fourth instants. From these two immediate perceptions, we gain
a mediate, or inferential, perception of the relation of all four instants.
This mediate perception is objectively, or as to the object represented,
spread over the four instants; but subjectively, or as itself the subject
of duration, it is completely embraced in the second moment. [The
reader will observe that I use the word instant to mean a point of time,
and moment to mean an infinitesimal duration.] If it is objected that,
upon the theory proposed, we must have more than a mediate percep­
tion of the succession of the four instants, I grant it; for the sum of the
two infinitesimal intervals is itself infinitesimal, so that it is immedi­
ately perceived. It is immediately perceived in the whole interval, but
only mediately perceived in the last two-thirds of the interval. Now,
let there be an indefinite succession of these inferential acts of compar­
ative perception; and it is plain that the last moment will contain
objectively the whole series. Let there be, not merely an indefinite
succession, but a continuous flow of inference through a finite time;
and the result will be a mediate objective consciousness of the whole
time in the last moment. In this last moment, the whole series will be
recognised, or known as known before, except only the last moment,
which of course will be absolutely unrecognisable to itself. Indeed,
even this last moment will be recognised like the rest, or, at least be
just beginning to be so. There is a little elenchus, or appearance of
contradiction, here, which the ordinary logic of reflection quite suf­
fices to resolve.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 316]

316 I The Essential Peirce
I n f i n i t y a n d C o n t i n u i t y , in G e n e r a l
Most of the mathematicians who during the last two generations
have treated the differential calculus have been of the opinion that an
infinitesimal quantity is an absurdity; although, with their habitual
caution, they have often added “ or, at any rate, the conception of an
infinitesimal is so difficult, that we practically cannot reason about it
with confidence and security.” Accordingly, the doctrine of limits has
been invented to evade the difficulty, or, as some say, to explain the
signification of the word “ infinitesimal.” This doctrine, in one form
or another, is taught in all the text-books, though in some of them only
as an alternative view of the matter; it answers well enough the pur­
poses of calculation, though even in that application it has its difficul­
ties.
The illumination of the subject by a strict notation for the logic of
relatives had shown me clearly and evidently that the idea of an in­
finitesimal involves no contradiction, before I became acquainted with
the writings of Dr. Georg Cantor (though many of these had already
appeared in the Mathematische Annalen and in Borchardt'sJournal, if not
yet in the Acta Mathematica, all mathematical journals of the first dis­
tinction), in which the same view is defended with extraordinary
genius and penetrating logic.3
The prevalent opinion is that finite numbers are the only ones that
we can reason about, at least, in any ordinary mode of reasoning, or,
as some authors express it, they are the only numbers that can be
reasoned about mathematically. But this is an irrational prejudice. I
long ago showed4that finite collections are distinguished from infinite
ones only by one circumstance and its consequences, namely, that to
them is applicable a peculiar and unusual mode of reasoning called by
its discoverer, De Morgan, the “ syllogism of transposed quantity.”
Balzac, in the introduction of his Physiologie du manage, remarks
that every young Frenchman boasts of having seduced some French­
woman. Now, as a woman can only be seduced once, and there are no
more Frenchwomen than Frenchmen, it follows, if these boasts are
true, that no French women escape seduction. If their number be
finite, the reasoning holds. But since the population is continually
increasing, and the seduced are on the average younger than the seduc­
ers, the conclusion need not be true. In like manner, De Morgan, as
an actuary, might have argued that if an insurance company pays to
its insured on an average more than they have ever paid it, including
interest, it must lose money. But every modern actuary would see a
fallacy in that, since the business is continually on the increase. But
should war, or other cataclysm, cause the class of insured to be a finite
one, the conclusion would turn out painfully correct, after all. The
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 317]

The Law of Mind I 317
above two reasonings are examples of the syllogism of transposed
quantity.5
The proposition that finite and infinite collections are distin­
guished by the applicability to the former of the syllogism of trans­
posed quantity ought to be regarded as the basal one of scientific
arithmetic.
If a person does not know how to reason logically, and I must say
that a great many fairly good mathematicians,—yea distinguished
ones,— fall under this category, but simply uses a rule of thumb in
blindly drawing inferences like other inferences that have turned out
well, he will, of course, be continually falling into error about infinite
numbers. The truth is such people do not reason, at all. But for the few
who do reason, reasoning about infinite numbers is easier than about
finite numbers, because the complicated syllogism of transposed quan­
tity is not called for. For example, that the whole is greater than its
part is not an axiom, as that eminently bad reasoner, Euclid, made it
to be. It is a theorem readily proved by means of a syllogism of trans­
posed quantity, but not otherwise. O f finite collections it is true, of
infinite collections false. Thus, a part of the whole numbers are even
numbers. Yet the even numbers are no fewer than all the numbers; an
evident proposition since if every number in the whole series of whole
numbers be doubled, the result will be the series of even numbers.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, etc.
So for every number there is a distinct even number. In fact, there are
as many distinct doubles of numbers as there are of distinct numbers.
But the doubles of numbers are all even numbers.
In truth, of infinite collections there are but two grades of magni­
tude, the endless and the innumerable. Just as a finite collection is distin­
guished from an infinite one by the applicability to it of a special mode
of reasoning, the syllogism of transposed quantity, so, as I showed in
the paper last referred to, a numerable collection is distinguished from
an innumerable one by the applicability to it of a certain mode of
reasoning, the Fermatian inference, or, as it is sometimes improperly
termed, “ mathematical induction.” 6
As an example of this reasoning, Euler’s demonstration of the
binomial theorem for integral powers may be given. The theorem is
that (x 4- y ) n, where n is a whole number, may be expanded into the
sum of a series of terms of which the first is x ny ° and each of the others
is derived from the next preceding by diminishing the exponent of x
by i and multiplying by that exponent and at the same time increasing
the exponent of y by i and dividing by that increased exponent. Now,
suppose this proposition to be true for a certain exponent, n = M, then
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 318]

318 I The Essential Peirce
it must also be true for n —M - hi. For let one of the terms in the
expansion of (x + y ) M be written AxPyQ. Then, this term with the two
following will be
AxPyQ+ A— — xP~xy(lJrX- f A— — - — \xP~2y4+2
J q + 1 J q + \ q + 2 J
Now, when (x + y )M is multiplied by x + y to give (x -f y )M^ x, we
multiply first by x and then by y instead of by x and add the two
results. When we multiply by x, the second of the above three terms
will be the only one giving a term involving xPyQ + 1 and the third will
be the only one giving a term \nxP~ x
y 4 + 2; and when we multiply by
y, the first will be the only term giving a term in x^y^^1, and the
second will be the only term giving a term in XP 1j/? + 2. Hence,
adding like terms, we find that the coefficient of xPy^ + x in the expan­
sion of (x + y )M+ l will be the sum of the coefficients of the first two
of the above three terms, and that the coefficient of x P ~ ly 4 + 2 will be
the sum of the coefficients of the last two terms. Hence, two successive
terms in the expansion of (x + y ) M+ 1 will be
A (\ + — .-)*/>
vg + 1+ A ....(1 + t^ ll\xP-x
y(
l +2
\ ? + V < 7 + H <
7+ 2/
= A P ± l ± l x p q + 1 + A t ± l ± l . ^ _ x p - l y q + 2
q 1 ^+ 2
It is, thus, seen that the succession of terms follows the rule. Thus if
any integral power follows the rule, so also does the next higher
power. But the first power obviously follows the rule. Hence, all
powers do so.
Such reasoning holds good of any collection of objects capable of
being ranged in a series which though it may be endless, can be num­
bered so that each member of it receives a definite integral number.
For instance, all the whole numbers constitute such a numerable col­
lection. Again, all numbers resulting from operating according to any
definite rule with any finite number of whole numbers form such a
collection. For they may be arranged in a series thus. Let F be the
symbol of operation. First operate on i, giving ^(i). Then, operate on
a second i, giving F ( i ,i ). Next, introduce 2, giving 3rd, F{i)\ 4th, F ( 2 ,i);
5th, F{i,i)\ 6th, F(2,2). Next use a third variable giving 7th, F ( i ,i ,i); 8th,
F(2,i,i); 9th, F(1,2,1); 10th, F(2,2,1); nth, F(1,1,2); 12th, ^(2,1,2); 13th ^(1,2,2);
14th, ^(2,2,2). Next introduce 3, and so on, alternately introducing new
variables and new figures; and in this way it is plain that every arrange­
ment of integral values of the variables will receive a numbered place
in the series.*
*This proposition is substantially the same as a theorem of Cantor, though it is
enunciated in a much more general form.7
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 319]

The Law of Mind I 319
The class of endless but numerable collections (so called because
they can be so ranged that to each one corresponds a distinct whole
number) is very large. But there are collections which are certainly
innumerable. Such is the collection of all numbers to which endless
series of decimals are capable of approximating. It has been recognised
since the time of Euclid that certain numbers are surd or incommen­
surable, and are not exactly expressible by any finite series of decimals,
nor by a circulating decimal. Such is the ratio of the circumference of
a circle to its diameter, which we know is nearly 3.1415926. The calcula­
tion of this number has been carried to over 700 figures without the
slightest appearance of regularity in their sequence. The demonstra­
tions that this and many other numbers are incommensurable are
perfect. That the entire collection of incommensurable numbers is
innumerable has been clearly proved by Cantor.8 I omit the demon­
stration; but it is easy to see that to discriminate one from some other
would, in general, require the use of an endless series of numbers.
N ow if they cannot be exactly expressed and discriminated, clearly
they cannot be ranged in a linear series.
It is evident that there are as many points on a line or in an
interval of time as there are of real numbers in all. These are, there­
fore, innumerable collections. Many mathematicians have incau­
tiously assumed that the points on a surface or in a solid are more
than those on a line. But this has been refuted by Cantor.9 Indeed, it
is obvious that for every set of values of coordinates there is a single
distinct number. Suppose, for instance, the values of the coordinates
all lie between o and +1. Then if we compose a number by putting
in the first decimal place the first figure of the first coordinate, in the
second the first figure of the second coordinate, and so on, and when
the first figures are all dealt out go on to the second figures in like
manner, it is plain that the values of the coordinates can be read off
from the single resulting number, so that a triad or tetrad of num­
bers, each having innumerable values, has no more values than a sin­
gle incommensurable number.
Were the number of dimensions infinite, this would fail; and the
collection of infinite sets of numbers having each innumerable varia­
tions, might, therefore, be greater than the simple innumerable collec­
tion, and might be called endlessly infinite. The single individuals of
such a collection could not, however, be designated, even approxi­
mately, so that this is indeed a magnitude concerning which it would
be possible to reason only in the most general way, if at all.
Although there are but two grades of magnitudes of infinite collec­
tions, yet when certain conditions are imposed upon the order in
which individuals are taken, distinctions of magnitude arise from that
cause. Thus, if a simply endless series be doubled by separating each
unit into two parts, the successive first parts and also the second parts
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 320]

320 I The Essential Peirce
being taken in the same order as the units from which they are derived,
this double endless series will, so long as it is taken in that order,
appear as twice as large as the original series. In like manner the
product of two innumerable collections, that is, the collection of possi­
ble pairs composed of one individual of each, if the order of continuity
is to be maintained, is, by virtue of that order, infinitely greater than
either of the component collections.
We now come to the difficult question, What is continuity? Kant
confounds it with infinite divisibility, saying that the essential charac­
ter of a continuous series is that between any two members of it a third
can always be found.10 This is an analysis beautifully clear and defi­
nite; but unfortunately, it breaks down under the first test. For accord­
ing to this, the entire series of rational fractions arranged in the order
of their magnitude, would be an infinite series, although the rational
fractions are numerable, while the points of a line are innumerable.
Nay, worse yet, if from that series of fractions any two with all that
lie between them be excised, and any number of such finite gaps be
made, Kant’s definition is still true of the series, though it has lost all
appearance of continuity.
Cantor defines a continuous series as one which is concatenated and
perfect. 11 By a concatenated series, he means such a one that if any two
points are given in it, and any finite distance, however small, it is
possible to proceed from the first point to the second through a succes­
sion of points of the series each at a distance from the preceding one
less than the given distance. This is true of the series of rational
fractions ranged in the order of their magnitude. By a perfect series,
he means one which contains every point such that there is no distance
so small that this point has not an infinity of points of the series within
that distance of it. This is true of the series of numbers between o and
i capable of being expressed by decimals in which only the digits o and
i occur.
It must be granted that Cantor’s definition includes every series
that is continuous; nor can it be objected that it includes any important
or indubitable case of a series not continuous. Nevertheless, it has
some serious defects. In the first place, it turns upon metrical consider­
ations; while the distinction between a continuous and a discontinuous
series is manifestly non-metrical. In the next place, a perfect series is
defined as one containing “ every point” of a certain description. But
no positive idea is conveyed of what all the points are: that is definition
by negation, and cannot be admitted. If that sort of thing were al­
lowed, it would be very easy to say, at once, that the continuous linear
series of points is one which contains every point of the line between
its extremities. Finally, Cantor’s definition does not convey a distinct
notion of what the components of the conception of continuity are. It
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 321]

The Law of Mind I 321
ingeniously wraps up its properties in two separate parcels, but does
not display them to our intelligence.
Kant’s definition expresses one simple property of a continuum;12
but it allows of gaps in the series. To mend the definition, it is only
necessary to notice how these gaps can occur. Let us suppose, then, a
linear series of points extending from a point, A , to a point, B , having
a gap from B to a third point, C, and thence extending to a final limit,
D; and let us suppose this series conforms to Kant’s definition. Then,
of the two points, B and C, one or both must be excluded from the
series; for otherwise, by the definition, there would be points between
them. That is, if the series contains C, though it contains all the points
up to B , it cannot contain B. What is required, therefore, is to state in
non-metrical terms that if a series of points up to a limit is included
in a continuum the limit is included. It may be remarked that this is
the property of a continuum to which Aristotle’s attention seems to
have been directed when he defines a continuum as something whose
parts have a common lim it.13 The property may be exactly stated as
follows: If a linear series of points is continuous between two points,
A and Z), and if an endless series of points be taken, the first of them
between A and D and each of the others between the last preceding
one and Z), then there is a point of the continuous series between all
that endless series of points and Z), and such that every other point of
which this is true lies between this point and D. For example, take any
number between o and i, as o.i; then, any number between o.i and i,
as o.n; then any number between o.n and i, as o.iii; and so on, without
end. Then, because the series of real numbers between o and i is
continuous, there must be a least real number, greater than every
number of that endless series. This property, which may be called the
Aristotelicity of the series, together with Kant’s property, or its Kan-
ticity, completes the definition of a continuous series.
The property of Aristotelicity may be roughly stated thus: a con­
tinuum contains the end point belonging to every endless series of
points which it contains. An obvious corollary is that every continuum
contains its limits. But in using this principle it is necessary to observe
that a series may be continuous except in this, that it omits one or both
of the limits.
Our ideas will find expression more conveniently if, instead of
points upon a line, we speak of real numbers. Every real number is,
in one sense, the limit of a series, for it can be indefinitely approx­
imated to. Whether every real number is a limit of a regular series may
perhaps be open to doubt. But the series referred to in the definition
of Aristotelicity must be understood as including all series whether
regular or not. Consequently, it is implied that between any two points
an innumerable series of points can be taken.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 322]

322 I The Essential Peirce
Every number whose expression in decimals requires but a finite
number of places of decimals is commensurable. Therefore, incom­
mensurable numbers suppose an infinitieth place of decimals. The
word infinitesimal is simply the Latin form of infinitieth; that is, it is
an ordinal formed from infinitum, as centesimal from centum. Thus,
continuity supposes infinitesimal quantities. There is nothing contra­
dictory about the idea of such quantities. In adding and multiplying
them the continuity must not be broken up, and consequently they are
precisely like any other quantities, except that neither the syllogism
of transposed quantity nor the Fermatian inference applies to them.
If A is a finite quantity and i an infinitesimal, then in a certain sense
we may write A + i = A . That is to say, this is so for all purposes of
measurement. But this principle must not be applied except to get rid
of all the terms in the highest order of infinitesimals present. As a
mathematician, I prefer the method of infinitesimals to that of limits,
as far easier and less infested with snares.14 Indeed, the latter, as stated
in some books, involves propositions that are false; but this is not the
case with the forms of the method used by Cauchy, Duhamel, and
others.15 As they understand the doctrine of limits, it involves the
notion of continuity, and therefore contains in another shape the very
same ideas as the doctrine of infinitesimals.
Let us now consider an aspect of the Aristotelical principle which
is particularly important in philosophy. Suppose a surface to be part
red and part blue; so that every point on it is either red or blue, and,
of course, no part can be both red and blue. What, then, is the color
of the boundary line between the red and the blue? The answer is that
red or blue, to exist at all, must be spread over a surface; and the color
of the surface is the color of the surface in the immediate neighborhood
of the point. I purposely use a vague form of expression. N ow, as the
parts of the surface in the immediate neighborhood of any ordinary
point upon a curved boundary are half of them red and half blue, it
follows that the boundary is half red and half blue. In like manner, we
find it necessary to hold that consciousness essentially occupies time;
and what is present to the mind at any ordinary instant, is what is
present during a moment in which that instant occurs. Thus, the
present is half past and half to come. Again, the color of the parts of
a surface at any finite distance from a point, has nothing to do with
its color just at that point; and, in the parallel, the feeling at any finite
interval from the present has nothing to do with the present feeling,
except vicariously. Take another case: the velocity of a particle at any
instant of time is its mean velocity during an infinitesimal instant in
which that time is contained. Just so my immediate feeling is my
feeling through an infinitesimal duration containing the present in­
stant.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 323]

The Law of Mind I 323
A n a l y s i s o f T i m e
One of the most marked features about the law of mind is that it
makes time to have a definite direction of flow from past to future. The
relation of past to future is, in reference to the law of mind, different
from the relation of future to past. This makes one of the great con­
trasts between the law of mind and the law of physical force, where
there is no more distinction between the two opposite directions in
time than between moving northward and moving southward.
In order, therefore, to analyse the law of mind, we must begin by
asking what the flow of time consists in. Now, we find that in reference
to any individual state of feeling, all others are of two classes, those
which affect this one (or have a tendency to affect it, and what this
means we shall inquire shortly), and those which do not. The present
is affectible by the past but not by the future.
Moreover, if state A is affected by state 5 , and state B by state C,
then A is affected by state C, though not so much so. It follows, that
if A is affectible by B, B is not affectible by A .
If, of two states, each is absolutely unaffectible by the other, they
are to be regarded as parts of the same state. They are contempora­
neous.
T o say that a state is between two states means that it affects one and
is affected by the other. Between any two states in this sense lies an
innumerable series of states affecting one another; and if a state lies
between a given state and any other state which can be reached by
inserting states between this state and any third state, these inserted
states not immediately affecting or being affected by either, then the
second state mentioned immediately affects or is affected by the first,
in the sense that in the one the other is ipsofacto present in a reduced
degree.
These propositions involve a definition of time and of its flow. Over
and above this definition they involve a doctrine, namely, that every
state of feeling is affectible by every earlier state.
T h a t F e e l i n g s H a v e I n t e n s i v e C o n t i n u i t y
Tim e with its continuity logically involves some other kind of
continuity than its own. Time, as the universal form of change, cannot
exist unless there is something to undergo change, and to undergo a
change continuous in time, there must be a continuity of changeable
qualities. O f the continuity of intrinsic qualities of feeling we can now
form but a feeble conception. The development of the human mind has
practically extinguished all feelings, except a few sporadic kinds,
sound, colors, smells, warmth, etc., which now appear to be discon­
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 324]

324 I The Essential Peirce
nected and disparate. In the case of colors, there is a tridimensional
spread of feelings. Originally, all feelings may have been connected in
the same way, and the presumption is that the number of dimensions
was endless. For development essentially involves a limitation of possi­
bilities. But given a number of dimensions of feeling, all possible
varieties are obtainable by varying the intensities of the different ele­
ments. Accordingly, time logically supposes a continuous range of
intensity in feeling. It follows, then, from the definition of continuity,
that when any particular kind of feeling is present, an infinitesimal
continuum of all feelings differing infinitesimally from that is present.
T h a t F e e l i n g s H a v e S p a t i a l E x t e n s i o n
Consider a gob of protoplasm, say an amoeba or a slime-mold. It
does not differ in any radical way from the contents of a nerve-cell,
though its functions may be less specialised. There is no doubt that this
slime-mold, or this amoeba, or at any rate some similar mass of proto­
plasm feels. That is to say, it feels when it is in its excited condition.
But note how it behaves. When the whole is quiescent and rigid, a
place upon it is irritated. Just at this point, an active motion is set up,
and this gradually spreads to other parts. In this action, no unity nor
relation to a nucleus, or other unitary organ can be discerned. It is a
mere amorphous continuum of protoplasm, with feeling passing from
one part to another. N or is there anything like a wave-motion. The
activity does not advance to new parts just as fast as it leaves old parts.
Rather, in the beginning, it dies out at a slower rate than that at which
it spreads. And while the process is going on, by exciting the mass at
another point, a second quite independent state of excitation will be
set up. In some places, neither excitation will exist, in others each
separately, in still other places, both effects will be added together.
Whatever there is in the whole phenomenon to make us think there
is feeling in such a mass of protoplasm,—-
feeling, but plainly no person­
ality,— goes logically to show that that feeling has a subjective, or
substantial, spatial extension, as the excited state has. This is, no doubt,
a difficult idea to seize, for the reason that it is a subjective, not an
objective, extension. It is not that we have a feeling of bigness; though
Professor James, perhaps rightly, teaches that we have.16 It is that the
feeling, as a subject of inhesion, is big. Moreover, our own feelings are
focused in attention to such a degree that we are not aware that ideas
are not brought to an absolute unity; just as nobody not instructed by
special experiment has any idea how very, very little of the field of
vision is distinct. Still, we all know how the attention wanders about
among our feelings; and this fact shows that those feelings that are
not coordinated in attention have a reciprocal externality, although
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 325]

The Law o f Mind I 325
they are present at the same time. But we must not tax introspec­
tion to make a phenomenon manifest which essentially involves exter­
nality.
Since space is continuous, it follows that there must be an immedi­
ate community of feeling between parts of mind infinitesimally near
together. Without this, I believe it would have been impossible for
minds external to one another, ever to become coordinated, and
equally impossible for any coordination to be established in the action
of the nerve-matter of one brain.
A f f e c t i o n s o f I d e a s
But we are met by the question what is meant by saying that one
idea affects another. The unravelment of this problem requires us to
trace out phenomena a little further.
Three elements go to make up an idea. The first is its intrinsic
quality as a feeling. The second is the energy with which it affects
other ideas, an energy which is infinite in the here-and-nowness
of immediate sensation, finite and relative in the recency of the past.
The third element is the tendency of an idea to bring along other ideas
with it.
As an idea spreads, its power of affecting other ideas gets rapidly
reduced; but its intrinsic quality remains nearly unchanged. It is long
years now since I last saw a cardinal in his robes;17 and my memory
of their color has become much dimmed. The color itself, however, is
not remembered as dim. I have no inclination to call it a dull red. Thus,
the intrinsic quality remains little changed; yet more accurate observa­
tion will show a slight reduction of it. The third element, on the other
hand, has increased. As well as I can recollect, it seems to me the
cardinals I used to see wore robes more scarlet than vermilion is, and
highly luminous. Still, I know the color commonly called cardinal is
on the crimson side of vermilion and of quite moderate luminosity,
and the original idea calls up so many other hues with it, and asserts
itself so feebly, that I am unable any longer to isolate it.
A finite interval of time generally contains an innumerable series
of feelings; and when these become welded together in association, the
result is a general idea. For we have just seen how by continuous
spreading an idea becomes generalised.
The first character of a general idea so resulting is that it is living
feeling. A continuum of this feeling, infinitesimal in duration, but still
embracing innumerable parts, and also, though infinitesimal, entirely
unlimited, is immediately present. And in its absence of boundedness
a vague possibility of more than is present is directly felt.
Second, in the presence of this continuity of feeling, nominalistic
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 326]

326 I The Essential Peirce
maxims appear futile. There is no doubt about one idea affecting
another, when we can directly perceive the one gradually modified and
shaping itself into the other. N or can there any longer be any difficulty
about one idea resembling another, when we can pass along the contin­
uous field of quality from one to the other and back again to the point
which we had marked.
Third, consider the insistency of an idea. The insistency of a past
idea with reference to the present is a quantity which is less the further
back that past idea is, and rises to infinity as the past idea is brought
up into coincidence with the present. Here we must make one of those
inductive applications of the law of continuity which have produced
such great results in all the positive sciences. We must extend the law
of insistency into the future. Plainly, the insistency of a future idea
with reference to the present is a quantity affected by the minus sign;
for it is the present that affects the future, if there be any effect, not
the future that affects the present. Accordingly, the curve of insistency
is a sort of equilateral hyperbola. [See the figure.] Such a conception
is none the less mathematical, that its quantification cannot now be
exactly specified.
N ow consider the induction which we have here been led into.
This curve says that feeling which has not yet emerged into immediate
consciousness is already affectible and already affected. In fact, this is
habit, by virtue of which an idea is brought up into present conscious­
ness by a bond that had already been established between it, and
another idea while it was still in futuro.
We can now see what the affection of one idea by another consists
in. It is that the affected idea is attached as a logical predicate to the
affecting idea as subject. So when a feeling emerges into immediate
consciousness, it always appears as a modification of a more or less
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 327]

The Law of Mind I 327
general object already in the mind. The word suggestion is well
adapted to expressing this relation. The future is suggested by, or
rather is influenced by the suggestions of, the past.
I d e a s C a n n o t B e C o n n e c t e d E x c e p t B y C o n t i n u i t y
That ideas can nowise be connected without continuity is suffi­
ciently evident to one who reflects upon the matter. But still the
opinion may be entertained that after continuity has once made the
connection of ideas possible, then they may get to be connected in
other modes than through continuity. Certainly, I cannot see how
anyone can deny that the infinite diversity of the universe, which we
call chance, may bring ideas into proximity which are not associated
in one general idea. It may do this many times. But then the law of
continuous spreading will produce a mental association; and this I
suppose is an abridged statement of the way the universe has been
evolved. But if I am asked whether a blind avayKi) cannot bring ideas
together, first I point out that it would not remain blind. There being
a continuous connection between the ideas, they would infallibly
become associated in a living, feeling, and perceiving general idea.
Next, I cannot see what the mustness or necessity of this a v a j k t ]
would consist in. In the absolute uniformity of the phenomenon, says
the nominalist. Absolute is well put in; for if it merely happened so
three times in succession, or three million times in succession, in the
absence of any reason, the coincidence could only be attributed to
chance. But absolute uniformity must extend over the whole infinite
future; and it is idle to talk of that except as an idea. No; I think we
can only hold that wherever ideas come together they tend to weld into
general ideas; and wherever they are generally connected, general
ideas govern the connection; and these general ideas are living feelings
spread out.
M e n t a l L a w F o l l o w s t h e F o r m s o f L o g ic
The three main classes of logical inference are Deduction, Induc­
tion, and Hypothesis. These correspond to three chief modes of action
of the human soul. In deduction the mind is under the dominion of a
habit or association by virtue of which a general idea suggests in each
case a corresponding reaction. But a certain sensation is seen to involve
that idea. Consequently, that sensation is followed by that reaction.
That is the way the hind legs of a frog, separated from the rest of the
body, reason, when you pinch them. It is the lowest form of psychical
manifestation.
By induction, a habit becomes established. Certain sensations, all
involving one general idea, are followed each by the same reaction; and
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 328]

328 I The Essential Peirce
an association becomes established, whereby that general idea gets to
be followed uniformly by that reaction.
Habit is that specialisation of the law of mind whereby a general
idea gains the power of exciting reactions. But in order that the general
idea should attain all its functionality, it is necessary, also, that it
should become suggestible by sensations. That is accomplished by a
psychical process having the form of hypothetic inference. By hypo­
thetic inference, I mean, as I have explained in other writings, an
induction from qualities. For example, I know that the kind of man
known and classed as a “ mugwump” has certain characteristics. He
has a high self-respect and places great value upon social distinction.
He laments the great part that rowdyism and unrefined good-fellow­
ship play in the dealings of American politicians with their constitu­
ency. He thinks that the reform which would follow from the aban­
donment of the system by which the distribution of offices is made to
strengthen party organisations and a return to the original and essen­
tial conception of office-filing would be found an unmixed good. He
holds that monetary considerations should usually be the decisive ones
in questions of public policy. He respects the principle of individual­
ism and of laisser-faire as the greatest agency of civilisation. These
views, among others, I know to be obtrusive marks of a “ mugwump.”
N ow, suppose I casually meet a man in a railway-train, and falling into
conversation find that he holds opinions of this sort; I am naturally led
to suppose that he is a “ mugwump.” That is hypothetic inference.
That is to say, a number of readily verifiable marks of a mugwump
being selected, I find this man has these, and infer that he has all the
other characters which go to make a thinker of that stripe. Or let us
suppose that I meet a man of a semi-clerical appearance and a sub-
pharisaical sniff, who appears to look at things from the point of view
of a rather wooden dualism. He cites several texts of scripture and
always with particular attention to their logical implications; and he
exhibits a sternness, almost amounting to vindictiveness, toward evil­
doers, in general. I readily conclude that he is a minister of a certain
denomination. N ow the mind acts in a way similar to this, every time
we acquire a power of coordinating reactions in a peculiar way, as in
performing any act requiring skill. Thus, most persons have a diffi­
culty in moving the two hands simultaneously and in opposite direc­
tions through two parallel circles nearly in the medial plane of the
body. T o learn to do this, it is necessary to attend, first, to the different
actions in different parts of the motion, when suddenly a general
conception of the action springs up and it becomes perfectly easy. We
think the motion we are trying to do involves this action, and this, and
this. Then, the general idea comes which unites all those actions, and
thereupon the desire to perform the motion calls up the general idea.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 329]

The Law o f Mind I 329
The same mental process is many times employed whenever we are
learning to speak a language or are acquiring any sort of skill.
Thus, by induction, a number of sensations followed by one reac­
tion become united under one general idea followed by the same
reaction; while by the hypothetic process, a number of reactions called
for by one occasion get united in a general idea which is called out by
the same occasion. By deduction, the habit fulfils its function of calling
out certain reactions on certain occasions.
U n c e r t a i n t y o f M e n t a l A c t i o n
The inductive and hypothetic forms of inference are essentially
probable inferences, not necessary; while deduction may be either
necessary or probable.
But no mental action seems to be necessary or invariable in its
character. In whatever manner the mind has reacted under a given
sensation, in that manner it is the more likely to react again; were this,
however, an absolute necessity, habits would become wooden and
ineradicable, and no room being left for the formation of new habits,
intellectual life would come to a speedy close. Thus, the uncertainty
of the mental law is no mere defect of it, but is on the contrary of its
essence. The truth is, the mind is not subject to “ law,” in the same rigid
sense that matter is. It only experiences gentle forces which merely
render it more likely to act in a given way than it otherwise would be.
There always remains a certain amount of arbitrary spontaneity in its
action, without which it would be dead.
Some psychologists think to reconcile the uncertainty of reactions
with the principle of necessary causation by means of the law of
fatigue. T ru ly for a law, this law of fatigue is a little lawless. I think
it is merely a case of the general principle that an idea in spreading
loses its insistency. Put me tarragon into my salad, when I have not
tasted it for years, and I exclaim “ What nectar is this!” But add it to
every dish I taste for week after week, and a habit of expectation has
been created; and in thus spreading into habit, the sensation makes
hardly any more impression upon me; or, if it be noticed, it is on a new
side from which it appears as rather a bore. The doctrine that fatigue
is one of the primordial phenomena of mind I am much disposed to
doubt. It seems a somewhat little thing to be allowed as an exception
to the great principle of mental uniformisation. For this reason, I
prefer to explain it in the manner here indicated, as a special case of
that great principle. T o consider it as something distinct in its nature,
certainly somewhat strengthens the necessitarian position; but even if
it be distinct, the hypothesis that all the variety and apparent arbitrari­
ness of mental action ought to be explained away in favor of absolute
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 330]

330 I The Essential Peirce
determinism does not seem to me to recommend itself to a sober and
sound judgment, which seeks the guidance of observed facts and not
that of prepossessions.
R e s t a t e m e n t o f t h e L a w
Let me now try to gather up all these odds and ends of commentary
and restate the law of mind, in a unitary way.
First, then, we find that when we regard ideas from a nominalistic,
individualistic, sensualistic way, the simplest facts of mind become
utterly meaningless. That one idea should resemble another or influ­
ence another, or that one state of mind should so much as be thought
of in another is, from that standpoint, sheer nonsense.
Second, by this and other means we are driven to perceive, what
is quite evident of itself, that instantaneous feelings flow together into
a continuum of feeling, which has in a modified degree the peculiar
vivacity of feeling and has gained generality. And in reference to such
general ideas, or continua of feeling, the difficulties about resemblance
and suggestion and reference to the external, cease to have any force.
Third, these general ideas are not mere words, nor do they consist
in this, that certain concrete facts will every time happen under cer­
tain descriptions of conditions; but they are just as much, or rather far
more, living realities than the feelings themselves out of which they
are concreted. And to say that mental phenomena are governed by law
does not mean merely that they are describable by a general formula;
but that there is a living idea, a conscious continuum of feeling, which
pervades them, and to which they are docile.
Fourth, this supreme law, which is the celestial and living har­
mony, does not so much as demand that the special ideas shall surren­
der their peculiar arbitrariness and caprice entirely; for that would be
self-destructive. It only requires that they shall influence and be in­
fluenced by one another.
Fifth, in what measure this unification acts, seems to be regulated
only by special rules; or, at least, we cannot in our present knowledge
say how far it goes. But it may be said that, judging by appearances,
the amount of arbitrariness in the phenomena of human minds is
neither altogether trifling nor very prominent.
P e r s o n a l i t y
Having thus endeavored to state the law of mind, in general, I
descend to the consideration of a particular phenomenon which is
remarkably prominent in our own consciousnesses, that of personal­
ity. A strong light is thrown upon this subject by recent observations
of double and multiple personality. The theory which at one time
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 331]

The Law o f Mind I 331
seemed plausible that two persons in one body corresponded to the
two halves of the brain will, I take it, now be universally acknowledged
to be insufficient. But that which these cases make quite manifest is
that personality is some kind of coordination or connection of ideas.
N ot much to say, this, perhaps. Yet when we consider that, according
to the principle which we are tracing out, a connection between ideas
is itself a general idea, and that a general idea is a living feeling, it is
plain that we have at least taken an appreciable step toward the under­
standing of personality. This personality, like any general idea, is not
a thing to be apprehended in an instant. It has to be lived in time; nor
can any finite time embrace it in all its fulness. Yet in each infinitesimal
interval it is present and living, though specially colored by the imme­
diate feelings of that moment. Personality, so far as it is apprehended
in a moment, is immediate self-consciousness.
But the word coordination implies somewhat more than this; it
implies a teleological harmony in ideas, and in the case of personality
this teleology is more than a mere purposive pursuit of a predetermi­
nate end; it is a developmental teleology. This is personal character.
A general idea, living and conscious now, it is already determinative
of acts in the future to an extent to which it is not now conscious.
This reference to the future is an essential element of personality.
Were the ends of a person already explicit, there would be no room
for development, for growth, for life; and consequently there would
be no personality. The mere carrying out of predetermined purposes
is mechanical. This remark has an application to the philosophy of
religion. It is that a genuine evolutionary philosophy, that is, one that
makes the principle of growth a primordial element of the universe,
is so far from being antagonistic to the idea of a personal creator, that
it is really inseparable from that idea; while a necessitarian religion is
in an altogether false position and is destined to become disintegrated.
But a pseudo-evolutionism which enthrones mechanical law above the
principle of growth, is at once scientifically unsatisfactory, as giving
no possible hint of how the universe has come about, and hostile to all
hopes of personal relations to God.
C o m m u n i c a t i o n
Consistently with the doctrine laid down in the beginning of this
paper, I am bound to maintain that an idea can only be affected by an
idea in continuous connection with it. By anything but an idea, it
cannot be affected at all. This obliges me to say, as I do say, on other
grounds, that what we call matter is not completely dead, but is merely
mind hide-bound with habits. It still retains the element of diversifica­
tion; and in that diversification there is life. When an idea is conveyed
from one mind to another, it is by forms of combination of the diverse
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 332]

332 I The Essential Peirce
elements of nature, say by some curious symmetry, or by some union
of a tender color with a refined odor. To such forms the law of mechan­
ical energy has no application. If they are eternal, it is in the spirit they
embody; and their origin cannot be accounted for by any mechanical
necessity. They are embodied ideas; and so only can they convey ideas.
Precisely how primary sensations, as colors and tones, are excited, we
cannot tell, in the present state of psychology. But in our ignorance,
I think that we are at liberty to suppose that they arise in essentially
the same manner as the other feelings, called secondary. As far as sight
and hearing are in question, we know that they are only excited by
vibrations of inconceivable complexity; and the chemical senses are
probably not more simple. Even the least psychical of peripheral sen­
sations, that of pressure, has in its excitation conditions which, though
apparently simple, are seen to be complicated enough when we con­
sider the molecules and their attractions. The principle with which I
set out requires me to maintain that these feelings are communicated
to the nerves by continuity, so that there must be something like them
in the excitants themselves. If this seems extravagant, it is to be remem­
bered that it is the sole possible way of reaching any explanation of
sensation, which otherwise must be pronounced a general fact abso­
lutely inexplicable and ultimate. N ow absolute inexplicability is a
hypothesis which sound logic refuses under any circumstances to jus­
tify.
I may be asked whether my theory would be favorable or otherwise
to telepathy. I have no decided answer to give to this. At first sight,
it seems unfavorable. Yet there may be other modes of continuous
connection between minds other than those of time and space.
The recognition by one person of another’s personality takes place
by means to some extent identical with the means by which he is
conscious of his own personality. The idea of the second personality,
which is as much as to say that second personality itself, enters within
the field of direct consciousness of the first person, and is as immedi­
ately perceived as his ego, though less strongly. At the same time, the
opposition between the two persons is perceived, so that the external­
ity of the second is recognised.
The psychological phenomena of intercommunication between
two minds have been unfortunately little studied. So that it is impossi­
ble to say, for certain, whether they are favorable to this theory or not.
But the very extraordinary insight which some persons are able to gain
of others from indications so slight that it is difficult to ascertain what
they are, is certainly rendered more comprehensible by the view here
taken.
A difficulty which confronts the synechistic philosophy is this. In
considering personality, that philosophy is forced to accept the doc­
trine of a personal God; but in considering communication, it cannot
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 333]

The Law of Mind I 333
but admit that if there is a personal God, we must have a direct
perception of that person and indeed be in personal communication
with him. Now, if that be the case, the question arises how it is possible
that the existence of this being should ever have been doubted by
anybody. The only answer that I can at present make is that facts that
stand before our face and eyes and stare us in the face are far from
being, in all cases, the ones most easily discerned. That has been
remarked from time immemorial.
C o n c l u s i o n
I have thus developed as well as I could in a little space the synechistic
philosophy, as applied to mind. I think that I have succeeded in making
it clear that this doctrine gives room for explanations of many facts
which without it are absolutely and hopelessly inexplicable; and fur­
ther that it carries along with it the following doctrines: ist, a logical
realism of the most pronounced type; 2nd, objective idealism; 3rd,
tychism, with its consequent thorough-going evolutionism. We also
notice that the doctrine presents no hindrances to spiritual influences,
such as some philosophies are felt to do.
This content downloaded from 89.39.107.146 on Sun, 15 May 2022 18:39:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

[page 334]

24
Mans Glassy Essence
P 480: The Monist j (October 1892)11-22. [Also published in
CP 6.238-yi.] In thispaper, Peirce applies his synechistic phi­
losophy to the mind-bodyproblem or “the relation between the
psychical and physical aspects o f a substance. ” In order to
carry out his purpose of developing a philosophy that ade­
quately represents the state of knowledge in the nineteenth
century, he discusses at length, and in elaborate technical
detail, the constitution of matter and the molecular theory of
protoplasm. He associates the main physical properties of
protoplasm with the three main types of mental action, and
he suggests that—as “matter is effete mind, ” as “physical
events are but degraded or undeveloped forms o f psychical
events, ” and as “mechanical laws are nothing but acquired
habits, like all the regularities o f mind”— uthe idealist has no
need to dread a mechanical theory o f life. ” Peirce ends his
paper with a discussion o f the life o f ideas and the self-
consciousness of groups o f individuals.
In The Monist for January 1891, I tried to show what conceptions
ought to form the brick and mortar of a philosophical system. Chief
among these was that of absolute chance for which I argued again in
last A pril’s number.* In July, I applied another fundamental idea, that
of continuity, to the law of mind.2 N ext in order, I have to elucidate,
from the point of view chosen, the relation between the psychical and
physical aspects of a substance.
The first step towards this ought, I think, to be the framing of a
molecular theory of protoplasm. But before doing that, it seems indis-
pensible to glance at the constitution of matter, in general. We shall,
thus, unavoidably make a long detour; but, after all, our pains will not
*1 am rejoiced to find, since my last paper was printed, that a philosopher as subtle
and profound as Dr. Edmund Montgomery has long been arguing for the same element
in the universe. Other world-renowned thinkers, as M. Renouvier and M. Delboeuf,
appear to share this opinion.1

[page 335]

Man's Glassy Essence I 335
be wasted, for the problems of the papers that are to follow in the series
w ill call for the consideration of the same question.
All physicists are rightly agreed the evidence is overwhelming
which shows all sensible matter is composed of molecules in swift
motion and exerting enormous mutual attractions, and perhaps repul­
sions, too. Even Sir William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, who wishes to
explode action at a distance and return to the doctrine of a plenum,
not only speaks of molecules, but undertakes to assign definite magni­
tudes to them.3 The brilliant Judge Stallo, a man who did not always
rightly estimate his own qualities in accepting talks for himself, de­
clared war upon the atomic theory in a book well worth careful
perusal.4 To the old arguments in favor of atoms which he found in
Fechner’s monograph,5 he was able to make replies of considerable
force, though they were not sufficient to destroy those arguments. But
against modern proofs he made no headway at all. These set out from
the mechanical theory of heat. Rum ford’s experiments showed that
heat is not a substance.6 Joule demonstrated that it was a form of
energy.7 The heating of gases under constant volume, and other facts
instanced by Rankine, proved that it could not be an energy of strain.8
This drove physicists to the conclusion that it was a mode of motion.
Then it was remembered that John Bernoulli had shown that the
pressure of gases could be accounted for by assuming their molecules
to be moving uniformly in rectilinear paths.9The same hypothesis was
now seen to account for Avogadro’s law, that in equal volumes of
different kinds of gases exposed to the same pressure and temperature
are contained equal numbers of molecules.10 Shortly after, it was
found to account for the laws of diffusion and viscosity of gases, and
for the numerical relation between these properties. Finally, Crookes’s
radiometer furnished the last link in the strongest chain of evidence
which supports any physical hypothesis.11
Such being the constitution of gases, liquids must clearly be bodies
in which the molecules wander in curvilinear paths, while in solids
they move in orbits or quasi-orbits. (See my definition solid II, i, in the
Century Dictionary.)12
We see that the resistance to compression and to interpenetration
between sensible bodies is, by one of the prime propositions of the
molecular theory, due in large measure to the kinetical energy of the
particles, which must be supposed to be quite remote from one an­
other, on the average, even in solids. This resistance is no doubt in­
fluenced by finite attractions and repulsions between the molecules.
All the impenetrability of bodies which we can observe is, therefore,
a limited impenetrability due to kinetic and positional energy. This
being the case, we have no logical right to suppose that absolute im­
penetrability, or the exclusive occupancy of space, belongs to mole­

[page 336]

336 I The Essential Peirce
cules or iitnms. Tt is an unwarranted hvoothesis. not a vera causa. *
Unless ® ne’ *s generally a dualistic philosophy in which the conception of
tions aSecond receives exaggerated attention; for this One (though of course
impen *nvo^
ving r^e ic*ea °** F irst) is always the other of a manifold which is
distantnot one* t*ie Many, because variety is arbitrariness and
wanto arbitrariness is repudiation of any Secondness, has for its principal
In shocomPonent in cep tio n of First. In psychology Feeling is First,
an atc^ense react^
on Second, General conception Third, or mediation. In
througbiol° ^ ’ the idea arbitrary sporting is First, heredity is Second, the
with inertia.13 The potential energy belongs to two molecules, and is
to be conceived as different between molecules A and B from what it
is between molecules A and C. The distribution of energy is not
necessarily spherical. N ay, a molecule may conceivably have more
than one centre; it may even have a central curve, returning into itself.
But I do not think there are any observed facts pointing to such
multiple or linear centres. On the other hand, many facts relating to
crystals, especially those observed by Voigt,t go to show that the
distribution of energy is harmonical but not concentric. We can easily
calculate the forces which such atoms must exert upon one another by
considering! that they are equivalent to aggregations of pairs of elec­
trically positive and negative points infinitely near to one another.
About such an atom there would be regions of positive and of negative
potential, and the number and distribution of such regions would
determine the valency of the atom, a number which it is easy to see
would in many cases be somewhat indeterminate. I must not dwell
further upon this hypothesis, at present. In another paper, its conse­
quences will be further considered.14
I cannot assume that the students of philosophy who read this
magazine are thoroughly versed in modern molecular physics, and
therefore it is proper to mention that the governing principle in this
branch of science is Clausius’s law of the virial. I will first state the law,
and then explain the peculiar terms of the statement. This statement
is that the total kinetic energy of the particles of a system in stationary
motion is equal to the total virial. By a system is here meant a number
of particles acting upon one another.** Stationary motion is a quasi-
*By a vera causa, in the logic of science, is meant a state of things known to exist
in some cases and supposed to exist in other cases, because it would account for observed
phenomena.
tWiedemann, Annalen, 1887-1889 [30:190; 31:141, 544; 32:526; 34:981; 35:76, 370; 36:743;
38:573]-
+See Maxwell on Spherical Harmonics, in his Electricity and Magnetism [2:179].
**The word system has three peculiar meanings in mathematics. (A.) It means an
orderly exposition of the truths of astronomy, and hence a theory of the motions of the
stars; as the Ptolemaic system; the Copernican system. This is much like the sense in
which we speak of the Calvinistic system of theology, the Kantian system of philosophy,
etc. (B.) It means the aggregate of the planets considered as all moving in somewhat the

[page 337]

Man > Glassy Essence I 337
orbital motion among a system of particles so that none of them are
removed to indefinitely great distances nor acquire indefinitely great
velocities. The kinetic energy of a particle is the work which would
be required to bring it to rest, independently of any forces which may
be acting upon it. The virial of a pair of particles is half the work which
the force which actually operates between them would do if, being
independent of the distance, it were to bring them together. The
equation of the virial is
\^m v2 = \ ^ R r .
Here m is the mass of a particle, v its velocity, R is the attraction
between two particles, and r is the distance between them. The sign
2 on the left-hand side signifies that the values of m v2 are to be
summed for all the particles, and 2 2 on the right-hand side signifies
that the values of Rr are to be summed for all the pairs of particles. If
there is an external pressure P (as from the atmosphere) upon the
system, and the volume of vacant space within the boundary of that
pressure is V, then the virial must be understood as including \PV, so
that the equation is
¡ I m v 2 = \ P V + ¡ l l R r .
There is strong (if not demonstrative) reason for thinking that the
temperature of any body above the absolute zero (—2jfC.), is propor­
tional to the average kinetic energy of its molecules, or say aO, where
a is a constant and 6 is the absolute temperature. Hence, we may write
the equation
ad = Itm ? = \ P V + frR r
where the heavy lines above the different expressions signify that the
average values for single molecules are to be taken. In 1872, a student
in the University of Leyden, Van der Waals, propounded in his thesis
for the doctorate a specialisation of the equation of the virial which has
since attracted great attention.15 Namely, he writes it
The quantity b is the volume of a molecule, which he supposes to be
an impenetrable body, and all the virtue of the equation lies in this
term which makes the equation a cubic in F, which is required to
same way, as the solar system; and hence any aggregate of particles moving under mutual
forces. (C.) It means a number of forces acting simultaneously upon a number of parti­
cles.

[page 338]

338 I The Essential Peirce
account for the shape of certain isothermal curves.* But if the idea of
an impenetrable atom is illogical, that of an impenetrable molecule is
almost absurd. For the kinetical theory of matter teaches us that a
molecule is like a solar system or star-cluster in miniature. Unless we
suppose that in all heating of gases and vapors internal work is per­
formed upon the molecules, im plying that their atoms are at considera­
ble distances, the whole kinetical theory of gases falls to the ground.
As for the term added to P, there is no more than a partial and roughly
approximative justification for it. Nam ely, let us imagine two spheres
described round a particle as their centre, the radius of the larger being
so great as to include all the particles whose action upon the centre is
sensible, while the radius of the smaller is so large that a good many
molecules are included within it. The possibility of describing such a
sphere as the outer one implies that the attraction of the particles
varies at some distances inversely as some higher power of the distance
than the cube, or, to speak more clearly, that the attraction multiplied
by the cube of the distance diminishes as the distance increases; for the
number of particles at a given distance from any one particle is propor­
tionate to the square of that distance and each of these gives a term of
the virial which is the product of the attraction into the distance.
Consequently unless the attraction multiplied by the cube of the dis­
tance diminished so rapidly with the distance as soon to become insen­
sible, no such outer sphere as is supposed could be described. H ow­
ever, ordinary experience shows that such a sphere is possible; and
consequently there must be distances at which the attraction does thus
rapidly diminish as the distance increases. The two spheres, then,
being so drawn, consider the virial of the central particle due to the
particles between them. Let the density of the substance be increased,
say, N times. Then, for every term, i?r, of the virial before the conden­
sation, there will be N terms of the same magnitude after the condensa­
tion. Hence, the virial of each particle will be proportional to the
density, and the equation of the virial becomes
ad = P V +
V
This omits the virial within the inner sphere, the radius of which is
so taken that within that distance the number of particles is not pro­
portional to the number in a large sphere. For Van der Waals this
radius is the diameter of his hard molecules, which assumption gives
his equation. But it is plain that the attraction between the molecules
must to a certain extent modify their distribution, unless some pecu­
*But, in fact, an inspection of these curves is sufficient to show that they are of a
higher degree than the third. For they have the line V — o, or some line V a constant
for an asymptote, while for small values of P, the values of d 2P/(dV)2 are positive.

[page 339]

Man's Glassy Essence I 339
liar conditions are fulfilled. The equation of Van der Waals can be
approximately true therefore only for a gas. In a solid or liquid condi­
tion, in which the removal of a small amount of pressure has little
effect on the volume, and where consequently the virial must be much
greater than PV, the virial must increase with the volume. For suppose
we had a substance in a critical condition in which an increase of the
volume would diminish the virial more than it would increase \PV. If
we were forcibly to diminish the volume of such a substance, when the
temperature became equalised, the pressure which it could withstand
would be less than before, and it would be still further condensed, and
this would go on indefinitely until a condition were reached in which
an increase of volume would increase \PV more than it would decrease
the virial. In the case of solids, at least, P may be zero; so that the state
reached would be one in which the virial increases with the volume,
or the attraction between the particles does not increase so fast with
a diminution of their distance as it would if the attraction were in­
versely as the distance.
Almost contemporaneously with Van der Waals’s paper, another
remarkable thesis for the doctorate was presented at Paris by Ama-
gat.16 It related to the elasticity and expansion of gases, and to this
subject the superb experimenter, its author, has devoted his whole
subsequent life. Especially interesting are his observations of the
volumes of ethylene and of carbonic acid at temperatures from 20° to
ioo° and at pressures ranging from an ounce to 5000 pounds to the
square inch. As soon as Amagat had obtained these results, he re­
marked that the “ coefficient of expansion at constant volume,” as it is
absurdly called, that is, the rate of variation of the pressure with the
temperature, was very nearly constant for each volume. This accords
with the equation of the virial, which gives
dp _ a d'IRr
J e ~ ' v ~ d6 '
N ow, the virial must be nearly independent of the temperature, and
therefore the last term almost disappears. The virial would not be
quite independent of the temperature, because if the temperature (i.e.
the square of the velocity of the molecules) is lowered, and the pressure
correspondingly lowered, so as to make the volume the same, the
attractions of the molecules will have more time to produce their
effects, and consequently, the pairs of molecules the closest together
w ill be held together longer and closer; so that the virial w ill generally
be increased by a decrease of temperature. Now, Amagat’s experi­
ments do show an excessively minute effect of this sort, at least, when
the volumes are not too small. However, the observations are well
enough satisfied by assuming the “ coefficient of expansion at constant
volume” to consist wholly of the first term, a/V. Thus, Amagat’s

[page 340]

340 I The Essential Peirce
experiments enable us to determine the values of a and thence to
calculate the virial; and this.we find varies for carbonic acid gas nearly
inversely to V 09. There is, thus, a rough approximation to satisfying
Van der Waals’s equation. But the most interesting result of Amagat’s
experiments, for our purpose at any rate, is that the quantity a, though
nearly constant for any one volume, differs considerably with the
volume, nearly doubling when the volume is reduced five-fold. This
can only indicate that the mean kinetic energy of a given mass of the
gas for a given temperature is greater the more the gas is compressed.
But the laws of mechanics appear to enjoin that the mean kinetic
energy of a moving particle shall be constant at any given temperature.
The only escape from contradiction, then, is to suppose that the mean
mass of a moving particle diminishes upon the condensation of the gas.
In other words, many of the molecules are dissociated, or broken up
into atoms or sub-molecules. The idea that dissociation should be
favored by diminishing the volume will be pronounced by physicists,
at first blush, as contrary to all our experience. But it must be remem­
bered that the circumstances we are speaking of, that of a gas under
fifty or more atmospheres pressure, are also unusual. That the “ coef­
ficient of expansion under constant volume” when multiplied by the
volumes should increase with a decrement of the volume is also quite
contrary to ordinary experience; yet it undoubtedly takes place in all
gases under great pressure. Again, the doctrine of Arrhenius* is now
generally accepted, that the molecular conductivity of an electrolyte
is proportional to the dissociation of ions. N ow the molecular conduc­
tivity of a fused electrolyte is usually superior to that of a solution.
Here is a case, then, in which diminution of volume is accompanied
by increased dissociation.
The truth is that several different kinds of dissociation have to be
distinguished. In the first place, there is the dissociation of a chemical
molecule to form chemical molecules under the regular action of
chemical laws. This may be a double decomposition, as when iodhy-
dric acid is dissociated, according to the formula
/ / / + / / / = / / / / + / / ;
or, it may be a simple decomposition, as when pentachloride of phos­
phorus is dissociated according to the formula
p c i 5 = PCl3 + CICL
All these dissociations require, according to the laws of thermochemis­
try, an elevated temperature. In the second place, there is the dissocia­
tion of a physically polymerous molecule, that is, of several chemical
*Anticipated by Clausius as long ago as 1857; and by Williamson in 1851.17

[page 341]

Man's Glassy Essence I 341
molecules joined by physical attractions. This I am inclined to suppose
is a common concomitant of the heating of solids and liquids; for in
these bodies there is no increase of compressibility with the tempera­
ture at all comparable with the increase of the expansibility. But, in
the third place, there is the dissociation with which we are now con­
cerned, which must be supposed to be a throwing off of unsaturated
sub-molecules or atoms from the molecule. The molecule may, as I
have said, be roughly likened to a solar system. As such, molecules are
able to produce perturbations of one another’s internal motions; and
in this way a planet, i.e. a sub-molecule, will occasionally get thrown
off and wander about by itself, till it finds another unsaturated sub­
molecule with which it can unite. Such dissociation by perturbation
will naturally be favored by the proximity of the molecules to one
another.
Let us now pass to the consideration of that special substance, or
rather class of substances, whose properties form the chief subject of
botany and of zoology, as truly as those of the silicates form the chief
subject of mineralogy: I mean the life-slimes, or protoplasm. Let us
begin by cataloguing the general characters of these slimes. They one
and all exist in two states of aggregation, a solid or nearly solid state
and a liquid or nearly liquid state; but they do not pass from the former
to the latter by ordinary fusion. They are readily decomposed by heat,
especially in the liquid state; nor will they bear any considerable
degree of cold. All their vital actions take place at temperatures very
little below the point of decomposition. This extreme instability is one
of numerous facts which demonstrate the chemical complexity of pro­
toplasm. Every chemist will agree that they are far more complicated
than the albumens. Now, albumen is estimated to contain in each
molecule about a thousand atoms; so that it is natural to suppose that
the protoplasms contain several thousands. We know that while they
are chiefly composed of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen, a
large number of other elements enter into living bodies in small pro­
portions; and it is likely that most of these enter into the composition
of protoplasms. N ow, since the numbers of chemical varieties increase
at an enormous rate with the number of atoms per molecule, so that
there are certainly hundreds of thousands of substances whose mole­
cules contain twenty atoms or fewer, we may well suppose that the
number of protoplasmic substances runs into the billions or trillions.
Professor Cayley has given a mathematical theory of “ trees,” with a
view of throwing a light upon such questions;18 and in that light the
estimate of trillions (in the English sense) seems immoderately moder­
ate. It is true that an opinion has been emitted, and defended among
biologists, that there is but one kind of protoplasm; but the observa­
tions of biologists, themselves, have almost exploded that hypothesis,
which from a chemical standpoint appears utterly incredible. The

[page 342]

342 I The Essential Peirce
anticipation of the chemist would decidedly be that enough different
chemical substances having protoplasmic characters might be formed
to account, not only for the differences between nerve-slime and mus-
cle-slime, between whale-slime and lion-slime, but also for those
minuter pervasive variations which characterise different breeds and
single individuals.
Protoplasm, when quiescent, is, broadly speaking, solid; but when
it is disturbed in an appropriate way, or sometimes even spontane­
ously without external disturbance, it becomes, broadly speaking, liq­
uid. A moner in this state is seen under the microscope to have streams
within its matter; a slime-mold slowly flows by force of gravity. The
liquefaction starts from the point of disturbance and spreads through
the mass. This spreading, however, is not uniform in all directions; on
the contrary it takes at one time one course, at another another,
through the homogeneous mass, in a manner that seems a little myste­
rious. The cause of disturbance being removed, these motions gradu­
ally (with higher kinds of protoplasm, quickly) cease, and the slime
returns to its solid condition.
The liquefaction of protoplasm is accompanied by a mechanical
phenomenon. Namely, some kinds exhibit a tendency to draw them­
selves up into a globular form. This happens particularly with the
contents of muscle-cells. The prevalent opinion, founded on some of
the most exquisite experimental investigations that the history of sci­
ence can show, is undoubtedly that the contraction of muscle-cells is
due to osmotic pressure; and it must be allowed that that is a factor in
producing the effect. But it does not seem to me that it satisfactorily
accounts even for the phenomena of muscular contraction; and be­
sides, even naked slimes often draw up in the same way. In this case,
we seem to recognise an increase of the surface-tension. In some cases,
too, the reverse action takes place, extraordinary pseudopodia being
put forth, as if the surface-tension were diminished in spots. Indeed,
such a slime always has a sort of skin, due no doubt to surface-tension,
and this seems to give way at the point where a pseudopodium is put
forth.
Long-continued or frequently repeated liquefaction of the proto­
plasm results in an obstinate retention of the solid state, which we call
fatigue. On the other hand repose in this state, if not too much pro­
longed, restores the liquefiability. These are both important functions.
The life-slimes have, further, the peculiar property of growing.
Crystals also grow; their growth, however, consists merely in attract­
ing matter like their own from the circumambient fluid. To suppose
the growth of protoplasm of the same nature, would be to suppose this
substance to be spontaneously generated in copious supplies wherever
food is in solution. Certainly, it must be granted that protoplasm is but
a chemical substance, and that there is no reason why it should not be

[page 343]

Man !r Glassy Essence I 343
formed synthetically like any other chemical substance. Indeed, Clif­
ford has clearly shown that we have overwhelming evidence that it is
so form ed.19 But to say that such formation is as regular and frequent
as the assimilation of food is quite another matter. It is more consonant
with the facts of observation to suppose that assimilated protoplasm
is formed at the instant of assimilation, under the influence of the
protoplasm already present. For each slime in its growth preserves its
distinctive characters with wonderful truth, nerve-slime growing
nerve-slime and muscle-slime muscle-slime, lion-slime growing lion-
slime, and all the varieties of breeds and even individual characters
being preserved in the growth. N ow it is too much to suppose there
are billions of different kinds of protoplasm floating about wherever
there is food.
The frequent liquefaction of protoplasm increases its power of
assimilating food; so much so, indeed, that it is questionable whether
in the solid form it possesses this power.
The life-slime wastes as well as grows; and this too takes place
chiefly if not exclusively in its liquid phases.
Closely connected with growth is reproduction; and though in
higher forms this is a specialised function, it is universally true that
wherever there is protoplasm, there is, will be, or has been a power of
reproducing that same kind of protoplasm in a separated organism.
Reproduction seems to involve the union of two sexes; though it is not
demonstrable that this is always requisite.
Another physical property of protoplasm is that of taking habits.
The course which the spread of liquefaction has taken in the past is
rendered thereby more likely to be taken in the future; although there
is no absolute certainty that the same path will be followed again.
V ery extraordinary, certainly, are all these properties of proto­
plasm; as extraordinary as indubitable. But the one which has next to
be mentioned, while equally undeniable, is infinitely more wonderful.
It is that protoplasm feels. We have no direct evidence that this is true
of protoplasm universally, and certainly some kinds feel far more than
others. But there is a fair analogical inference that all protoplasm feels.
It not only feels but exercises all the functions of mind.
Such are the properties of protoplasm. The problem is to find a
hypothesis of the molecular constitution of this compound which will
account for these properties, one and all.
Some of them are obvious results of the excessively complicated
constitution of the protoplasm molecule. All very complicated sub­
stances are unstable; and plainly a molecule of several thousand atoms
may be separated in many ways into two parts in each of which the
polar chemical forces are very nearly saturated. In the solid proto­
plasm, as in other solids, the molecules must be supposed to be moving
as it were in orbits, or, at least, so as not to wander indefinitely. But

[page 344]

344 I The Essential Peirce
this solid cannot be melted, for the same reason that starch cannot be
melted; because an amount of heat insufficient to make the entire
molecules wander is sufficient to break them up completely and cause
them to form new and simpler molecules. But when one of the mole­
cules is disturbed, even if it be not quite thrown out of its orbit at first,
sub-molecules of perhaps several hundred atoms each are thrown off
from it. These will soon acquire the same mean kinetic energy as the
others, and therefore velocities several times as great. They will natu­
rally begin to wander, and in wandering will perturb a great many
other molecules and cause them in their turn to behave like the one
originally deranged. So many molecules will thus be broken up, that
even those that are intact will no longer be restrained within orbits,
but w ill wander about freely. This is the usual condition of a liquid,
as modern chemists understand it; for in all electrolytic liquids there
is considerable dissociation.
But this process necessarily chills the substance, not merely on
account of the heat of chemical combination, but still more because the
number of separate particles being greatly increased, the mean kinetic
energy must be less. The substance being a bad conductor, this heat
is not at once restored. N ow the particles moving more slowly, the
attractions between them have time to take effect, and they approach
the condition of equilibrium. But their dynamic equilibrium is found
in the restoration of the solid condition, which therefore takes place,
if the disturbance is not kept up.
When a body is in the solid condition, most of its molecules must
be moving at the same rate, or, at least, at certain regular sets of rates;
otherwise the orbital motion would not be preserved. The distances of
neighboring molecules must always be kept between a certain maxi­
mum and a certain minimum value. But if, without absorption of heat,
the body be thrown into a liquid condition, the distances of neighbor­
ing molecules will be far more unequally distributed, and an effect
upon the virial will result. The chilling of protoplasm upon its lique­
faction must also be taken into account. The ordinary effect will no
doubt be to increase the cohesion and with that the surface-tension, so
that the mass will tend to draw itself up. But in special cases, the virial
will be increased so much that the surface-tension will be diminished
at points where the temperature is first restored. In that case, the outer
film will give way and the tension at other places will aid in causing
the general fluid to be poured out at those points, forming pseudo­
podia.
When the protoplasm is in a liquid state, and then only, a solution
of food is able to penetrate its mass by diffusion. The protoplasm is
then considerably dissociated; and so is the food, like all dissolved
matter. If then the separated and unsaturated sub-molecules of the

[page 345]

Man's Glassy Essence I 345
food happen to be of the same chemical species as sub-molecules of the
protoplasm, they may unite with other sub-molecules of the proto­
plasm to form new molecules, in such a fashion that when the solid
state is resumed, there may be more molecules of protoplasm than
there were at the beginning. It is like the jack-knife whose blade and
handle, after having been severally lost and replaced, were found and
put together to make a new knife.
We have seen that protoplasm is chilled by liquefaction, and that
this brings it back to the solid state, when the heat is recovered. This
series of operations must be very rapid in the case of nerve-slime and
even of muscle-slime, and may account for the unsteady or vibratory
character of their action. O f course, if assimilation takes place, the heat
of combination, which is probably trifling, is gained. On the other
hand, if work is done, whether by nerve or by muscle, loss of energy
must take place. In the case of the muscle, the mode by which the
instantaneous part of the fatigue is brought about is easily traced out.
If when the muscle contracts it be under stress, it will contract less
than it otherwise would do, and there will be a loss of heat. It is like
an engine which should work by dissolving salt in water and using the
contraction during the solution to lift a weight, the salt being recov­
ered afterwards by distillation. But the major part of fatigue has noth­
ing to do with the correlation of forces. A man must labor hard to do
in a quarter of an hour the work which draws from him enough heat
to cool his body by a single degree. Meantime, he will be getting
heated, he will be pouring out extra products of combustion, perspira­
tion, etc., and he will be driving the blood at an accelerated rate
through minute tubes at great expense. Yet all this will have little to
do with his fatigue. He may sit quietly at his table writing, doing
practically no physical work at all, and yet in a few hours be terribly
fagged. This seems to be owing to the deranged sub-molecules of the
nerve-slime not having had time to settle back into their proper combi­
nations. When such sub-molecules are thrown out, as they must be
from time to time, there is so much waste of material.
In order that a sub-molecule of food may be thoroughly and firmly
assimilated into a broken molecule of protoplasm, it is necessary not
only that it should have precisely the right chemical composition, but
also that it should be at precisely the right spot at the right time and
should be moving in precisely the right direction with precisely the
right velocity. If all these conditions are not fulfilled, it w ill be more
loosely retained than the other parts of the molecule; and every time
it comes round into the situation in which it was drawn in, relatively
to the other parts of that molecule and to such others as were near
enough to be factors in the action, it will be in special danger of being
thrown out again. Thus, when a partial liquefaction of the protoplasm

[page 346]

346 I The Essential Peirce
takes place many times to about the same extent, it will, each time, be
pretty nearly the same molecules that were last drawn in that are now
thrown out. They will be thrown out, too, in about the same way, as
to position, direction of motion, and velocity, in which they were
drawn in; and this w ill be in about the same course that the ones last
before them were thrown out. Not exactly, however; for the very cause
of their being thrown off so easily is their not having fulfilled precisely
the conditions of stable retention. Thus, the law of habit is accounted
for, and with it its peculiar characteristic of not acting with exactitude.
It seems to me that this explanation of habit, aside from the ques­
tion of its truth or falsity, has a certain value as an addition to our little
store of mechanical examples of actions analogous to habit. All the
others, so far as I know, are either statical or else involve forces which,
taking only the sensible motions into account, violate the law of en­
ergy. It is so with the stream that wears its own bed. Here, the sand
is carried to its most stable situation and left there. The law of energy
forbids this; for when anything reaches a position of stable equilib­
rium, its momentum will be at a maximum, so that it can according
to this law only be left at rest in an unstable situation. In all the statical
illustrations, too, things are brought into certain states and left there.
A garment receives folds and keeps them; that is, its limit of elasticity
is exceeded. This failure to spring back is again an apparent violation
of the law of energy; for the substance will not only not spring back
of itself (which might be due to an unstable equilibrium being reached)
but will not even do so when an impulse that way is applied to it.
Accordingly, Professor James says “ the phenomena of habit... are due
to the plasticity of the . . . materials.” 20 N ow, plasticity of materials
means the having of a low limit of elasticity. (See the Century Dictio­
n a r y under solid.)11 But the hypothetical constitution of protoplasm
here proposed involves no forces but attractions and repulsions strictly
following the law of energy. The action here, that is, the throwing of
an atom out of its orbit in a molecule, and the entering of a new atom
into nearly, but not quite the same orbit, is somewhat similar to the
molecular actions which may be supposed to take place in a solid
strained beyond its limit of elasticity. Namely, in that case certain
molecules must be thrown out of their orbits, to settle down again
shortly after into new orbits. In short, the plastic solid resembles
protoplasm in being partially and temporarily liquefied by a slight
mechanical force. But the taking of a set by a solid body has but a
moderate resemblance to the taking of a habit, inasmuch as the charac­
teristic feature of the latter, its inexactitude and want of complete
determinacy, is not so marked in the former, if it can be said to be
present there, at all.
The truth is that though the molecular explanation of habit is

[page 347]

Man y
s Glassy Essence I 347
pretty vague on the mathematical side, there can be no doubt that
systems of atoms having polar forces would act substantially in that
manner, and the explanation is even too satisfactory to suit the conve­
nience of an advocate of tychism. For it may fairly be urged that since
the phenomena of habit may thus result from a purely mechanical
arrangement, it is unnecessary to suppose that habit-taking is a pri­
mordial principle of the universe. But one fact remains unexplained
mechanically, which concerns not only the facts of habit, but all cases
of actions apparently violating the law of energy; it is that all these
phenomena depend upon aggregations of trillions of molecules in one
and the same condition and neighborhood; and it is by no means clear
how they could have all been brought and left in the same place and
state by any conservative forces. But let the mechanical explanation be
as perfect as it may, the state of things which it supposes presents
evidence of a primordial habit-taking tendency. For it shows us like
things acting in like ways because they are alike. N ow, those who insist
on the doctrine of necessity w ill for the most part insist that the
physical world is entirely individual. Yet law involves an element of
generality. N ow to say that generality is primordial, but generalisation
not, is like saying that diversity is primordial but diversification not.
It turns logic upside down. At any rate, it is clear that nothing but a
principle of habit, itself due to the growth by habit of an infinitesimal
chance tendency toward habit-taking is the only bridge that can span
the chasm between the chance-medley of chaos and the cosmos of
order and law.
I shall not attempt a molecular explanation of the phenomena of
reproduction, because that would require a subsidiary hypothesis, and
carry me away from my main object. Such phenomena, universally
diffused though they be, appear to depend upon special conditions; and
we do not find that all protoplasm has reproductive powers.
But what is to be said of the property of feeling? If consciousness
belongs to all protoplasm, by what mechanical constitution is this to
be accounted for? The slime is nothing but a chemical compound.
There is no inherent impossibility in its being formed synthetically in
the laboratory, out of its chemical elements; and if it were so made, it
would present all the characters of natural protoplasm. N o doubt,
then, it would feel. T o hesitate to admit this would be puerile and
ultra-puerile. By what element of the molecular arrangement, then,
would that feeling be caused? This question cannot be evaded or pooh-
poohed. Protoplasm certainly does feel; and unless we are to accept a
weak dualism, the property must be shown to arise from some pecu­
liarity of the mechanical system. Yet the attempt to deduce it from the
three laws of mechanics, applied to never so ingenious a mechanical
contrivance, would obviously be futile. It can never be explained,

[page 348]

348 I The Essential Peirce
unless we admit that physical events are but degraded or undeveloped
forms of psychical events. But once grant that the phenomena of
matter are but the result of the sensibly complete sway of habits upon
mind, and it only remains to explain why in the protoplasm these
habits are to some slight extent broken up, so that according to the law
of mind, in that special clause of it sometimes called the principle of
accommodation,* feeling becomes intensified. N ow the manner in
which habits generally get broken up is this. Reactions usually termi­
nate in the removal of a stimulus; for the excitation continues as long
as the stimulus is present. Accordingly, habits are general ways of
behavior which are associated with the removal of stimuli. But when
the expected removal of the stimulus fails to occur, the excitation
continues and increases, and non-habitual reactions take place; and
these tend to weaken the habit. If, then, we suppose that matter never
does obey its ideal laws with absolute precision, but that there are
almost insensible fortuitous departures from regularity, these will pro­
duce, in general, equally minute effects. But protoplasm is in an exces­
sively unstable condition; and it is the characteristic of unstable equi­
librium, that near that point excessively minute causes may produce
startlingly large effects. Here then, the usual departures from regular­
ity will be followed by others that are very great; and the large fortui­
tous departures from law so produced, w ill tend still further to break
up the laws, supposing that these are of the nature of habits. Now, this
breaking up of habit and renewed fortuitous spontaneity will, accord­
ing to the law of mind, be accompanied by an intensification of feeling.
The nerve-protoplasm is, without doubt, in the most unstable condi­
tion of any kind of matter; and consequently, there the resulting feel­
ing is the most manifest.
Thus we see that the idealist has no need to dread a mechanical
theory of life. On the contrary, such a theory, fully developed, is bound
to call in a tychistic idealism as its indispensible adjunct. Wherever
chance-spontaneity is found, there, in the same proportion, feeling
exists. In fact, chance is but the outward aspect of that which within
itself is feeling. I long ago showed that real existence, or thing-ness,
consists in regularities.22 So, that primeval chaos in which there was
no regularity was mere nothing, from a physical aspect. Yet it was not
a blank zero; for there was an intensity of consciousness there in
comparison with which all that we ever feel is but as the struggling
of a molecule or two to throw off a little of the force of law to an endless
and innumerable diversity of chance utterly unlimited.
But after some atoms of the protoplasm have thus become partially
emancipated from law, what happens next to them? To understand
*“ Physiologically,. . . accommodation means the breaking up of a habit. . . . Psycho­
logically, it means reviving consciousness.” Baldwin, Psychology, Part III, ch. i., §5.

[page 349]

Man's Glassy Essence I 349
this, we have to remember that no mental tendency is so easily
strengthened by the action of habit as is the tendency to take habits.
N ow , in the higher kinds of protoplasm, especially, the atoms in ques­
tion have not only long belonged to one molecule or another of the
particular mass of slime of which they are parts; but before that, they
were constituents of food of a protoplasmic constitution. During all
this time, they have been liable to lose habits and to recover them
again; so that now, when the stimulus is removed, and the foregone
habits tend to reassert themselves, they do so in the case of such atoms
with great promptness. Indeed, the return is so prompt that there is
nothing but the feeling to show conclusively that the bonds of law have
ever been relaxed.
In short, diversification is the vestige of chance-spontaneity; and
wherever diversity is increasing, there chance must be operative. On
the other hand, wherever uniformity is increasing, habit must be oper­
ative. But wherever actions take place under an established uniform­
ity, there so much feeling as there may be takes the mode of a sense
of reaction. That is the manner in which I am led to define the relation
between the fundamental elements of consciousness and their physical
equivalents.
It remains to consider the physical relations of general ideas. It may
be well here to reflect that if matter has no existence except as a
specialisation of mind, it follows that whatever affects matter accord­
ing to regular laws is itself matter. But all mind is directly or indirectly
connected with all matter, and acts in a more or less regular way; so
that all mind more or less partakes of the nature of matter. Hence, it
would be a mistake to conceive of the psychical and the physical
aspects of matter as two aspects absolutely distinct. View ing a thing
from the outside, considering its relations of action and reaction with
other things, it appears as matter. View ing it from the inside, looking
at its immediate character as feeling, it appears as consciousness. These
two views are combined when we remember that mechanical laws are
nothing but acquired habits, like all the regularities of mind, including
the tendency to take habits, itself; and that this action of habit is
nothing but generalisation, and generalisation is nothing but the
spreading of feelings. But the question is, how do general ideas appear
in the molecular theory of protoplasm?
The consciousness of a habit involves a general idea. In each action
of that habit certain atoms get thrown out of their orbit, and replaced
by others. Upon all the different occasions it is different atoms that are
thrown off, but they are analogous from a physical point of view, and
there is an inward sense of their being analogous. Every time one of
the associated feelings recurs, there is a more or less vague sense that
there are others, that it has a general character, and of about what this
general character is. We ought not, I think, to hold that in protoplasm

[page 350]

350 I The Essential Peirce
habit never acts in any other than the particular way suggested above.
On the contrary, if habit be a prim ary property of mind, it must be
equally so of matter, as a kind of mind. We can hardly refuse to admit
that wherever chance motions have general characters, there is a tend­
ency for this generality to spread and to perfect itself. In that case, a
general idea is a certain modification of consciousness which accompa­
nies any regularity or general relation between chance actions.
The consciousness of a general idea has a certain “ unity of the ego”
in it, which is identical when it passes from one mind to another. It
is, therefore, quite analogous to a person; and, indeed, a person is only
a particular kind of general idea. Long ago, in the Journal o f Speculative
Philosophy (Vol. II, p. 156), I pointed out that a person is nothing but
a symbol involving a general idea;23 but my views were, then, too
nominalistic to enable me to see that every general idea has the unified
living feeling of a person.
All that is necessary, upon this theory, to the existence of a person
is that the feelings out of which he is constructed should be in close
enough connection to influence one another. Here we can draw a
consequence which it may be possible to submit to experimental test.
Namely, if this be the case, there should be something like personal
consciousness in bodies of men who are in intimate and intensely
sympathetic communion. It is true that when the generalisation of
feeling has been carried so far as to include all within a person, a
stopping-place, in a certain sense, has been attained; and further
generalisation will have a less lively character. But we must not think
it will cease. Esprit de corps, national sentiment, sym-pathy, are no mere
metaphors. None of us can fully realise what the minds of corporations
are, any more than one of my brain-cells can know what the whole
brain is thinking. But the law of mind clearly points to the existence
of such personalities, and there are many ordinary observations which,
if they were critically examined and supplemented by special experi­
ments, might, as first appearances promise, give evidence of the influ­
ence of such greater persons upon individuals. It is often remarked
that on one day half a dozen people, strangers to one another, will take
it into their heads to do one and the same strange deed, whether it be
a physical experiment, a crime, or an act of virtue. When the thirty
thousand young people of the society for Christian Endeavor were in
N ew York, there seemed to me to be some mysterious diffusion of
sweetness and light.24 If such a fact is capable of being made out
anywhere, it should be in the church. The Christians have always been
ready to risk their lives for the sake of having prayers in common, of
getting together and praying simultaneously with great energy, and
especially for their common body, for “ the whole state of Christ’s
church militant here in earth,” as one of the missals has it. This
practice they have been keeping up everywhere, weekly, for many

[page 351]

Man VGlassy Essence I 351
centuries. Surely, a personality ought to have developed in that
church, in that “ bride of Christ,” as they call it, or else there is a
strange break in the action of mind, and I shall have to acknowledge
my views are much mistaken. Would not the societies for psychical
research be more likely to break through the clouds, in seeking evi­
dences of such corporate personality, than in seeking evidences of
telepathy, which, upon the same theory, should be a far weaker phe­
nomenon?

[page 352]

25
Evolutionary Love
P 521: The Monist 3 (January 1893):176-200. [Also published
in CP 6.287-317.] In this fifth (and last) Monist paper,
Peirce develops his agapism, the doctrine that the law of love
is operative in the world. He argues that of the three kinds
o f evolution (by fortuitous variation, by mechanical neces­
sity, and by creative love) the third is the mostfundamental:
“Love, recognizing germs of loveliness in the hateful, gradu­
ally warms it into life, and makes it lovely. That is the sort
o f evolution which every careful student of my essay ‘The
Law of Mind ’ must see that synechism calls for. ” Peirce
delivers a polemic against the “gospel ofgreed” and laments
thefact that sentiment seems to have lostfavor; sentimen­
talism, he says, is “the doctrine that great respect should be
paid to the natural judgments o f the sensible heart, ” and he
entreats his readers “to consider whether to contemn it is not
o f all blasphemies the most degrading. ” He compares some of
the views expressed here with those of Christianity, and ends
with a discussion o f the continuity o f mind and the caution
that we should not overestimate the importance o f the indi­
vidual.
A t F i r s t B l u s h . C o u n t e r - G o s p e l s
Philosophy, when just escaping from its golden pupa-skin, mythol-
ogy, proclaimed the great evolutionary agency of the universe to be
Love. Or, since this pirate-lingo, English, is poor in such-like words,
let us say Eros, the exuberance-love. Afterwards, Empedocles set up
passionate-love and hate as the two coordinate powers of the universe.1
In some passages, kindness is the word. But certainly, in any sense in
which it has an opposite, to be senior partner of that opposite, is the
highest position that love can attain. Nevertheless, the ontological
gospeller, in whose days those views were familiar topics, made the
One Supreme Being, by whom all things have been made out of noth­
ing, to be cherishing-love. What, then, can he say to hate? N ever mind,
at this time, what the scribe of the apocalypse, if he were John, stung

[page 353]

Evolutionary Love I 353
at length by persecution into a rage unable to distinguish suggestions
of evil from visions of heaven, and so become the Slanderer of God to
men, may have dreamed. The question is rather what the sane John
thought, or ought to have thought, in order to carry out his idea
consistently. His statement that God is love seems aimed at that saying
of Ecclesiastes that we cannot tell whether God bears us love or hatred.
“ N ay,” says John, “ we can tell, and very simply! We know and have
trusted the love which God hath in us. God is love.” There is no logic
in this, unless it means that God loves all men. In the preceding
paragraph, he had said, “ God is light and in him is no darkness at all.”
We are to understand, then, that as darkness is merely the defect of
light, so hatred and evil are mere imperfect stages of ayaTriq and
ayaOov, love and loveliness. This concords with that utterance re­
ported in John’s Gospel: “ God sent not the Son into the world to judge
the world; but that the world should through him be saved. He that
believeth on him is not judged: he that believeth not hath been judged
already. . . . And this is the judgment, that the light is come into the
world, and that men loved darkness rather than the light.” That is to
say, God visits no punishment on them; they punish themselves, by
their natural affinity for the defective. Thus, the love that God is, is
not a love of which hatred is the contrary; otherwise Satan would be
a coordinate power; but it is a love which embraces hatred as an
imperfect stage of it, an Anteros—yea, even needs hatred and hateful­
ness as its object. For self-love is no love; so if G od’s self is love, that
which he loves must be defect of love; just as a luminary can light up
only that which otherwise would be dark. H enry James, the Sweden-
borgian, says: “ It is no doubt very tolerable finite or creaturely love to
love one’s own in another, to love another for his conformity to one’s
self: but nothing can be in more flagrant contrast with the creative
Love, all whose tenderness ex vi termini must be reserved only for what
intrinsically is most bitterly hostile and negative to itself.” This is from
Substance and Shadow: an Essay on the Physics o f Creation.2 It is a pity he
had not filled his pages with things like this, as he was able easily to
do, instead of scolding at his reader and at people generally, until the
physics of creation was wellnigh forgot. I must deduct, however, from
what I just wrote: obviously no genius could make his every sentence
as sublime as one which discloses for the problem of evil its everlasting
solution.
The movement of love is circular, at one and the same impulse
projecting creations into independency and drawing them into har­
mony. This seems complicated when stated so; but it is fully summed
up in the simple formula we call the Golden Rule. This does not, of
course, say, Do everything possible to gratify the egoistic impulses of
others, but it says, Sacrifice your own perfection to the perfectionment
of your neighbor. N or must it for a moment be confounded with the

[page 354]

354 I The Essential Peirce
Benthamite, or Helvetian, or Beccarian motto, Act for the greatest
good of the greatest number. Love is not directed to abstractions but
to persons; not to persons we do not know, nor to numbers of people,
but to our own dear ones, our family and neighbors. “ Our neighbor,”
we remember, is one whom we live near, not locally perhaps, but in
life and feeling.
Everybody can see that the statement of St. John is the formula of
an evolutionary philosophy, which teaches that growth comes only
from love, from— I will not say self-sacrifice, but from the ardent im­
pulse to fulfil another’s highest impulse. Suppose, for example, that I
have an idea that interests me. It is my creation. It is my creature; for
as shown in last Ju ly’s Monist, 3 it is a little person. I love it; and I will
sink m yself in perfecting it. It is not by dealing out cold justice to the
circle of my ideas that I can make them grow, but by cherishing and
tending them as I would the flowers in my garden. The philosophy we
draw from John’s gospel is that this is the way mind develops; and as
for the cosmos, only so far as it yet is mind, and so has life, is it capable
of further evolution. Love, recognising germs of loveliness in the hate­
ful, gradually warms it into life, and makes it lovely. That is the sort
of evolution which every careful student of my essay “ The Law of
M ind” 4 must see that synechism calls for.
The nineteenth century is now fast sinking into the grave, and we
all begin to review its doings and to think what character it is destined
to bear as compared with other centuries in the minds of future histori­
ans. It will be called, I guess, the Economical Century; for political
economy has more direct relations with all the branches of its activity
than has any other science. Well, political economy has its formula of
redemption, too. It is this: Intelligence in the service of greed ensures
the justest prices, the fairest contracts, the most enlightened conduct
of all the dealings between men, and leads to the summum bonum, food
in plenty and perfect comfort. Food for whom? Why, for the greedy
master of intelligence. I do not mean to say that this is one of the
legitimate conclusions of political economy, the scientific character of
which I fully acknowledge. But the study of doctrines, themselves
true, will often temporarily encourage generalisations extremely false,
as the study of physics has encouraged necessitarianism. What I say,
then, is that the great attention paid to economical questions during
our century has induced an exaggeration of the beneficial effects of
greed and of the unfortunate results of sentiment, until there has
resulted a philosophy which comes unwittingly to this, that greed is
the great agent in the elevation of the human race and in the evolution
of the universe.
I open a handbook of political economy,5— the most typical and
middling one I have at hand,— and there find some remarks of which
I w ill here make a brief analysis. I omit qualifications, sops thrown to

[page 355]

Evolutionary Love I 355
Cerberus, phrases to placate Christian prejudice, trappings which
serve to hide from author and reader alike the ugly nakedness of the
greed-god. But I have surveyed my position. The author enumerates
“ three motives to human action:
The love of self;
The love of a limited class having common interests and feelings
with one’s self;
The love of mankind at large.” 6
Remark, at the outset, what obsequious title is bestowed on
greed,— “ the love of self.” Love! The second motive is love. In place
of “ a limited class” put “ certain persons,” and you have a fair descrip­
tion. Taking “ class” in the old-fashioned sense, a weak kind of love is
described. In the sequel, there seems to be some haziness as to the
delimitation of this motive. By the love of mankind at large, the author
does not mean that deep, subconscious passion that is properly so
called; but merely public-spirit, perhaps little more than a fidget about
pushing ideas. The author proceeds to a comparative estimate of the
worth of these motives. Greed, says he, but using, of course, another
word, “ is not so great an evil as is commonly supposed... . Every man
can promote his own interests a great deal more effectively than he can
promote any one else’s, or than any one else can promote his.” Besides,
as he remarks on another page, the more miserly a man is, the more
good he does. The second motive “ is the most dangerous one to which
society is exposed.” Love is all very pretty: “ no higher or purer source
of human happiness exists.” (Ahem!) But it is a “ source of enduring
injury,” and, in short, should be overruled by something wiser. What
is this wiser motive? We shall see.
As for public spirit, it is rendered nugatory by the “ difficulties in
the way of its effective operation.” For example, it might suggest
putting checks upon the fecundity of the poor and the vicious; and “ no
measure of repression would be too severe,” in the case of criminals.
The hint is broad. But unfortunately, you cannot induce legislatures
to take such measures, owing to the pestiferous “ tender sentiments of
man towards man.” It thus appears, that public-spirit, or Benthamism,
is not strong enough to be the effective tutor of love (I am skipping to
another page), which must therefore be handed over to “ the motives
which animate men in the pursuit of wealth,” in which alone we can
confide, and which “ are in the highest degree beneficent.” * Yes, in the
“ highest degree” without exception are they beneficent to the being
upon whom all their blessings are poured out, namely, the Self, whose
“ sole object,” says the writer, in accumulating wealth is his individual
*How can a writer have any respect for science, as such, who is capable of confound­
ing with the scientific propositions of political economy, which have nothing to say
concerning what is “ beneficent,” such brummagem generalisations as this?

[page 356]

356 I The Essential Peirce
“ sustenance and enjoyment.” Plainly, the author holds the notion that
some other motive might be in a higher degree beneficent even for the
man’s self to be a paradox wanting in good sense. He seeks to gloze and
modify his doctrine; but he lets the perspicacious reader see what his
animating principle is; and when, holding the opinions I have re­
peated, he at the same time acknowledges that society could not exist
upon a basis of intelligent greed alone, he simply pigeon-holes himself
as one of the eclectics of inharmonious opinions. He wants his mam­
mon flavored with a soupgon of god.
The economists accuse those to whom the enunciation of their
atrocious villainies communicates a thrill of horror of being sentimen­
talists. It may be so: I w illingly confess to having some tincture of
sentimentalism in me, God be thanked! Ever since the French Revolu­
tion brought this leaning of thought into ill-repute,—and not alto­
gether undeservedly, I must admit, true, beautiful, and good as that
great movement was,— it has been the tradition to picture sentimental­
ists as persons incapable of logical thought and unwilling to look facts
in the eyes. This tradition may be classed with the French tradition
that an Englishman says godam at every second sentence, the English
tradition that an American talks about “ Britishers,” and the American
tradition that a Frenchman carries forms of etiquette to an inconve­
nient extreme, in short with all those traditions which survive simply
because the men who use their eyes and ears are few and far between.
Doubtless some excuse there was for all those opinions in days gone
by; and sentimentalism, when it was the fashionable amusement to
spend one’s evenings in a flood of tears over a woeful performance on
a candle-litten stage, sometimes made itself a little ridiculous. But what
after all is sentimentalism? It is an ism, a doctrine, namely, the doctrine
that great respect should be paid to the natural judgments of the
sensible heart. This is what sentimentalism precisely is; and I entreat
the reader to consider whether to contemn it is not of all blasphemies
the most degrading. Yet the nineteenth century has steadily con­
temned it, because it brought about the Reign of Terror. That it did
so is true. Still, the whole question is one of how much. The reign of
terror was very bad; but now the Gradgrind banner has been this
century long flaunting in the face of heaven, with an insolence to
provoke the very skies to scowl and rumble. Soon a flash and quick peal
will shake economists quite out of their complacency, too late. The
twentieth century, in its latter half, shall surely see the deluge-tempest
burst upon the social order,— to clear upon a world as deep in ruin as
that greed-philosophy has long plunged it into guilt. No post-ther-
midorian high jinks then!
So a miser is a beneficent power in a community, is he? With the
same reason precisely, only in a much higher degree, you might pro­

[page 357]

Evolutionary Love I 357
nounce the Wall Street sharp to be a good angel, who takes money
from heedless persons not likely to guard it properly, who wrecks
feeble enterprises better stopped, and who administers wholesome
lessons to unwary scientific men, by passing worthless checks upon
them,— as you did, the other day, to me, my millionaire Master in
glomery, when you thought you saw your way to using my process
without paying for it, and of so bequeathing to your children some­
thing to boast of their father about,— and who by a thousand wiles puts
money at the service of intelligent greed, in his own person.7 Bernard
Mandeville, in his Fable of the Bees, maintains that private vices of all
descriptions are public benefits, and proves it, too, quite as cogently
as the economist proves his point concerning the miser.8 He even
argues, with no slight force, that but for vice civilisation would never
have existed. In the same spirit, it has been strongly maintained and
is to-day widely believed that all acts of charity and benevolence,
private and public, go seriously to degrade the human race.
The Origin ofSpecies of Darwin merely extends politico-economical
views of progress to the entire realm of animal and vegetable life. The
vast majority of our contemporary naturalists hold the opinion that
the true cause of those exquisite and marvellous adaptations of nature
for which, when I was a boy, men used to extol the divine wisdom, is
that creatures are so crowded together that those of them that happen
to have the slightest advantage force those less pushing into situations
unfavorable to multiplication or even kill them before they reach the
age of reproduction. Among animals, the mere mechanical individual­
ism is vastly reenforced as a power making for good by the animal’s
ruthless greed. As Darwin puts it on his title-page, it is the struggle
for existence; and he should have added for his motto: Every individual
for himself, and the Devil take the hindmost! Jesus, in his Sermon on
the Mount, expressed a different opinion.
Here, then, is the issue. The gospel of Christ says that progress
comes from every individual merging his individuality in sympathy
with his neighbors. On the other side, the conviction of the nineteenth
century is that progress takes place by virtue of every individual’s
striving for himself with all his might and trampling his neighbor
under foot whenever he gets a chance to do so. This may accurately
be called the Gospel of Greed.
Much is to be said on both sides. I have not concealed, I could not
conceal, my own passionate predilection. Such a confession will proba­
bly shock my scientific brethren. Yet the strong feeling is in itself, I
think an argument of some weight in favor of the agapastic theory of
evolution,—so far as it may be presumed to bespeak the normal judg­
ment of the Sensible Heart. Certainly, if it were possible to believe in
agapasm without believing it warmly, that fact would be an argument

[page 358]

358 I The Essential Peirce
against the truth of the doctrine. At any rate, since the warmth of
feeling exists, it should on every account be candidly confessed; espe­
cially since it creates a liability to one-sidedness on my part against
which it behooves my readers and me to be severally on our guard.
S e c o n d T h o u g h t s . I r e n i c a
Let us try to define the logical affinities of the different theories of
evolution. Natural selection, as conceived by Darwin, is a mode of
evolution in which the only positive agent of change in the whole
passage from moner to man is fortuitous variation. T o secure advance
in a definite direction chance has to be seconded by some action that
shall hinder the propagation of some varieties or stimulate that of
others. In natural selection, strictly so called, it is the crowding out of
the weak. In sexual selection, it is the attraction of beauty, mainly.
The Origin ofSpecies was published toward the end of the year 1859.
The preceding years since 1846 had been one of the most productive
seasons,— or if extended so as to cover the great book we are consider­
ing, the most productive period of equal length in the entire history
of science from its beginnings until now. The idea that chance begets
order, which is one of the corner-stones of modern physics (although
Dr. Carus considers it “ the weakest point in Mr. Peirce’s system,” )9
was at that time put into its clearest light. Quetelet had opened the
discussion by his Letters on the Application o fProbabilities to the Moral and
Political Sciences, a work which deeply impressed the best minds of that
day, and to which Sir John Herschel had drawn general attention in
Great Britain.10 In 1857, the first volume of Buckle’s History of Civilisa­
tion had created a tremendous sensation, owing to the use he made of
this same idea. Meantime, the “ statistical method” had, under that
very name, been applied with brilliant success to molecular physics.
Dr. John Herapath, an English chemist, had in 1847 outlined the kineti­
cal theory of gases in his Mathematical Physics; and the interest the
theory excited had been refreshed in 1856 by notable memoirs by
Clausius and K ronig.11 In the very summer preceding D arwin’s publi­
cation, M axwell had read before the British Association the first and
most important of his researches on this subject.12 The consequence
was that the idea that fortuitous events may result in a physical law,
and further that this is the way in which those laws which appear to
conflict with the principle of the conservation of energy are to be
explained, had taken a strong hold upon the minds of all who were
abreast of the leaders of thought. By such minds, it was inevitable that
the Origin of Species, whose teaching was simply the application of the
same principle to the explanation of another “ non-conservative” ac­
tion, that of organic development, should be hailed and welcomed. The
sublime discovery of the conservation of energy by Helmholtz in 1847,

[page 359]

Evolutionary Love I 359
and that of the mechanical theory of heat by Clausius and by Rankine,
independently, in 1850, had decidedly overawed all those who might
have been inclined to sneer at physical science.13 Thereafter a belated
poet still harping upon “ science peddling with the names of things”
would fail of his effect. Mechanism was now known to be all, or very
nearly so. All this time, utilitarianism,—that improved substitute for
the Gospel,— was in its fullest feather; and was a natural ally of an
individualistic theory. Dean Mansel’s injudicious advocacy had led to
mutiny among the bondsmen of Sir William Hamilton, and the nomi­
nalism of Mill had profited accordingly;14 and although the real science
that Darwin was leading men to was sure some day to give a death­
blow to the sham-science of Mill, yet there were several elements of
the Darwinian theory which were sure to charm the followers of Mill.
Another thing: an aesthetics had been in use for thirteen years. A l­
ready, people’s acquaintance with suffering had dropped off very
much; and as a consequence, that unlovely hardness by which our
times are so contrasted with those that immediately preceded them,
had already set in, and inclined people to relish a ruthless theory.
The reader would quite mistake the drift of what I am saying if he
were to understand me as wishing to suggest that any of those things
(except perhaps Malthus) influenced Darwin himself. What I mean is
that his hypothesis, while without dispute one of the most ingenious
and pretty ever devised, and while argued with a wealth of knowl­
edge, a strength of logic, a charm of rhetoric, and above all with a
certain magnetic genuineness that was almost irresistible, did not ap­
pear, at first, at all near to being proved; and to a sober mind its case
looks less hopeful now than it did twenty years ago; but the extraor­
dinarily favorable reception it met with was plainly owing, in large
measure, to its ideas being those toward which the age was favorably
disposed, especially, because of the encouragement it gave to the
greed-philosophy.
Diametrically opposed to evolution by chance, are those theories
which attribute all progress to an inward necessary principle, or other
form of necessity. Many naturalists have thought that if an egg is
destined to go through a certain series of embryological transforma­
tions, from which it is perfectly certain not to deviate, and if in geolog­
ical time almost exactly the same forms appear successively, one re­
placing another in the same order, the strong presumption is that this
latter succession was as predeterminate and certain to take place as the
former. So, Nageli, for instance, conceives that it somehow follows
from the first law of motion and the peculiar, but unknown, molecular
constitution of protoplasm, that forms must complicate themselves
more and more. Kolliker makes one form generate another after a
certain maturation has been accomplished. Weismann, too, though he
calls himself a Darwinian, holds that nothing is due to chance, but that

[page 360]

360 I The Essential Peirce
all forms are simple mechanical resultants of the heredity from two
parents.*15 It is very noticeable that all these different sectaries seek to
import into their science a mechanical necessity to which the facts that
come under their observation do not point. Those geologists who
think that the variation of species is due to cataclasmic alterations of
climate or of the chemical constitution of the air and water are also
making mechanical necessity chief factor of evolution.
Evolution by sporting and evolution by mechanical necessity are
conceptions warring against one another. A third method, which
supersedes their strife, lies enwrapped in the theory of Lam arck.16
According to his view, all that distinguishes the highest organic forms
from the most rudimentary has been brought about by little hypertro­
phies or atrophies which have affected individuals early in their lives,
and have been transmitted to their offspring. Such a transmission of
acquired characters is of the general nature of habit-taking, and this
is the representative and derivative within the physiological domain
of the law of mind. Its action is essentially dissimilar to that of a
physical force; and that is the secret of the repugnance of such neces­
sitarians as Weismann to admitting its existence. The Lamarckians
further suppose that although some of the modifications of form so
transmitted were originally due to mechanical causes, yet the chief
factors of their first production were the straining of endeavor and the
overgrowth superinduced by exercise, together with the opposite ac­
tions. N ow, endeavor, since it is directed toward an end, is essentially
psychical, even though it be sometimes unconscious; and the growth
due to exercise, as I argued in my last paper,17 follows a law of a
character quite contrary to that of mechanics.
Lamarckian evolution is thus evolution by the force of habit.—
That sentence slipped off my pen while one of those neighbors whose
function in the social cosmos seems to be that of an Interrupter, was
asking me a question. O f course, it is nonsense. Habit is mere inertia,
a resting on one’s oars, not a propulsion. N ow it is energetic projacula-
tion (lucky there is such a word, or this untried hand might have been
put to inventing one) by which in the typical instances of Lamarckian
evolution the new elements of form are first created. Habit, however,
forces them to take practical shapes, compatible with the structures
they affect, and in the form of heredity and otherwise, gradually re­
places the spontaneous energy that sustains them. Thus, habit plays a
double part; it serves to establish the new features, and also to bring
them into harmony with the general morphology and function of the
animals and plants to which they belong. But if the reader will now
kindly give himself the trouble of turning back a page or two, he will
*1 am happy to find that Dr. Carus, too, ranks Weismann among the opponents of
Darwin, notwithstanding his flying that flag.

[page 361]

Evolutionary Love I 361
see that this account of Lamarckian evolution coincides with the gen­
eral description of the action of love, to which, I suppose, he yielded
his assent.
Remembering that all matter is really mind, remembering, too, the
continuity of mind, let us ask what aspect Lamarckian evolution takes
on within the domain of consciousness. Direct endeavor can achieve
almost nothing. It is as easy by taking thought to add a cubit to one’s
stature, as it is to produce an idea acceptable to any of the Muses by
merely straining for it, before it is ready to come. We haunt in vain
the sacred well and throne of Mnemosyne; the deeper workings of the
spirit take place in their own slow way, without our connivance. Let
but their bugle sound, and we may then make our effort, sure of an
oblation for the altar of whatsoever divinity its savor gratifies. Besides
this inward process, there is the operation of the environment, which
goes to break up habits destined to be broken up and so to render the
mind lively. Everybody knows that the long continuance of a routine
of habit makes us lethargic, while a succession of surprises wonder­
fully brightens the ideas. Where there is a motion, where history is
a-making, there is the focus of mental activity, and it has been said that
the arts and sciences reside within the temple of Janus, waking when
that is open, but slumbering when it is closed. Few psychologists have
perceived how fundamental a fact this is. A portion of mind abun­
dantly commissured to other portions works almost mechanically. It
sinks to the condition of a railway junction. But a portion of mind
almost isolated, a spiritual peninsula, or cul-de-sac, is like a railway
terminus. N ow mental commissures are habits. Where they abound,
originality is not needed and is not found; but where they are in defect,
spontaneity is set free. Thus, the first step in the Lamarckian evolution
of mind is the putting of sundry thoughts into situations in which they
are free to play. As to growth by exercise, I have already shown, in
discussing “ M an’s Glassy Essence,” in last October’s Monist, 18 what its
modus operandi must be conceived to be, at least, until a second equally
definite hypothesis shall have been offered. Namely, it consists of the
flying asunder of molecules, and the reparation of the parts by new
matter. It is, thus, a sort of reproduction. It takes place only during
exercise, because the activity of protoplasm consists in the molecular
disturbance which is its necessary condition. Growth by exercise
takes place also in the mind. Indeed, that is what it is to learn. But
the most perfect illustration is the development of a philosophical
idea by being put into practice. The conception which appeared, at
first, as unitary, splits up into special cases; and into each of these
new thought must enter to make a practicable idea. This new thought,
however, follows pretty closely the model of the parent conception;
and thus a homogeneous development takes place. The parallel be­
tween this and the course of molecular occurrences is apparent. Pa­

[page 362]

362 I The Essential Peirce
tient attention will be able to trace all these elements in the transaction
called learning.
Three modes of evolution have thus been brought before us; evolu­
tion by fortuitous variation, evolution by mechanical necessity, and
evolution by creative love. We may term them tychastic evolution, or
tychasm, anancastic evolution, or anancasm, and agapastic evolution, or
agapasm. The doctrines which represent these as severally of principal
importance, we may term tychasticism, anancasticism, and agapasticism.
On the other hand the mere propositions that absolute chance, me­
chanical necessity, and the law of love, are severally operative in the
cosmos, may receive the names of tychism, anancism, and agapism.
All three modes of evolution are composed of the same general
elements. Agapasm exhibits them the most clearly. The good result is
here brought to pass, first, by the bestowal of spontaneous energy by
the parent upon the offspring, and, second, by the disposition of the
latter to catch the general idea of those about it and thus to subserve
the general purpose. In order to express the relation that tychasm and
anancasm bear to agapasm, let me borrow a word from geometry. An
ellipse crossed by a straight line is a sort of cubic curve; for a cubic is
a curve which is cut thrice by a straight line; now a straight line might
cut the ellipse twice and its associated straight line a third time. Still
the ellipse with the straight line across it would not have the character­
istics of a cubic. It would have, for instance, no contrary flexure, which
no true cubic wants; and it would have two nodes, which no true cubic
has. The geometers say that it is a degenerate cubic. Just so, tychasm and
anancasm are degenerate forms of agapasm.
Men who seek to reconcile the Darwinian idea with Christianity
will remark that tychastic evolution, like the agapastic, depends upon
a reproductive creation, the forms preserved being those that use the
spontaneity conferred upon them in such wise as to be drawn into
harmony with their original, quite after the Christian scheme. V ery
good! This only shows that just as love cannot have a contrary, but
must embrace what is most opposed to it, as a degenerate case of it, so
tychasm is a kind of agapasm. Only, in the tychastic evolution progress
is solely owing to the distribution of the napkin-hidden talent of the
rejected servant among those not rejected, just as ruined gamesters
leave their money on the table to make those not yet ruined so much
the richer. It makes the felicity of the lambs just the damnation of the
goats, transposed to the other side of the equation. In genuine aga­
pasm, on the other hand, advance takes place by virtue of a positive
sympathy among the created springing from continuity of mind. This
is the idea which tychasticism knows not how to manage.
The anancasticist might here interpose, claiming that the mode of
evolution for which he contends agrees with agapasm at the point at
which tychasm departs from it. For it makes development go through

[page 363]

certain phases, having its inevitable ebbs and flows, yet tending on the
whole to a foreordained perfection. Bare existence by this its destiny
betrays an intrinsic affinity for the good. Herein, it must be admitted,
anancasm shows itself to be in a broad acception a species of agapasm.
Some forms of it might easily be mistaken for the genuine agapasm.
The Hegelian philosophy is such an anancasticism. With its revelatory
religion, with its synechism (however imperfectly set forth), with its
“ reflection/’ the whole idea of the theory is superb, almost sublime.
Yet, after all, living freedom is practically omitted from its method.
The whole movement is that of a vast engine, impelled by a vis a tergo,
with a blind and mysterious fate of arriving at a lofty goal. I mean that
such an engine it would be, if it really worked; but in point of fact, it
is a Keely motor.19 Grant that it really acts as it professes to act, and
there is nothing to do but accept the philosophy. But never was there
seen such an example of a long chain of reasoning,— shall I say with
a flaw in every link?— no, with every link a handful of sand, squeezed
into shape in a dream. Or say, it is a pasteboard model of a philosophy
that in reality does not exist. If we use the one precious thing it
contains, the idea of it, introducing the tychism which the arbitrari­
ness of its every step suggests, and make that the support of a vital
freedom which is the breath of the spirit of love, we may be able to
produce that genuine agapasticism, at which Hegel was aiming.
A T h ir d A s p e c t . D i s c r i m i n a t i o n
In the very nature of things, the line of demarcation between the
three modes of evolution is not perfectly sharp. That does not prevent
its being quite real; perhaps it is rather a mark of its reality. There is
in the nature of things no sharp line of demarcation between the three
fundamental colors, red, green, and violet. But for all that they are
really different. The main question is whether three radically different
evolutionary elements have been operative; and the second question is
what are the most striking characteristics of whatever elements have
been operative.
I propose to devote a few pages to a very slight examination of these
questions in their relation to the historical development of human
thought. I first formulate for the reader’s convenience the briefest
possible definitions of the three conceivable modes of development of
thought, distinguishing also two varieties of anancasm and three of
agapasm. The tychastic development of thought, then, will consist in
slight departures from habitual ideas in different directions indiffer­
ently, quite purposeless and quite unconstrained whether by outward
circumstances or by force of logic, these new departures being fol­
lowed by unforeseen results which tend to fix some of them as habits
more than others. The anancastic development of thought w ill consist
Evolutionary Love I 363

[page 364]

364 I The Essential Peirce
of new ideas adopted without foreseeing whither they tend, but having
a character determined by causes either external to the mind, such as
changed circumstances of life, or internal to the mind as logical devel­
opments of ideas already accepted, such as generalisations. The agapas-
tic development of thought is the adoption of certain mental tenden­
cies, not altogether heedlessly, as in tychasm, nor quite blindly by the
mere force of circumstances or of logic, as in anancasm, but by an
immediate attraction for the idea itself, whose nature is divined before
the mind possesses it, by the power of sympathy, that is, by virtue of
the continuity of mind; and this mental tendency may be of three
varieties, as follows. First, it may affect a whole people or community
in its collective personality, and be thence communicated to such
individuals as are in powerfully sympathetic connection with the col­
lective people, although they may be intellectually incapable of attain­
ing the idea by their private understandings or even perhaps of con­
sciously apprehending it. Second, it may affect a private person
directly, yet so that he is only enabled to apprehend the idea, or to
appreciate its attractiveness, by virtue of his sympathy with his neigh­
bors, under the influence of a striking experience or development of
thought. The conversion of St. Paul may be taken as an example of
what is meant. Third, it may affect an individual, independently of his
human affections, by virtue of an attraction it exercises upon his mind,
even before he has comprehended it. This is the phenomenon which
has been well called the divination of genius; for it is due to the continu­
ity between the man’s mind and the Most High.
Let us next consider by means of what tests we can discriminate
between these different categories of evolution. No absolute criterion
is possible in the nature of things, since in the nature of things there
is no sharp line of demarcation between the different classes. N ever­
theless, quantitative symptoms may be found by which a sagacious and
sympathetic judge of human nature may be able to estimate the ap­
proximate proportions in which the different kinds of influence are
commingled.
So far as the historical evolution of human thought has been tychas-
tic, it should have proceeded by insensible or minute steps; for such
is the nature of chances when so multiplied as to show phenomena of
regularity. For example, assume that of the native-born white adult
males of the United States in 1880, one-fourth part were below 5 feet
4 inches in stature and one-fourth part above 5 feet 8 inches. Then by
the principles of probability, among the whole population, we should
expect
216 under 4 feet 6 inches, 216 above 6 feet 6 inches.
48 " 4 « 5
9 " 4 " 4
less than 2 " 4 » 3 "
48 " 6 " 7
9 « 6 « 8
less than 2 " 6 " 9 "

[page 365]

Evolutionary Love I 365
I set down these figures to show how insignificantly few are the
cases in which anything very far out of the common run presents itself
by chance. Though the stature of only every second man is included
within the four inches between 5 feet 4 inches and 5 feet 8 inches, yet
if this interval be extended by thrice four inches above and below, it
will embrace all our 8 millions odd of native-born adult white males
(of 1880), except only 9 taller and 9 shorter.
The test of minute variation, if not satisfied, absolutely negatives
tychasm. If it is satisfied, we shall find that it negatives anancasm but
not agapasm. We want a positive test, satisfied by tychasm, only. N ow
wherever we find men’s thought taking by imperceptible degrees a
turn contrary to the purposes which animate them, in spite of their
highest impulses, there, we may safely conclude, there has been a
tychastic action.
Students of the history of mind there be of an erudition to fill an
imperfect scholar like me with envy edulcorated by joyous admiration,
who maintain that ideas when just started are and can be little more
than freaks, since they cannot yet have been critically examined, and
further that everywhere and at all times progress has been so gradual
that it is difficult to make out distinctly what original step any given
man has taken. It would follow that tychasm has been the sole method
of intellectual development. I have to confess I cannot read history so;
I cannot help thinking that while tychasm has sometimes been opera­
tive, at others great steps covering nearly the same ground and made
by different men independently, have been mistaken for a succession
of small steps, and further that students have been reluctant to admit
a real entitative “ spirit” of an age or of a people, under the mistaken
and unscrutinised impression that they should thus be opening the
door to wild and unnatural hypotheses. I find, on the contrary, that,
however it may be with the education of individual minds, the histori­
cal development of thought has seldom been of a tychastic nature, and
exclusively in backward and barbarising movements. I desire to speak
with the extreme modesty which befits a student of logic who is re­
quired to survey so very wide a field of human thought that he can
cover it only by a reconnaisance, to which only the greatest skill and
most adroit methods can impart any value at all; but, after all, I can
only express my own opinions and not those of anybody else; and in
my humble judgment, the largest example of tychasm is afforded by
the history of Christianity, from about its establishment by Constan­
tine, to, say, the time of the20 Irish monasteries, an era or eon of about
500 years. Undoubtedly the external circumstance which more than all
others at first inclined men to accept Christianity in its loveliness and
tenderness, was the fearful extent to which society was broken up into
units by the unmitigated greed and hard-heartedness into which the
Romans had seduced the world. And yet it was that very same fact,

[page 366]

366 I The Essential Peirce
more than any other external circumstance, that fostered that bitter­
ness against the wicked world of which the primitive Gospel of Mark
contains not a single trace. At least, I do not detect it in the remark
about the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, where nothing is said
about vengeance, nor even in that speech where the closing lines of
Isaiah are quoted, about the worm and the fire that feed upon the
“ carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me.” 21 But little
by little the bitterness increases until in the last book of the N ew
Testament, its poor distracted author represents that all the time
Christ was talking about having come to save the world, the secret
design was to catch the entire human race, with the exception of a
paltry 144000, and souse them all in brimstone lake, and as the smoke
of their torment went up for ever and ever, to turn and remark, “ There
is no curse any more.” Would it be an insensible smirk or a fiendish
grin that should accompany such an utterance? I wish I could believe
St. John did not write it; but it is his gospel which tells about the
“ resurrection unto condemnation,”— that is of men’s being resus­
citated just for the sake of torturing them;— and, at any rate, the
Revelation is a very ancient composition. One can understand that the
early Christians were like men trying with all their might to climb a
steep declivity of smooth wet clay; the deepest and truest element of
their life, animating both heart and head, was universal love; but they
were continually, and against their wills, slipping into a party spirit,
every slip serving as a precedent, in a fashion but too familiar to every
man. This party feeling insensibly grew until by about a .d . 330 the
lustre of the pristine integrity that in St. Mark reflects the white spirit
of light was so far tarnished that Eusebius (the Jared Sparks22 of that
day), in the preface to his History, could announce his intention of
exaggerating everything that tended to the glory of the church and of
suppressing whatever might disgrace it.23 His Latin contemporary
Lactantius is worse, still;24 and so the darkling went on increasing
until before the end of the century the great library of Alexandria was
destroyed by Theophilus,* until Gregory the Great, two centuries
later, burnt the great library of Rome, proclaiming that “ Ignorance is
the mother of devotion” 25 (which is true, just as oppression and injus­
tice is the mother of spirituality), until a sober description of the state
of the church would be a thing our not too nice newspapers would
treat as “ unfit for publication.” All this movement is shown by the
application of the test given above to have been tychastic. Another
very much like it on a small scale, only a hundred times swifter, for
the study of which there are documents by the library-full, is to be
found in the history of the French Revolution.
*See [John William] Draper’s History of Intellectual Development [1862], chap. x.

[page 367]

Evolutionary Love I 367
Anancastic evolution advances by successive strides with pauses
between. The reason is that in this process a habit of thought having
been overthrown is supplanted by the next strongest. N ow this next
strongest is sure to be widely disparate from the first, and as often as
not is its direct contrary. It reminds one of our old rule of making the
second candidate vice-president. This character, therefore, clearly dis­
tinguishes anancasm from tychasm. The character which distin­
guishes it from agapasm is its purposelessness. But external and inter­
nal anancasm have to be examined separately. Development under the
pressure of external circumstances, or cataclasmine evolution, is in
most cases unmistakable enough. It has numberless degrees of inten­
sity, from the brute force, the plain war, which has more than once
turned the current of the world’s thought, down to the hard fact of
evidence, or what has been taken for it, which has been known to
convince men by hordes. The only hesitation that can subsist in the
presence of such a history is a quantitative one. N ever are external
influences the only ones which affect the mind, and therefore it must
be a matter of judgment for which it would scarcely be worth while
to attempt to set rules, whether a given movement is to be regarded
as principally governed from without or not. In the rise of medieval
thought, I mean scholasticism and the synchronistic art developments,
undoubtedly the crusades and the discovery of the writings of A ris­
totle were powerful influences. The development of scholasticism
from Roscellin to Albertus Magnus closely follows the successive steps
in the knowledge of Aristotle. Prantl thinks that that is the whole
story, and few men have thumbed more books than Carl Prantl.26 He
has done good solid work, notwithstanding his slap-dash judgments.
But we shall never make so much as a good beginning of comprehend­
ing scholasticism until the whole has been systematically explored and
digested by a company of students regularly organised and held under
rule for that purpose. But as for the period we are now specially
considering, that which synchronised the Romanesque architecture,
the literature is easily mastered. It does not quite justify Prantl’s dicta
as to the slavish dependence of these authors upon their authorities.
Moreover, they kept a definite purpose steadily before their minds,
throughout all their studies. I am, therefore, unable to offer this period
of scholasticism as an example of pure external anancasm, which seems
to be the fluorine of the intellectual elements. Perhaps the recent
Japanese reception of western ideas is the purest instance of it in
history. Yet in combination with other elements, nothing is com­
moner. If the development of ideas under the influence of the study
of external facts be considered as external anancasm,— it is on the
border between the external and the internal forms,— it is, of course,
the principal thing in modern learning. But Whewell, whose masterly
comprehension of the history of science critics have been too ignorant

[page 368]

368 I The Essential Peirce
properly to appreciate, clearly shows that it is far from being the
overwhelmingly preponderant influence, even there.27
Internal anancasm, or logical groping, which advances upon a
predestined line without being able to foresee whither it is to be
carried nor to steer its course, this is the rule of development of philos­
ophy. Hegel first made the world understand this; and he seeks to make
logic not merely the subjective guide and monitor of thought, which
was all it had been ambitioning before, but to be the very mainspring
of thinking, and not merely of individual thinking but of discussion,
of the history of the development of thought, of all history, of all
development. This involves a positive, clearly demonstrable error. Let
the logic in question be of whatever kind it may, a logic of necessary
inference or a logic of probable inference (the theory might perhaps
be shaped to fit either), in any case it supposes that logic is sufficient
of itself to determine what conclusion follows from given premises; for
unless it will do so much, it w ill not suffice to explain why an individ­
ual train of reasoning should take just the course it does take, to say
nothing of other kinds of development. It thus supposes that from
given premises, only one conclusion can logically be drawn, and that
there is no scope at all for free choice. That from given premises only
one conclusion can logically be drawn, is one of the false notions which
have come from logicians’ confining their attention to that Nantucket
of thought, the logic of non-relative terms. In the logic of relatives, it
does not hold good.
One remark occurs to me. If the evolution of history is in considera­
ble part of the nature of internal anancasm, it resembles the develop­
ment of individual men; and just as 33 years is a rough but natural unit
of time for individuals, being the average age at which man has issue,
so there should be an approximate period at the end of which one great
historical movement ought to be likely to be supplanted by another.
Let us see if we can make out anything of the kind. Take the govern­
mental development of Rome as being sufficiently long and set down
the principal dates.
B.C. 753, Foundation of Rome.
B.C. 510, Expulsion of the Tarquins.
B.C. 27, Octavius assumes title Augustus.
A.D. 476, End of Western Empire.
A.D. 962, H oly Roman Empire.
A.D. 1453, Fall of Constantinople.
The last event was one of the most significant in history, especially for
Italy. The intervals are 243, 483, 502, 486, 491 years. All are rather
curiously near equal, except the first which is half the others. Succes­
sive reigns of kings would not commonly be so near equal. Let us set
down a few dates in the history of thought.

[page 369]

Evolutionary Love I 369
B.C. 585, Eclipse of Thales. Beginning of Greek philosophy.
A.D. 30, The crucifixion.
A.D. 529, Closing of Athenian schools. End of Greek philosophy.
A.D. 1125, (Approximate) Rise of the Universities of Bologna and
Paris.
A.D. 1543, Publication of the De Revolutionibus of Copernicus. Be­
ginning of Modern Science.
The intervals are 615, 499, 596, 418 years. In the history of metaphysics,
we may take the following:
B.C. 322, Death of Aristotle.
A.D. 1274, Death of Aquinas.
A.D. 1804, Death of Kant.
The intervals are 1595 and 530 years. The former is about thrice the
latter.
From these figures, no conclusion can fairly be drawn. At the same
time, they suggest that perhaps there may be a rough natural era of
about 500 years. Should there be any independent evidence of this, the
intervals noticed may gain some significance.
The agapastic development of thought should, if it exists, be distin­
guished by its purposive character, this purpose being the develop­
ment of an idea. We should have a direct agapic or sympathetic com­
prehension and recognition of it, by virtue of the continuity of
thought. I here take it for granted that such continuity of thought has
been sufficiently proved by the arguments used in my paper on the
“ Law of M ind” in The Monist of last July. Even if those arguments are
not quite convincing in themselves, yet if they are reenforced by an
apparent agapasm in the history of thought, the two propositions will
lend one another mutual aid. The reader will, I trust, be too well
grounded in logic to mistake such mutual support for a vicious circle
in reasoning. If it could be shown directly that there is such an entity
as the “ spirit of an age” or of a people, and that mere individual
intelligence will not account for all the phenomena, this would be
proof enough at once of agapasticism and of synechism. I must ac­
knowledge that I am unable to produce a cogent demonstration of this;
but I am, I believe, able to adduce such arguments as will serve to
confirm those which have been drawn from other facts. I believe that
all the greatest achievements of mind have been beyond the powers of
unaided individuals; and I find, apart from the support this opinion
receives from synechistic considerations, and from the purposive char­
acter of many great movements, direct reason for so thinking in the
sublimity of the ideas and in their occurring simultaneously and inde­
pendently to a number of individuals of no extraordinary general
powers. The pointed Gothic architecture in several of its develop­

[page 370]

370 I The Essential Peirce
ments appears to me to be of such a character. All attempts to imitate
it by modern architects of the greatest learning and genius appear flat
and tame, and are felt by their authors to be so. Yet at the time the style
was living, there was quite an abundance of men capable of producing
works of this kind of gigantic sublimity and power. In more than one
case, extant documents show that the cathedral chapters, in the selec­
tion of architects, treated high artistic genius as a secondary considera­
tion, as if there were no lack of persons able to supply that; and the
results justify their confidence. Were individuals in general, then, in
those ages possessed of such lofty natures and high intellect? Such an
opinion would break down under the first examination.
How many times have men now in middle life seen great discover­
ies made independently and almost simultaneously! The first instance
I remember was the prediction of a planet exterior to Uranus by
Leverrier and Adams.28 One hardly knows to whom the principle of
the conservation of energy ought to be attributed, although it may
reasonably be considered as the greatest discovery science has ever
made. The mechanical theory of heat was set forth by Rankine and by
Clausius during the same month of February, 1850;29 and there are
eminent men who attribute this great step to Thomson.* The kinetical
theory of gases, after being started by John Bernoulli and long buried
in oblivion, was reinvented and applied to the explanation not merely
of the laws of Boyle, Charles, and Avogadro,30 but also of diffusion and
viscosity, by at least three modern physicists separately. It is well
known that the doctrine of natural selection was presented by Wallace
and by Darwin at the same meeting of the British Association; and
Darwin in his “ Historical Sketch” prefixed to the later editions of his
book shows that both were anticipated by obscure forerunners. The
method of spectrum analysis was claimed for Swan as well as for
Kirchhoff, and there were others who perhaps had still better claims.
The authorship of the Periodical Law of the Chemical Elements is
disputed between a Russian, a German, and an Englishman;31 al­
though there is no room for doubt that the principal merit belongs to
the first. These are nearly all the greatest discoveries of our times. It
is the same with the inventions. It may not be surprising that the
telegraph should have been independently made by several inventors,
because it was an easy corollary from scientific facts well made out
before. But it was not so with the telephone and other inventions.
Ether, the first anaesthetic, was introduced independently by three
different N ew England physicians.32 N ow ether had been a common
article for a century. It had been in one of the pharmacopoeias three
centuries before. It is quite incredible that its anaesthetic property
*Thomson, himself, in his article Heat in the Encyclopedia Britannica, never once
mentions the name of Clausius.

[page 371]

Evolutionary Love I 371
should not have been known; it was known. It had probably passed
from mouth to ear as a secret from the days of Basil Valentine;33 but
for long it had been a secret of the Punchinello kind.34 In N ew En­
gland, for many years, boys had used it for amusement. Why then had
it not been put to its serious use? N o reason can be given, except that
the motive to do so was not strong enough. The motives to doing so
could only have been desire for gain and philanthropy. About 1846, the
date of the introduction, philanthropy was undoubtedly in an unusu­
ally active condition. That sensibility, or sentimentalism, which had
been introduced in the previous century, had undergone a ripening
process, in consequence of which, though now less intense than it had
previously been, it was more likely to influence unreflecting people
than it had ever been. All three of the ether-claimants had probably
been influenced by the desire for gain; but nevertheless they were
certainly not insensible to the agapic influences.
I doubt if any of the great discoveries ought, properly, to be consid­
ered as altogether individual achievements; and I think many will
share this doubt. Yet, if not, what an argument for the continuity of
mind, and for agapasticism is here! I do not wish to be very strenuous.
If thinkers will only be persuaded to lay aside their prejudices and
apply themselves to studying the evidences of this doctrine, I shall be
fully content to await the final decision.

[page 373]

N O T E S
These notes, numbered consecutively within each of the twenty-five items in
the present volume, provide biographical, historical, bibliographic, explana­
tory, and other relevant information (including translations) not contained in
Peirce’s footnotes in the text. For some of the better known works by some
of the better known philosophers (such as Hume’s Treatise [ofHuman Nature],
Kant’s Critique [of the Pure Reason/, or Locke’s Essay [Concerning Human Under­
standing]), we have used abbreviated titles. We have also used a number of
standard abbreviations (including those for books of the Bible) and a few
somewhat less than standard: among these are aph. (aphorism), art. (article),
pt. (part), qu. (question), sec. (section), and tract, (tractatus). Again, MS refer­
ences are to Peirce’s manuscripts in Harvard’s Houghton Library, P refer­
ences to his publications (as listed in Ketner et al., A Comprehensive Bibliogra­
phy), W references to the Writings of Charles S. Peirce, and CP references to the
Collected Papers.
i. O n a N e w L i s t o f C a t e g o r i e s
1. See book i of the Transcendental Analytic in Kant’s Critique.
2. In note 12 in MS 785, Peirce made the following comment upon this
statement: “ It may be doubted whether it was philosophical to rest this matter
on empirical psychology. The question is extremely difficult” (W2:94).
3. Johann Friedrich Herbart, Lehrbuch zur Einleitung in die Philosophie (vol.
1 of Sammtliche Werke [Leipzig, 1850]), p. 77: “ All our thoughts may be consid­
ered from two points of view; partly as activities of our mind, partly in relation
to what is thought through them. In the latter respect they are called concepts,
which term, by signifying what is conceived, requires us to abstract from the
mode and manner in which we might receive, produce, or reproduce the
thought.”
4. See “ Upon Logical Comprehension and Extension” (W270-86).
2. Q u e s t i o n s C o n c e r n i n g C e r t a i n F a c u l t i e s
1. St. Anselm, Monologium et proslogion, chs. 66 and 70. St. Paul’s saying
(“ For now we see in a mirror, darkly; but then face to face” ) is quoted from
the Vulgate, 1 Cor. 13:12.
2. Berengarius is quoted from Carl Prantl, Geschichteder Logik im Abendlande
(Leipzig, 1855-67), 2:72-75: “ Clearly it is characteristic of a great soul to take
refuge in dialectic in all circumstances, because to take refuge in it is to take
refuge in reason, and whoever does not take refuge there, since it is in respect
of reason that he is made in the image of God, gives up his honor; nor can he
be renewed from day to day in the image of God.”
3. Peirce read Fredegisus (d. 834), an English monk who succeeded Alcuin
at Charlemagne’s court, in Prantl’s Geschichte, 2:17-19.
4. Peter Abelard, Ouvrages inédits (Paris, 1836), p. 179.
5. De generibus et speciebus is included in Abelard’s Ouvrages inédits; see pp.
528, J17, 535.

[page 374]

374 I Notes fo r pages 13-49
6. John of Salisbury, Metalogicon, bk. 4, ch. 27: “ Although there are many
mistakes in Aristotle, as is evident from the writings of Christians and pagans
alike, his equal in logic has yet to be found.”
7. Abelard, Ouvrages inedits, pp. 293 and 204: “ But nothing against Aristotle”
and “ But if we can find fault with Aristotle the prince of the Peripatetics, what
can we trust in this art?”
8. Almost certainly, this is J. M. Macallister, a New England magician.
9. An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision (1709).
10. Peirce gives the following definition in the Century Dictionary: “ the
smallest angular measure of which the eye can distinguish the parts. It is about
half a minute.”
11. See Berkeley’s Principles of Human Knowledge, secs. 1-6.
3. S o m e C o n s e q u e n c e s o f F o u r I n c a p a c i t i e s
1. Aristotle, Prior Analytics, 68^5-17 or 69316-19.
2. There is no such published objection, but people like Chauncey Wright
or F. E. Abbot might have objected to Peirce’s argument when he presented
his paper, “ On the Natural Classification of Arguments” ^2:23-48), before the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences on 9 April 1867.
3. This is the second volume of Dugald Stewart’s Elements of the Philosophy
of the Human Mind, where in addition to the four authors mentioned, he also
discusses Bacon, Fontenelle, D’Alembert, Reid, and Prevost.
4. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, 1.2.72315.
5. Peirce did not know that this is a translation, by George Scholarios
(1400-1464), of Petrus Hispanus’s Summulae logicales.
6. “ An hypothesis is a proposition that is assumed in order to test the truth
of what is not yet known to be true. Many demand that for an hypothesis to
be identified as being true, no matter how true it appears before, other things
must be deducible from it. But others say that for an hypothesis to be true,
this one thing is required; namely, that such things must be deducible from
it as correspond to phenomena and as satisfy all the difficulties encountered,
on the one hand, in the thing itself and, on the other, in such as arise from it.”
7. “ I have thus far explained the phenomena of the heavens and sea by the
force of gravity, but have not yet assigned the cause of gravity. . . . I have not
yet been able to deduce from the phenomena the reason for these properties
of gravity, and I do not invent hypotheses. Whatever cannot be deduced from
the phenomena should be called an hypothesis. . . . In this philosophy, proposi­
tions are deduced from phenomena and are rendered general by induction.”
(General Scholium.)
8. This is Peirce’s short title for Herbart’s book cited on p. 8 (and in note
3 to item 1).
9. The reference is to J. S. Mill, Logic, bk. 2, ch. 3, sec. 3.
10. Ermolao Barbaro (1454-1493), Italian poet and savant and translator of
Aristotle.
11. Berkeley, Principles of Human Knowledge, sec. 10 of Introduction.
12. Locke, Essay, vol. 3, bk. 4, ch. 7, sec. 9.
13. Hume, Enquiry, sec. 2.
14. Henry Longueville Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, 2nd ed. (Oxford, i860),
p. 9n.
15. See his doctoral dissertation, De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilisforma
et principiis.
16. See note 10 to item 2.

[page 375]

Notes for pages 53-75 I 375
17. “ It is the same nature that in existence is determinate through the grade
of singularity and that in the intellect, that is as having to the intellect the
relation of known to knower, is indeterminate.”
18. See Ockham's Theory of Terms: Part I of the “Summa Logicae, ” tr. Michael
J. Loux (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1974), pp. 82-84.
19. Shakespeare, Measurefor Measure, 2.2.117-20. Peirce usually leaves out 1.
118 (“ Drest in a little brief authority” ).
4 . G r o u n d s o f V a l i d i t y
1. See item 3.
2. In MS 593, “ are” has been changed to “ may be.”
3. See items 2 and 3, as well as “ Nominalism versus Realism” and “ What Is
Meant by ‘Determined’ ” ^2:144-54 and 155-58).
4. This and the following quotation is from Petrus Hispanus, Summulae
logicales, tract. 6. (1) Signification is “ the representation, established by conven­
tion, of a thing by an utterance” and (2) “ Signification is thus prior to supposi­
tion, and they differ in that signification belongs to the word, whereas supposi­
tion belongs to the term already composed of the word and its signification.”
5. See item 3.
6. In MS 593, “ and” has been changed to “plus. ”
7. In MS 593, the word “ possibility” is underlined.
8. In MS 593, Peirce has added the following footnote: “That is, in the
Kantian sense. See the discussion of the nature of continuity in Essay X V II”
(of the “ Search for a Method”); the reference is to “ The Law of Mind” (item
23)-
9. See item 3.
10. Locke, Essay, bk. 4, ch. 17, sec. 4.
11. Logic, bk. 2, ch. 3.
12. Gulliver's Travels, pt. 3, ch. 5.
13. For example, his Wissenschaft der Logik, pt. 2, sec. 1, ch. 3.
14. In MS 593, “This . . . contradict” has been changed to “ This, however,
does not, in the least, contradict” ; and “ everything . . . future” has been
changed to “ it is possible to cognize everything,1 that is, that at some time all
things will be known” (with the corresponding footnote: “The difference
between the two statements is like that between ‘Every man is the son of some
woman,’ and ‘Some woman is the mother of every man.’ ”).
15. In MS 593, Peirce has added the following footnote: “ So far as there is
any validity in this conception.”
16. See his Wissenschaft der Logik, pt. 2, sec. 1, ch. 3.
17. For the Achilles and the Tortoise argument, see Aristotle’s Physics,
6.9.239b5, or Plutarch’s Moralia, ch. 43.
18. In MS 593, “ is . . . fact” has been changed to “ is supposed to follow from
the undoubted fact.”
19. In MS 593, Peirce has added the following footnote: “ Again the distinc­
tion is analogous to that between ‘Every man is the son of some woman or
other,’ and ‘Some one woman is the mother of all men.’ ”
20. In MS 593, “ seems” has been changed to “ in 1869 seemed.”
21. Hobbes, Leviathan, ch. n. Peirce reiterates the statement a few pages
later (p. 81) and also in item 7 (p. 119).
22. Whenever Peirce refers to the soporific power, or somnific virtue, of
opium (as he often does when explaining his theory of hypostatic abstraction),
he has in mind the final scene of Moltere’s Le Malade Imaginaire.

[page 376]

376 I Notes fo r pages 78-110
23. Kant, Critique, B19.
24. See Matthew 16:26, Mark 8:36, or Luke 9:25.
25. See note 22 above.
5. F r a s e r ’s B e r k e l e y
1. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, 83333-34 (“ they are mere prattle or twitter­
ings, and even if they exist, they are irrelevant”).
2. Edward reigned 1272-1307.
3. Henry Hallam, View of the State of Europe during the Middle Ages, 4th ed.
(London, 1869), p. 684.
4. See note 22 in item 4.
5. Kant, Critique, B16, 22m.
6. This long paragraph summarizes Duns Scotus’s views expressed in
Ordinatio, bk. 2, dist. 3, pt. 1, qu. 1-6, or Quaestiones subtilissimae, bk. 7, qu. 18.
7. Ockham, Summa logicae, pt. 1, ch. 13.
8. Hobbes, Elements of Philosophy, in The English Works (London, 1839), 1:36.
9. Ibid., 1:118-19.
10. Locke, Essay, vol. 3, bk. 4, ch. 7, sec. 9.
11. Principles of Human Knowledge, sec. 14 of Introduction.
12. “ Commonplace Book of Occasional Metaphysical Thoughts,” in Works,
4:448.
13. Second Dialogue between Hylas and Philonous, in Works, 1:304.
14. For Berkeley’s views on reality, existence, and experience (expressed in
this long paragraph), see his Principles of Human Knowledge, sec. 89, and his
“ Commonplace Book,” secs. 29-33.
15. The reference is to David Hartley’s “ white medullary substance” (and
the related theories on sensation and imagination), in his Observations on Man,
His Frame, His Duty and His Expectations (London, 1749).
16. Principles of Human Knowledge, secs. 102, 106, 107.
17. Archer Butler (in an article in the Dublin University Magazine 7:538-39),
as quoted in Fraser’s “ Life and Letters of George Berkeley,” in Works, 4:407.
18. In Fraser’s preface to Berkeley’s Theory of Vision.
19. Hermann Helmholtz, Handbuch derphysiologischen Optik (Leipzig, 1867),
sec. 33, p. 796.
6. O n a N e w C l a s s o f O b s e r v a t i o n s
1. For further discussion of the views of Scotus and Ockham, see pp. 92-95
(item 5).
2. The Harvard folder for this manuscript (MS 1104) contains a dark grey
envelope, with this inscription: “ 74 Scraps of Ribbon—Numbered in order of
apparent brightness of light by CSP on a dark day.”
3. Reported by Alexander Aphrodisiensis, in his commentary upon Topics,
149.9-17, as having been said in Aristotle’s Protrepticus. See The Works ofAristotle
(Oxford, 1952), 12:27: “ since even to inquire whether we ought to philosophize
or not is to philosophize.”
7. T h e F i x a t i o n o f B e l i e f
1. Roger Bacon, Opus Majus, tr. R. B. Burke (Philadelphia, 1928), pt. 6.
2. In MS 334, Peirce has expanded this sentence by adding “ as Harvey, a

[page 377]

Notes fo r pages 110-121 I 377
genuine man of science, said.” See William Harvey’s comment to John Au­
brey, in the latter’s BriefLives (Oxford, 1898), 1:299.
3. In MS 334, Peirce has added “ and Harvey.”
4. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ Mars;* and” to “ Mars and to state the
times occupied by the planet in describing the different parts of that curve;
but perhaps” (and has deleted the footnote).
5. In MS 334, Peirce has deleted the phrase “ in the . . . us).”
6. In MS 334, Peirce has changed the phrase “ written; and each” to “ Writ­
ten. Each.”
7. “ Read, read, read, work, pray, and read again” is a sentiment frequently
expressed in the old alchemical texts.
8. In MS 334, Peirce has added “ veritable” before “ instruments.”
9. In MS 334, Peirce has added “ but he had been more particularly im­
pressed by Malthus’s book on Population.”
10. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ were yet able” to read “ had yet been
able, eight years before the publication of Darwin’s immortal work.”
11. In MS 334, Peirce has added “ relative” before “ number.”
12. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ A . . . conclusion” to “ A being the fact
stated in the premisses and B that concluded.”
13. In MS 334, Peirce has added “ (if this be understood, not in the old sense,
but as consisting in a wise union of security with fruitfulness of reasoning).”
14. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ whether . . . follows” to “ why a certain
conclusion is thought to follow.”
15. A Syrian religious and military order founded in 1090 in Persia and
finally subdued in Lebanon in 1272. The Holy Spirit was said to reside in Sheik
al-Jebal (Old Man of the Mountain), whose will was followed in blind obedi­
ence. Notorious for their wide-spread acts of terror, the Assassins numbered
over 50,000 during the time of the Crusades.
16. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ effect of this sort” to “ such active effect,”
and “ action” to “ inquiry.”
17. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ secondary” to “ accidental,” and “ pro­
duced by” to “ superinduced by reflexion or.”
18. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ any . . . which . . . and” to “ as . . . any
. . . and then.”
19. From the beginning to the present, that is. Numa Pompilius was the
legendary second king of Rome (715-672 B.C.), and Pius IX, or Giovanni Mastai
Ferretti, was pope from 1846 until his death in 1878. He was the prime mover
in the acceptance, on 18 July 1870, of the doctrine of papal infallibility, an event
that deeply impressed Peirce.
20. See his Timaeus, 35-39, or Epinomis, 990-92.
21. See p. 72n.
22. In MS 334, Peirce has added this sentence: “ Indeed, as long as no better
method can be applied, it ought to be followed, since it is then the expression
of instinct which must be the ultimate cause of belief in all cases.” The
following “ But” has been changed to “ Nevertheless.”
23. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, bk. 1, aphs. 19 and 21.
24. In MS 334, Peirce has added to “ ceases” “ in some degree at least.” In
the following sentence, he has changed “ caused” to “determined.”
25. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ realities, or” to “ realities; for.”
26. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ uses” to “ does use.”
27. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ me” to “ us.”
28. In MS 334, Peirce has changed “ that” to “ his.”
29. In MS 407, Peirce has revised this sentence to read: “ Not that the first

[page 378]

three methods of settling opinions are every way at a disadvantage compared
with that of experience.”
8. How t o M a k e O u r Id eas C l e a r
1. See Descartes, Principia philosophiae, pt. 1, sec. 45. In MS 422, Peirce has
deleted “one sees that.”
2. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “ whether it be” to “ be it,” and “ help
doing” to “ but do.” In the following sentence, he has expanded “ formulas
. . . self-contradiction” to read “ two classes, those which cannot be denied
without self-contradiction, and those which result from the principle of suffi­
cient reason (of which more anon).”
3. See Leibniz’s Eighth Letter to Burnet; also his Opera omnia (Geneva,
1768), 6:267.
4. An apparent veiled allusion to his (first) wife, Harriet Melusina Fay
Peirce, from whom Peirce had separated two years earlier.
5. See item 7. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “ principles . . . papers” to
“ principles already set forth.”
6. In MS 422, Peirce has added “ among themselves” and “ as” after the first
and second “ arranged,” respectively.
7. In MS 422, Peirce has added “—no matter if contrary to all previous
experience.”
8. In MS 422, Peirce has inserted “ conceivably” before “ practical.”
9. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “or” to “ and.”
10. In MS 422, Peirce has added two handwritten pages, for which see CP
5.402m.
11. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “ Let . . . examples” to “ Now let us
illustrate our rule for attaining clearness of thought by some examples.”
12. Gustav Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen iiber mathematische Physik: Mechanik (Leip­
zig, 1876), Preface.
13. In MS 422, Peirce has deleted “ approach . . . and,” and changed “ it” to
“ logic.”
14. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “scientific” to “experiential.”
15. Although the passage has not been located, it is almost certainly in his
De divisione naturae.
16. In MS 422, Peirce has added (in commas) “as for the ‘born missionary’
of today” after “whom.”
17. A record of Abelard’s life from 1119 until 1132, composed in or soon after
the latter year. For a modern translation, see Betty Radice’s The Letters of
Abelard and Heloise (Baltimore, 1974).
18. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “ fully persuaded” to “ animated by a
cheerful hope” ; “ every” to “ each” ; “ can be applied” to “ apply it.”
19. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “will move” to “are found to move.”
20. In MS 422, Peirce has changed “ law” to “ hope.”
21. This is the first line of stanza 9 of William Cullen Bryant’s “ The
Battle-Field.” The entire stanza runs as follows:
Truth struck to earth shall rise again
The eternal years of God are hers
While error . . . writhes in pain
And dies amidst her worshippers.
22. Thomas Gray, “ Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard,” stanza 14.
23. In MS 422, Peirce has crossed out the remainder of the typewritten page
and has substituted a new, four-page handwritten conclusion to the paper.
378 I Notes fo r pages 126-140

[page 379]

Notes for pages 142-178 I 379
9. T h e D o c t r i n e o f C h a n c e s
1. In MS 703, Peirce has added the following footnote: “This characteriza­
tion of chemistry now sounds antiquated indeed; and yet it was justified by
the general state of mind of chemists at that day, as is shown by the fact that
only a few months before van ’t Hoff had put forth a statement of the law of
mass-action as something absolutely new to science. I am satisfied by consider­
able search after pertinent facts that no distinction between different allied
sciences can represent any truth of fact other than a difference between what
habitually passes in the minds, and moves the investigations of the two general
bodies of the cultivators of those sciences at the time to which the distinction
refers.”
2. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, bk. 2, aph. 27.
3. See Adolphe Quételet, Théorie desprobabilités (Brussels, 1853), and Francis
Galton, Hereditary Genius (London, 1869).
4. See item 8.
5. Locke, Essay, bk. 4, ch. 15, sec. 1.
6. See item 7.
7. See note 5.
8. Peirce found Parmenides’ statement in Hegel’s WissenschaftderLogik, bk.
1, pt. 1, ch. 1, sec. Ci, n. 1.
9. See item 8.
10. For Peirce’s review of Venn’s book, see W2*.98- io2.
11. See 1 Cor. 13.
10. T h e P r o b a b i l i t y o f I n d u c t i o n
1. John Venn, The Logic of Chance, Preface.
2. In the Century Dictionary, Peirce gives the following definition of the law:
“ as the physical force of excitation of a nerve increases geometrically the
sensation increases arithmetically, so that the sensation is proportional to the
logarithm of the excitation___According to Fechner, the total sensation varies
directly with the logarithm of the stimulus divided by the stimulus just suffi­
cient to give an appreciable sensation.” For Peirce’s (and Joseph Jastrow’s)
experimental refutation of the law, see W5:i22~35.
3. Adolphe Quételet, Théorie des probabilités, pt. 2, ch. 1.
4. Kant, Critique, B19.
5. See Gratry’s Logique, introduction; bk. 1, ch. 1; bk. 3, ch. 4; and bk. 4,
ch. 7.
11. T h e O r d e r o f N a t u r e
1. Etienne Vacherot, La religion (Paris, 1869), bk. 2, ch. 5.
2. See Pierre Simon de Laplace’s Exposition du système du monde. The anec­
dote of his answer to Napoleon is told in James R. Newman, The World of
Mathematics (New York, 1956), 4:2376-77.
3. John Tillotson, Works (London, 1820), 1:346.
4. Ibid., 1:347.
5. See item 10.
6. See Mill’s Logic, bk. 3, ch. 3, sec. 1.
7. Ibid., sec. 3.

[page 380]

8. See item 10.
9. Berkeley, Theory of Vision, secs. 2 and 3 (in Works, 1:35-36).
380 I Notesfor pages 179-209
12. D e d u c t i o n , I n d u c t i o n , a n d H y p o t h e s i s
*1. Peirce provides the proof in the 1880 “ On the Algebra of Logic” (item
13, although in the later part not included here) and in his Century Dictionary
definition of “ syllogism.”
2. Peirce stopped in Turkey, in August/September 1870, on his way to
explore observation sites in Southern Europe for an eclipse of the sun that he
observed in Sicily on 22 December.
3. For Mill’s four methods (of agreement, difference, residues, and concom­
itant variations), see his Logic, vol. 1, bk. 3, ch. 8.
4. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, bk. 1, aph. 10.
5. In the Century Dictionary, Peirce gives the following definition: “ in
physics, the law that at any given temperature the volume of a given mass of
gas varies inversely as the pressure which it bears. It was discovered by Robert
Boyle, and published by him about 1662; but Edme Mariotte having published
a book concerning it (about 1679), the law was for a long time called Mariotte’s
law. ”
6. See his Hydrodynamica.
7. For the 1866 Lowell Lectures, see Wr.358-514; for the 1867 “ On the Natural
Classification of Arguments,” see ^^2:23-48.
13. O n t h e A l g e b r a o f L o g i c (1880)
1. This is based on Joseph John Murphy, Habit and Intelligence (London,
1869), 1:169, which reads: “The definition of habit, and its primary law, is that
all vital actions tend to repeat themselves; or, if they are not such as can repeat
themselves, they tend to become easier on repetition.” Murphy (1827-1894) was
an Irish writer on religion, psychology, and logic.
2. The logical principle which, in Peirce’s translation in Baldwin’s Dictio­
nary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901-1902), says that “ The predicate of the
predicate is the predicate of the subject.” Peirce traces the principle back to
Aristotle, although the Latin phrase first occurred in Kant. His use of the
principle in the argument that follows suggests “ The mark of a mark is the
mark of the thing itself.”
3. See W2:359~429.
4. De Morgan presented five papers on the syllogism before the Cambridge
Philosophical Society (in 1846, 1850, 1858, i860, 1863), which were subsequently
published in the Society’s Transactions (in 1849, and [the last three] 1864);
throughout this article, Peirce gives the dates of presentation. De Morgan
introduced the terms “ universe” and “ universe of a proposition” on p. 380 of
his first paper (see also his Formal Logic, pp. 40-41, 55). The term “ universe of
discourse” was first used in Boole’s Laws of Thought.
5. Boole, Laws of Thought, p. 63; the example is “ Some men are not wise.”
6. See William Stanley Jevons, The Principles ofScience (London, 1874), 1:49.
7. See William Hamilton’s theory of quantification of the predicate, in his
Lectures on Logic (Boston, i860), app. 5.
8. The attempt to answer this question led Peirce and his student Christine
Ladd-Franklin to investigate second-order truth-functions, and it led to the
first known publication of a full sixteen-place second-order truth table in

[page 381]

Notes for pages 210-215 I 381
Ladd-Franklin’s “ On the Algebra of Logic,” in Studies in Logic (1883), pp. 17-71.
See also ^^4:569-71 (note 173.6-8).
14. L e c t u r e o n t h e S t u d y o f L o g ic
1. The lecture proper is preceded by the following two paragraphs:
“ Professor C. S. Peirce began his instruction for the current session by a
lecture in Hopkins Hall, on the underlying methods of modern logic. It was
attended by instructors as well as students. In compliance with a request for
an abstract of his address, which was delivered without notes, the speaker has
given the following outline.
“ Mr. Peirce said that he had requested the instructors to do him the favor
to listen to his observations, because he thought that a clear understanding of
the purpose of the study of logic might remove some prejudices by leading to
a true estimate of its nature.”
2. The two references are, respectively, to the Port-Royal Logic, 2nd ed.
(Edinburgh, 1851) and to Friedrich Ueberweg’s System der Logik (Bonn, 1857); in
the latter, logic is defined as “ the science of normative or ideal laws of human
cognition.”
3. This is the first sentence in Petrus Hispanus’s Summulae logicales (to
which Peirce has added “ aliarum scientiarum” from the second sentence).
Peirce translated the sentence as “ Logic is the art relating to arts, the science
relating to sciences, which holds the road to the principles of all methods”
(W4:4oo).
4. The unit of electrical resistance named after Georg Simon Ohm.
5. See his On Methods ofInference, defending Epicurean empirical methods
against the Stoics.
6. This is Peirce’s paraphrase of Matthew 3:3.
7. The classical economists Adam Smith and David Ricardo who developed
the concept of free trade.
8. The neogrammarians, notably Friedrich Karl Brugmann, who applied
methods of the natural sciences to linguistics.
9. Those astronomers who apply the spectroscopic method, especially
Lewis Morris Rutherfurd in the United States; Sir George Stokes illustrated
phenomena of emission and absorption of heat radiation by the resonance in
sound; Wilhelm Wundt applied to psychology the experimental methods of
the natural sciences.
10. For an outline of this part of the course, see item 13.
11. For one of these—namely, the first successful axiomatization of arithme­
tic—see “ On the Logic of Number” (W4.299-309).
12. For Peirce’s general theory of induction at this time, see his “ A Theory
of Probable Inference” ^4:408-50).
13. De Motibus is a part of Kepler’s Astronomia Nova.
15. D e s i g n a n d C h a n c e
1. On the Origin of Species.
2. William Edward Story (1850-1930), American mathematician who taught
at the Johns Hopkins and at Harvard.
3. William Crookes (1832-1919), English chemist and physicist, and Johann
Karl Friedrich Zollner (1834-1882), German physicist and astronomer. (For
Crookes, see also note 5 in item 21.)

[page 382]

382 I Notesfo r pages 215- 23$
4. For three of Peirce’s critical discussions of psychical research, see P 347,
352, and 354; the first of these is in C P 6.548-56.
5. J. S. Mill, Logic, bk. 3, ch. 3, sec. 1.
6. William Kingdon Clifford, “ Cosmic Emotion,” in his Lectures and Essays
(London, 1879), 2:253-85.
7. For Boyle’s law, see note 5 in item 12; Jacques Charles’s law says that, at
a constant pressure, the volume of a gas is directly proportional to the tempera­
ture.
8. Although the ellipsis in italic brackets indicates a missing manuscript
page, it is possible that only the word “ chance” is missing.
16. O n t h e A l g e b r a o f L o g i c (1885)
1. These are not the tokens in Peirce’s well-known type-token division, but
what are more generally known as his symbols, that is signs that represent their
objects by convention or habit.
2. John Venn, “ On the Diagrammatic and Mechanical Representations of
Propositions and Reasoning,” Philosophical Magazine 10 (i88o):i-i5.
17. A n A m e r ic a n P l a t o
1. Religious Aspect, especially bk. 2, ch. 12.
2. The reference is to Hegel’s absolute idealism (especially in his
Phänomenologie des Geistes) and to Schelling’s pantheistic idealism (in his Vor­
lesungen über die Methode des academischen Studium).
3. Peirce refers to himself; see item 8 (sec. IV, pp. 136-41).
4. ReligiousAspect, p. 426; the rhetor Thrasymachus appears in the first book
of The Republic and in Phaedrus.
5. Religious Aspect, p. 427.
6. Ibid., p. 4.
7. This is the argument of “The Fixation of B elief’ (item 7).
8. Peirce probably had in mind Schelling, Fichte, and Hegel, among others.
9. See the chapter on Transcendental Logic, Critique, A50-64 (B74-88).
10. Hermann Günther Grassmann (1809-1877), German mathematician and
Orientalist, best known for his contributions to algebra and algebraic mathe­
matical logic.
11. Critique, A7iff. (B96ff.) or A598f. (B626f.).
12. For O. H. Mitchell’s study, see the footnote on p. 227.
13. The reference is to Kant’s conception of space and time as forms of
sensible intuition; see his Critique, A22-36 (B37-53).
14. Peirce later used the word “ molition” which, in a 17 December 1909
letter to William James, he defined as “ volition minus all desire and purpose,
the mere consciousness of exertion of any kind” (CP 8.303).
15. Critique, A22-23 (B37-38).
16. Hegel, Encyclopädie, sec. 7.
17. Religious Aspect, p. 427.
18. See note 3.
19. Religious Aspect, p. 430.
20. Roger Bacon, Compendium studii philosophiae, in Opera inedita (London,
1859), ch. 1; see also note 1 in item 7.
21. The original reads “ second.”
22. For more on feigned and real doubt, see item 3 (pp. 28-29).

[page 383]

Notes for pages 236-253 I 383
23. See J. S. Mill, Logic, bk. 3, ch. 3, sec. 1.
24. See The Logic of Hegel (Oxford, 1874), sec. 82.
25. Royce actually has “ ethical realist” and “ moral idealist” {ReligiousAspect,
pp. 21-22).
26. Ibid., ch. 3.
27. Ibid., p. 48.
28. Ibid., pp. 82ff., which refer to Spencer’s “ Data of Ethics,” in pt. 1 of his
Principles of Ethics (1879).
29. Royce mentions (pp. 135-36) Alexander Bain’s conception of memory
and Francis Galton’s investigation of word associations.
30. Ibid., p. 138.
31. Critique, A5 (B8-9).
32. Religious Aspect, pp. 140-41.
33. Ibid., p. 144.
34. John Phoenix was the pseudonym of George Horatio Derby (1823-1862),
American soldier and humorist. The story is given in his “ Official Report
. . . of a Military Survey and Reconnaissance of the Route from San Francisco
to the Mission of Dolores, ” in his Phoenixiana; or, Sketches and Burlesques (New
York, 1856), p. 21. The original has 184 rather than 365 solar compasses.
35. Religious Aspect, pp. 181-82, 187, and 196-97.
36. For Apollo’s lute, see Plato, Republic, 3.399c.
18. O n e , T w o , T h r e e
1. Peirce had first proposed this hypothesis in his January 1884 lecture on
“ Design and Chance” (item 15); it recurs throughout the Monist Metaphysical
Series (items 21-25).
2. The hypothesis set out in this paragraph is an early statement of “ A
Guess at the Riddle” (item 19), and it is a preview of the evolutionary cos­
mology developed in items 21-25.
3. See chapter 7 in item 19, pp. 273-79.
19. A G u e s s a t t h e R i d d l e
1. The reference is not to the first chapter that follows below, but to item
35 or one of the chapters in items 47-50 in W5 (pp. 242-47 and 292-308), all
chapters for the projected book entitled “ One, Two, Three.”
2. Although Peirce probably never wrote this chapter, its substance can be
readily deduced from the five papers to which he refers (and which are identi­
fied in the next five notes). For this chapter, the editors of the Collected Papers
used part of MS 901 (W5:242~47).
3. See item 16.
4. See item 1.
5. See “ A Theory of Probable Inference” (W4:4o8~5o).
6. See “ On the Natural Classification of Arguments” ^2:23-48).
7. See “ Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives” (W2.359-429).
8. The next two paragraphs, one of three such typewritten opening state­
ments for Peirce’s book, are taken from CP 1.1-2, where they serve as Preface
to the Collected Papers; the original typescript is no longer extant.
9. Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, 2.6.15-18.
10. See item 14, where Peirce discusses this point in greater detail.
11. In the original, the number is IV.

[page 384]

384 I Notes for pages 253-288
12. For an explication of this statement, see Max H. Fisch, “ Peirce’s
Arisbe,” in his Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism (Bloomington, 1986), pp. 229ff.
13. Benjamin Franklin and Benjamin Thompson (afterward Count Rum-
ford), whom Peirce mentions in his (Paris) July Fourth Address “ On the State
of Science in America” (W4:i52ff.); in the original, “ one another” is “ each
another.”
14. For the fact that Peirce exaggerates here, or later changed his mind, see
Max H. Fisch, “ Hegel and Peirce,” in his Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism, pp.
26lff.
15. For a somewhat earlier treatment of the subject matter of this chapter,
see W5:295-98.
16. The reference is probably to Thomas Hobbes.
17. In the original, the preceding “ in the” is lacking.
18. Not verified, but probably in his Physiology (New York, 1879).
19. In the Century Dictionary, Peirce gives the following definition: “ in older
writers, the mass into the square of the velocity, or the measure of the mass
multiplied by the square of that of the velocity: but recent writers frequently
use the phrase to denote one half of the above quantity.”
20. The table contains a number of corrections by the editors.
21. See the beginning of item 15, pp. 215-16.
22. Karl Friedrich Gauss, GeneralInvestigations ofCurvedSurfaces (Princeton,
1902), art. 20.
23. See note 34 in item 17; for the “ Lectures on Astronomy,” see Phoenixiana,
pp. 51-66.
24. Physics, I95b3i-i98ai3.
25. See the appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic, Critique, A642ff.
(B67off.).
20. T r i c h o t o m ic
1. The original reads “ third.”
2. The reference here, as on p. 284, is to Steele MacKaye (1842-1894), a New
York playwright, actor, theater manager, and inventor, and (with his wife) a
friend of the Peirces. MacKaye’s divisions of dramatic expression and of the
principles of being probably were made either in a public address or in a
journal or newspaper, which have not been identified.
3. See ch. 1 of the Transcendental Aesthetic, Critique, A19-22 (B33-36).
4. See note 2.
21. T h e A r c h i t e c t u r e o f T h e o r i e s
1. In the original, the word is “ accidently.”
2. Of “ the natural light” (of reason), Peirce says in MS S104, that it “ is no
evidence of truth, yet this is the one way of distinguishing the truth which alone
is quite indispensible. It must not be relied upon in the least degree; but it has
to be used. ”
3. See note 5 in item 12.
4. Named after Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856), Italian chemist and physi­
cist; for his law, see p. 335.
5. See William Crookes’s article in the Philosophical Transactions ofthe Royal
Society 165 (i875):5I9.

[page 385]

Notesfo r pages 288-320 I 385
6. This was one of Peirce’s concerns in his famous “ Note on the Theory
of the Economy of Research” (W472-78).
7. Herbert Spencer, First Principles, 5th ed. (New York, 1880), pt. 2, ch. 18.
8. For Peirce’s contributions (signed “ Outsider”) to the controversy re­
garding Spencer’s synthetic philosophy, which lasted for several weeks in
March/April 1890 in the New York Times, see P 402 and 416.
9. For more elaborate discussions of this example, see item 15 (pp. 220-21)
and item 19 (pp. 270-71).
10. Jean Baptiste Lamarck, Philosophie zoologique (Paris, 1873), pt. 1, ch. 7.
11. Clarence King, Catastrophism and the Evolution of Environment (1877).
12. August Weismann, “The Duration of Life,” in his Essays upon Heredity
(Oxford, 1889).
13. Christian August Friedrich Peters (1806-1880), German astronomer, and
Robert Stawell Ball (1840-1913), Irish mathematician, astronomer, and scientific
writer (both popular and technical).
14. In the original, the preceding phrase reads “ the sum of the three sides
of a triangle are.”
15. Peirce demonstrates this importance in item 23.
22. T h e D o c t r i n e o f N e c e s s i t y
1. See item 21.
2. See Hermann Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (Berlin, 1906), c. 55,
A 66.
3. See Aetius, Placita (in Migne, vol. 19), I, 12 and 15.
4. See De Interpretatione, i8b3i, 1937, and Ethica Nicomachea, ni2a7-io, and
Epicurus’ 3rd Epistle.
5. See (Cleanthes in) Epictetus, Manual, ch. 53, and Seneca, De Providentiay
V, 8.
6. In the original, the word is “ compromised.”
7. Examination ofSir William Hamilton J
s Philosophy (Boston, 1865), ch. 16.
8. According to his inter-leaf copy of the Century Dictionary, Peirce himself
wrote the six definitions.
9. As indicated in the headnote on p. 298, Paul Carus responded to the plea
with two articles, to which Peirce offered his “ Reply to the Necessitarians.”
23. T h e L a w o f M in d
1. See items 21 and 22.
2. See items 2-4; in the original, the parenthetical number is “ III.”
3. See Cantor’s Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen
Inhalts (Berlin, 1932), pp. 139-40. Peirce became acquainted with Cantor’s writ­
ings in the mid-i88os.
4. See “ On the Logic of Number” (^¥4:299-309, the last three pages).
5. See De Morgan’s Formal Logic (1847), pp. 165fr.
6. See Pierre de Fermat, Opera Omnia (Leipzig, 1911), vol. 1, secs. 340-51.
7. See Cantor, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, pp. 115fr.
8. Ibid., p. 278.
9. Ibid., p. 289 (13, 14).
10. Kant, Critique, A169 (B211).
11. Cantor, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, p. 194.

[page 386]

386 I Notesfor pages 321-335
12. See note 10.
13. Aristotle, Physics, 227310, and Metaphysics, 106935.
14. For a brief account of Peirce’s anticipation of the importance of in­
finitesimals in mathematics, see Carolyn Eisele, ed., The New Elements ofMathe­
matics (The Hague, 1976), 3:ix-x.
15. See Augustin Louis Cauchy, Leçons sur les applications du calcul infinitési­
mal à la géométrie (Paris, 1826-28), and Jean Marie Constant Duhamel, Eléments
de calcul infinitésimal (Paris, 1856).
16. See William James, Principles of Psychology (1890), vol. 2, ch. 20.
17. This was probably during his visits to Rome, in December 1870 and
January 1871.
24. M a n ’s G l a s s y E s s e n c e
1. Edmund Montgomery, “The Dependence of Quality on Specific Ener­
gies,” Mind 5 (1880)11-29; Charles Bernard Renouvier, Essais de critique générale
(Paris, 1875), app. 9; Joseph R. L. Delboeuf, “ Déterminisme et liberté,” Revue
Philosophique 13 (1882)1453-80, 608-38 and 14 (1882)-.158-89.
2. See items 21, 22, and 23. The “ papers that are to follow in the series”
mentioned in the next paragraph provide one of the several bits of evidence
that Peirce had projected more than five papers for the series; see also the
headnote to item 21.
3. William Thomson, “The Size of Atoms,” in his Popular Lectures and
Addresses (London, 1889), p. 218.
4. John Bernard Stallo, The Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics (New
York, 1882), ch. 7.
5. Gustav Theodor Fechner, Über diephysikalische undphilosophischeAtomen-
lehre (Leipzig, 1864).
6. Benjamin Thompson Rumford, Complete Works (Boston, 1870-75), 1:471-93;
2:1-22, 166-87, 208-21.
7. James Prescott Joule, Scientific Papers (London, 1884-87), i:i49if.
8. William J. M. Rankine, Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 20
(i85o):i92.
9. See Daniel Bernoulli, Hydrodynamica (1738), sec. 10.
10. See also note 4 in item 21.
11. See note 5 in item 21 (and note 3 in item 15).
12. “ A body which throughout its mass (and not merely at its surface) resists
for an indefinite time a sufficiently small force that tends to alter its equilib­
rium figure, always springing back into shape after the force is removed; a
body possessing elasticity of figure. Every such body has limits of elasticity,
and, if subjected to a strain exceeding these limits, it takes a set and does not
return to its original shape on being let go. This property is called plasticity.
The minimum energy required to give a set to a body of definite form and size
measures its resilience. When the resilience of a body is small and masks its
springiness, the body is called soft. Even fluids transmit shearing forces if time
be allowed, and many substances will yield indefinitely to very small (but not
indefinitely small) forces applied for great lengths of time. So solids that have
received a small set will sometimes partially recover their figures after a long
time. This property in fluids is called viscosity, in solids after-effect (German
nachwirkung). The phenomenon is connected with a regrouping of the mole­
cules, and indicates the essential difference between a solid and a liquid. In
fluids diffusion is continually active, and in gases it produces phenomena of
viscosity. In liquids it is not rapid enough to give rise to sensible viscosity, but

[page 387]

Notes fo r pages 336-357 I 387
the free motion of the molecules makes the body fluid, while the tendency of
sets of molecules to continue for a while associated makes the fluidity imper­
fect. In solids, on the other hand (at least when not under strain), there is no
diffusion, and the molecules are consequently in stationary motion or describ­
ing quasi-orbits. They thus become grouped in the mode in which they have
least positional energy consistent with their kinetic energy. When this group­
ing is slightly disturbed, it tends to restore itself; but when the disturbance is
greater, some of the molecules will tend to return to their old places and others
to move on to new situations, and this may give rise to a new permanent
grouping, and exhibit the phenomenon of plasticity. But if not quite sufficient
for this, disturbances of the molecular motions somewhat similar to the secular
perturbations of the planets will result, from which there will be no restora­
tion for a very long time. Solid bodies are very strongly cohesive, showing that
the molecules attract one another on the whole; and they are generally capable
of crystallization, showing that the attractions of the molecules are different
in different directions.”
13. See R. J. Boscovich, Theoria philosophiae naturalis (Venice, 1763), secs. 8,
81, 132.
14. This is the paper mentioned in the headnote on p. 285, which Peirce
seems not to have written.
15. “ Over de continuitet van den gas en vloeistof-toestand,” Academisch
Proefschrift (Leiden, 1873).
16. Emile Hilaire Amagat, “ Mémoire sur la compressibilité des gaz à des
pressions élevées,” Annales de Chimie et de Physique 19 (i88o):345~85.
17. Svante August Arrhenius, “ Uber die Diffusion der in Wasser gelösten
Stoffe,” Zeitschriftfür physikalische Chemie 1 (1887)1631-48; Rudolf J. E. Clausius,
“ Über die Elektricitätsleitung in Elektrolyten,” PoggendorjjTs Annalen 101
(1857)1338-60; Alexander W. Williamson, “ Über die Theorie der Aetherbil-
dung,” Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie 77 (i85i):37-49.
18. Arthur Cayley, “ On the Theory of the Analytical Forms called Trees,”
American Journal of Mathematics 4 (1881):266-68.
19. William Kingdon Clifford, Lectures and Essays (London, 1879), 2:311-16.
20. William James, Principles of Psychology (1890), 1:105.
21. See note 12 above.
22. See item 3, p. 52.
23. See item 3, p. 54. (In the original, the volume number is “ III.” )
24. The opening session of this event was held in Madison Square Garden
on 7 July 1892.
25. E v o l u t i o n a r y L o v e
1. See Hermann Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (Berlin, 1906), i:2iB.
2. See p. 442.
3. See item 24.
4. See item 23.
5. Simon Newcomb, Principles of Political Economy (New York, 1886).
6. Ibid., p. 534.
7. Peirce is speaking quite personally here. About the incident, he said in
a 20 September 1892 letter to Augustus Lowell: “ I lately reported on a chemical
process for a man in Wall St. who was to pay me $500 cash and a share in the
patents. He duly gave me a check and the bank returned it as ‘no good.’ ” The
“ Master in glomery” was Thomas J. Montgomery.
8. Bernard Mandeville, The Fable of the Bees (London, 1806), remark G.

[page 388]

388 I Notesfor pages 358-371
9. Paul Carus, “ Mr. Charles S. Peirce’s Onslaught on the Doctrine of
Necessity,” Monist 2 (1892)1576.
10. O. G. Downes’s translation of Quételet was published in London in
1849, and John Herschel’s “ Quételet on Probabilities” appeared in the Edin­
burgh Review (42:1-57) the following year.
11. Rudolf J. E. Clausius, “ Uber die Art der Bewegung welche wir Wärme
nennen,” PoggendorjpsAnnalen 100 (i857):305, and August Karl Krönig, “ Grund­
züge einer Theorie der Gase,” Poggendorjps Annalen 99 (i856):3i5.
12. James Clerk Maxwell, “ Illustrations of the Dynamical Theory of
Gases,” Philosophical Magazine 4 (i86o):22. (Also in his Collected Papers, 1:377.)
13. Hermann Helmholtz, “ Uber die Erhaltung der Kraft,” introduction to
a series of lectures given in Karlsruhe in 1862-63, in his PopularScientific Lectures
(New York, 1885), 1:316-62; Rudolf J. E. Clausius, “ Über die bewegende Kraft
der Wärme,” PoggendorjjTs Annalen 79 (i85o):368; for W. J. M. Rankine, see note
8 in item 24.
14. Henry Longueville Mansel (1820-1871), English metaphysician and fol­
lower of Hamilton; see also note 14 in item 3.
15. Karl Wilhelm Nägeli, Mechanisch-physiologische Theorie der Abstammungs­
lehre (Munich and Leipzig, 1884), Introduction; Albert von Kölliker, Entwick­
lungsgeschichtedesMenschen und derhöheren Tiere (Leipzig, 1879), sec. 1 of Introduc­
tion; August Weismann, Essays on Heredity (Oxford, 1889), vol. 1, essay 2.
16. Jean Baptiste Lamarck, Philosophie zoologique (Paris, 1873).
17. See item 24.
18. Ibid.
19. Invented by J. E. W. Keely in 1874, it was supposed to produce power
by responding to the intermolecular vibrations of the ether.
20. In the original, “ of the” is “ the of.”
21. See Mark 3:29, 9:48, and Isaiah 66:24.
22. Jared Sparks (1789-1866), American historian and editor, and president
of Harvard College.
23. Eusebius Pamphili, Ecclesiastical History (London, 1876), 8:2.
24. Lactantius, “ Of the False Wisdom of Philosophers,” in The Works (Edin­
burgh, 1871), bk. 3.
25. See John of Salisbury, Polycraticus, 2:26, 8:19.
26. See Prantl’s Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande (Leipzig, 1867), vol. 3, sec.
17, p. 2.
27. See William Whewell, Novum Organon Renovatum, 3rd ed. (London, 1858).
28. Urbain J. J. Leverrier, “ Recherches sur les mouvements de la planète
Herschel, dite Uranus,” in Connaissances des temps (1849); J. C. Adams, Nautical
Almanac, 1851, p. 3.
29. For Rankine, see note 8 in item 24; for Clausius, see note 13; for Thom­
son, see note 2 in item 24.
30. For Bernoulli, see note 9 in item 24; for Boyle, see note 5 in item 12; for
Charles, see note 7 in item 15; for Avogadro, see p. 335 and note 4 in item 21.
31. Mendeleef, Lothar Meyer, and J. A. R. Newlands.
32. W. T. G. Morton, C. T. Jackson, and J. C. Warren.
33. According to Peirce’s “ Note on the Age of Basil Valentine” (P 674),
Basil Valentine is reputed to have been one of the earliest scientific chemists,
in fifteenth-century Germany; but Peirce goes on to say that he may have been
the creation of Johann Thölde, who published several works attributed to
Basil Valentine around 1600.
34. Originating in the Italian commedia delParte, Punchinello is a sort of
rustic clown or buffoon (and the prototype of Punch).

[page 389]

I N D E X
Abbot, Francis Ellingwood, xxv, xxvi,
374" 2
Abducents, xxxvii
Abduction, xxxviii, xxxix
Abelard, Peter, 13«, 85, 100, 138, 3747*7(1)
Absolute, doctrine of, 294-95
Abstraction, 2, 3, 46, 100
Acceleration, 134-36; and Threeness, 250
Accidents, 6,101. See also Quality; Relation;
Representation
Achilles and the tortoise, 67
Action, xxxv; and belief, 129-30; and doubt,
114-15; and secondness, xxvii, xxxi; and
social sentiments, 150; thought as, 129,
131
Actualiter; 92
Actuality, xxiii, xxvii, xxxii. See also Real­
ity
Adaptation to the environment, 270-71
Aesthetics. See Esthetics
Affirmative: universal and particular, 208
Agapasm, 357-58, 362, 365, 367; in develop­
ment of thought, 364. See also Agapasti-
cism; Agapism
Agapasticism, 369-71. See also Agapasm
Agapism, xxii, 362-63. See also Agapasm
Agreement, 7
Albumen, 341
Algebra: and tokens, 227-28
Amagat, Emile Hilaire, 339-40
Analogy, 300; argument from, 34», 35
Anancasm, 362-64, 365; external and inter­
nal, 367, 368
Anancism, 362-63. See also Anancasm
Anger, 23, 43
Anselm, 171
Antecedent, 155
Anxiety, 43
Appearance, 19, 20
Apperception, 18, 20
Apprehension: and the effects of concep­
tion, 132; of ideas, 124-26
Approximation, 274
A priori method of fixing belief, 118-20,121,
125,138
Arche, 256-57
Arguments, xxxvii, 8; classification of, 186-
87, 245; complete, 31, 204-206; definitions
of, 9; from enumeration, 46; fallacious, 37-
38; incomplete, 204; material, 205; meas­
uring strength of, xxxviii; probable, 146;
simple and complex, 31; statistical, 33. See
also Conclusion; Consequences; Deduc­
tion; Hypothesis; Induction; Inference;
Premises
Arisbe period of Peirce’s thought, xxiii
Aristotle: Abélard on, 374« 7(1); his catego­
ries, xxx, 45-46; and chance, 274; and
continuum, 321; and free will, 299; and
geometry, 273; and induction, 33; his in­
fluence, xx, xxviii, xxxiv, 246-47; and In-
solubilia, 74«; his logic, 34, 374« 6(1); on
matter, 95n; on metaphysics, 84,108; and
scholasticism, 86, 87, 138, 367; and sign
theory, xxxvi
Arithmetic, 144-45
Arrhenius, doctrine of, 340
Association: of images, 3; and sign, 51
Associationalism, 103, 299
Astronomy, xxi, 138, 140, 199, 211, 212, 370
Atoms, 288, 335-36
Attention, 1, 2, 46-47
Authority: external, 13; internal, 13; method
of fixing belief, 117-18, 119, 121, 138; and
reason, no; as source of truth, 125
Avogadro, Amedeo, 288
Axioms, questioning of, 215-17, 242-43, 373
Bacon, Francis, 110, 119, 143, 196; his induc­
tion, 257
Bacon, Roger, 110, 234
Balancing reasons, 159, 161
Balzac, Honoré de, 316
Barbaro, Ermolao, 3747*10(2)
Barbarus, Hermolaus, 47
Bayle, Pierre, 88
Beauty, xxxi, 42
Being, 2, 76; as category, 6; and cognizabil-
ity, 25; and signs, 45; transition to sub­
stance, 3, 4, 5, 6
Belief, 21, 113; and belief-habit, 201-202; and
chance, 158-59; and conception, 22; as
end of inquiry, 127-28, 231; and facts, 170;
false distinctions of, 130-31; fixation of,
115-23 (see also Fixing belief); and habit,
114-15, 129-30; and instinct, 377« 22; natu­
ral, 305-306; and probability, 156, 159-61;
sensational and active, 22; true vs. false,
137
Beneke, Friedrich Eduard, 35n
Bentley, Arthur F., xxiii
Berengarius of Tours, 13, 373« 2(2)
Berkeley, George, 25, 47, 95, 101, 285; ideal­
ism of, 51; metaphysical theories of, 84-
85, 96-102, 104; on space, 14, 180
Bernoulli, Daniel, 196

[page 390]

390 I Index
Bernoulli, John, 335, 370
Bias and counter-bias, 193
Biology, 199; triad in, 246
Boehm, Jakob, 313
Boethius, 13n
Boole, George, xxxvi, 203«, 207, 213; his log­
ical algebra, 207, 213
Botany, 143
Boyle’s law, 196-97, 221, 288
Brahe, Tycho, no
Bretano, xxxv
Britain, philosophy in, 84-85, 285-86
Brown, Thomas, 104, 247
Brugmann, Friedrich Karl, 3817*8
Buckle, Henry Thomas, 358
Buddhism, 184
Butler, Archer, 101
Cambridge Metaphysical Club, xxvi
Cambridge period of Peirce’s thought,
xxiii
Cantor, Georg, xxii, xxvi, 316, 319; and con­
tinuous series, 320-21
Carnap, Rudolf, xxxi-xxxii
Cartesianism: critique of, xxiv, 28-30; dual­
ism of, 292. See also Descartes, René
Carus, Paul, 358
Case: in arguments, 187-91
Categories, xxvi, xxvii, 17; of conceptions,
6; and the divisions of philosophy, xxxi;
universal, xxx. See also Being; Firstness;
Quality; Relation; Representation; Se­
condness; Substance; Thirdness
Causality, principle of, 50, 274
Causation, 64, 214, 306
Cause, 133,180; doubt of, 217-18,273-74; final,
101; and fixing belief, 118
Cayley, Arthur, 341
Century Dictionary, xxi-xxii, xxiv, xxvi,
306, 380« 1(1), 3807*5(1), 384019, 385« 8(2)
Certainty: absolute, 158; test of, 28, 29, 30
Chance, xxxii, xxxiii, 274; absolute, 219, 243,
246; arguments against, 305-307, 309-11;
in atomic theory, 298; and belief, 158-59;
calculus of, 144-45; and change, 219-22;
design and, 222-24; its development into
habit, 265; its development into law, 276,
288-89, 3°5; and diversification, 349; doc­
trine of, 212, 214; even, 162-65; and evolu­
tionary theory, 290, 358; as First, 277, 297;
and first events, 243; logarithm of, 159;
and the order of the universe, xxii, 172-
74, 217; and probability, 147,160,166; rela­
tive, 219. See also Chance-world
Chance-world, 172-76
Chaos, xxxiii, 164
Chapman, John Jay, xxi-xxii
Characters, xxvii; combinations of, 172-74;
in common among objects, 174-80; of the
universe, 183
Charity, 150
Chemistry, in, 142, 199, 211, 212, 222; mental,
100, 103
Children: perceptive powers of, 14; self-
consciousness in, 18-20
Chinese rings, trick of, 14
Christianity, 72«, 185, 350; and tychasm,
365-66. See also Scholasticism
Cicero, 95
Classification: of arguments, 186-87; method
of, 143
Clausius, Rudolf, in, 336, 358, 359, 370
Clearness, 124-26, 127, 132
Clifford, William Kingdon, xxii, 218, 343
Cognitions, xxvi, 213; first, 25, 26-27, 30, 52,
260; intuitive, 11—
18, 25; intuitive distinc­
tion between, 49; mediate, 11—
18; objec­
tive and subjective elements of, 21; and
previous cognitions, 25-27,30,39; process
of, 30 {see also Syllogistic process); real
and unreal, 52. See also Conceptions;
Knowledge; Thought-sign
Cognizability, 25. See also Incognizable
Collections, endless, 317-20
Combination: and Thirdness, 251-52
Commonality among a group of objects,
174-76
Common sense, 113, 246
Communication, xxii, 331-32
Community, xl, 54-55, 81, 82,105; indefinite,
52, 149-51; of philosophers, 29
Comparison, 5, 6
Comprehension, 9, 10. See also Apprehen­
sion
Conceptions, 40, 106; and belief, 22; clear
and obscure, 124; compared to words, 93;
denial of, 96-97; distinct and confused,
124; and experience, 3; mediate and im­
mediate, 4; and naturalists, 143-44; uni­
versal, 1-2, 92. See also Cognitions; Ideas
Conclusion: analytic, 168; and belief-habit,
201; and facts, 20-21; false, 64-67; and in­
duction, 33; and premises, 9,12,14,61; and
syllogistic process, 31; synthetic, 162, 165;
and valid inference, 36-37
Concurrence, propositions of, 9
Connotation, 10
Conscience, 236-37, 238, 254
Consciousness, 30, 92; distinguishing modes
of, 21-22; dual, 233, 283-84; and the I think,
53-54; immediate, 42, 128-29, 2&2 (see a^s0
Feeling); and Lamarckian evolution, 361;
mediate, 128-29; plural, 283-84; simple,
282-83, 284; sign, xxxvi; synthetic, 261,
263-64; and time, 314-15. See also Self-
consciousness
Consequences, xxii, 155-56, 158
Consistency, 54
Contemplation, 48n
Contiguity, principle of, 50

[page 391]

Index I 391
Continuity, xxii, 143-44,313,316, 334; as con­
tinuous series, 320-22; of feeling, 323-24;
and ideas, 327; as sophism, 67; of thought,
369; of time, 323-24. See also Synechism
Continuum, 68, 321
Contradiction, 69-72
Convention, xxxvii, xl
Conviction, 22. See also Belief
Copernicus, 110
Copula, 2, 45, 203, 207
Correlate, reference to, 5, 6, 7, 9, 151
Cosmology: evolutionary, xxii, xxxii-
xxxiii, xli; and transcendentalism, xxix.
See also Evolution
Cosmopolitan period of Peirce’s thought,
xxiii
Cournot, Antoine Augustin, 212
Critic, xxxi, xxxviii, xxxix
Crookes, William, 215, 288, 335, 381»3(2)
Darwin, Charles, xix, xxiii, xxxiv, 289;
and chance, 222; and the individual, 357;
and logic, hi, 212; and natural selection,
hi, 358, 370; nominalism of, 104; Origin
of Species, 215, 358-59; and sign theory,
xxxvi
Death, 39, 149, 308; of the universe, 221
Dedekind, ]. W. R , xxvi
Deducents, xxxvii
Deduction, xxxviii, 33, 35, 188, 245, 327; and
habit, 329; and synthetic inference, 169,
187-89; and the validity of inferences, 78;
and volition, 199
Definitions, abstract, 126
Deledalle, Gérard, xxiv
Democritus, 298, 299; and chance, 274
Demonstration, 115
De Morgan, Augustus, xxii, 174W; and
probability, 157; his propositional forms,
206-207, 209; and sign theory, xxxvi; and
syllogism, 213, 316, 380/^4(2)
Derby, George Horatio, 383» 34
Descartes, René, 28, 34n, 84, 171, 246; and
the a priori method of fixing belief, 125,
138; and clear ideas, 125-26; dualism of,
99, 292. See also Cartesianism
Descriptives, xxxvii
Design, 222-24
Designatives, xxxvii
Desire, 23, 283, 284
Destiny, xxxii
Determinism, xli
Dewey, John, xix
Diallele, 45
Dialogism, 206
Dicent, xxxvii
Dictionary. See Century Dictionary
Discrimination, 2, 3
Dissociation, 2, 3
Distinctness, 125-26, 127
Dogmatism, 258
Doubt, 113; irritation of, 114-15, 127-28, 129;
universal, 28-29, 56
Dreams, 14, 21, 49, 137, 236
Dualism, 99, 292
Puns Scotus, 92-93, 94,106; his haecceities,
xxvii, 275; and nominalism, 87; realism
of, xxv-xxvi, xxviii, 53; and scholasti­
cism, 85, 86
Durandus a Sancto Porciano (of St. Pour-
çain), 94, 95
Dynamics, 287
“ Eclipse of the Sun, The,” period in
Peirce’s thought, xxiv
Education: and logic, 212
Effects, xxvi; conception of, 132; and Sec­
ond, 248
Effete mind. See Mind: effete
Ego, 12, 18, 20
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 312
Emotion, 23, 43-45, 51; and hypothetic in­
ference, 199; and social sentiments, 150
Empedocles, 352
Empirical formula, 195
Empiricism, xxxiv, 95, 104
Ends, xxxi; tendency toward, 236
England, philosophy in, 84-85, 285-86
Ens, 52
Enthymeme, 204
Epicurus, 298, 299
Epistemology, xxxvi
Erigena, John Scotus, 100, 137
Error, 20, 25, 38, 52, 89; law of distribution
of, 144; in propositions, 231-32; theory of,
212
Esposito, Joseph L., xxxviw
Esthetics, xxxi, xli
Ethics, xxxi, xli; and transcendentalism,
xxix
Euclid, 287, 295, 317
Euler, Leonhard, 227
Events: and secondness, xxxiii; as signs,
xxxvii
Evidence: and religion, 170-71
Evolution, xxxii-xxxiii, 288; agapastic, 362;
anancastic, 359-60, 362-68; by chance,
358-59, 362; and habit, 360-61; of physical
law, 218-22; and sign theory, xxxvi; by
sporting, 360; theories of, 289-90; as
Third, 297; three modes of, 362-71; triad
in, 270-73. See also Agapasm; Tychasm
Existence: potential vs. actual, 89; sign of,
xxxvii
Experience, xxiii, xxvi, 112, 113; and acci­
dents, 101; assurance by, xxxvii; and con­
ceptions, 3,4; and dreams, 14; externality
of, 98; and firstness, xxxi; and the incog­
nizable, 24; in Kant, 17«; possible, 301,
302; in Roger Bacon, no, 234; and syn-

[page 392]

392 I Index
thetic judgments, 168-69; and truth,
xxxiv
Extension, 9, 10
Facts: and appearance, 20; categories of,
xxvii; correspondence in, 7; external, 22,
24, 30; as guiding principles, 113; indeter­
minate, 275; internal, 22; and probability,
156, 159, 165; and secondness, xxxiii; and
self-consciousness, 20-21; ultimate, 274-
75; universe of, xxviii; and validity, 78
Faith, 150
Fallacies, 37-38, 144. See also Sophisms
Fallibilism, xxii
Falsity: in Insolubilia, 73-74; in nominal­
ism, 95
Fate, 72, 139»; question of, 133
Fear, 43
Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 159, 335, 3797*2(2)
Feeling, 43, 222; vs. attention, 46; of belief,
158-59,160-61; communal, 350; continuity
of, 323-24; as first, 260; and firstness,
xxvii, xxxi, 246, 296; and ideas, 325-27; in
Kant, 258-59; physiological basis of, 262-
63; in protoplasm, 343, 347-48; as simple
consciousness, 41, 233, 282, 284, 290-91;
spatial extension of, 324-25. See also Emo­
tion
Feibleman, James, xix
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 51
Fiction, 136, 137, 146
First, 247-48, 249, 280, 296-97; absolute, 251;
as arche, 256—
57; as chance, 243, 277; and
consciousness, 250, 260; phenomenon as,
xxxi; and the principle of sporting, 272-
73; psychological origin of, 257; reality
of, xxviii. See also Firstness
Firstness, xxx, xxxi, xxxiii, 249; and the
development of regularity, 278; facts of,
xxvii; and feeling, 246; and indeter­
minacy, 275; signs of, xxvii
Fisch, Max, xxiii, xxv, xxvi-xxvii, xxvii,
xxviii
Fixing belief, 115-23,140; apriori method of,
118-20, 121, 125, 138; authority method of,
117-18, 119, 121, 138; tenacity method of,
115-17, 118, 120, 121, 122, 137
Force, 133-36, 287; correlation of, 104; and
the dissipation of energy, 221; idea of,
180-81; index as, 232
Formalism, 29, 87
Formalitates, doctrine of, 93
Formaliter, 93
Formalities, 87. See also Formalitates
Foster, Michael, 267
Fraser, Alexander Campbell, 101, 103. See
also Berkeley, George
Fredegisus of Tours, 13«
Freedom, xxxiii, 72, 84; chance as, 222; in
nature, 243
Free-will, question of, 133
Frege, Gottlob, xx
Frequency: relative, 162, 165-66. See also
Probability: frequency theory of
Future, 63-64
Galileo, 110, 287
Gallie, W. B., xxxii
Galton, Francis, 144, 212
Gambling, 148; and adaptation, 270-71; and
chance, 220-21
Gases, theory of, 111, 196-97, 287-88
Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 273
Generalisation: and continuous quantity,
143; of mathematics to philosophy, 293-
96; tendency to, 291-92
Generals, xxxvii; and individuals, 106
Geodesy, xxi
Geometry, 134-35, 145, 193, 217, 242-43, 287;
and metaphysics, 246, 273; and philoso­
phy, 237, 293-96
Gilbert, William, no
Gilbert de la Porrée, 85
Gilman, Daniel C., xxix
God, 84; existence of, 171, 236; as First and
Second, 251; and love, 353; metaphysical
conceptions of, xxxvi; mind of, 99; and
philosophy, 332-33; thought of, 230
Goodness, three kinds of, xxxi
Gospel of Greed, xli, 357
Gospel of John, 352-54
Gothic era, 86-87
Goudge, Thomas, xxviii-xxix
Grammar: formal, 8; speculative, xxxi,
xxxviii
Graphs, existential, xx
Grassmann, Hermann Günther, 232,
3827*10
Gravity, 133, 218
Ground, xxxvii; and predicate, 9; refer­
ence to, 4-7; of symbol, 8, 10
Guiding principles, 112—
13
Habit, xxxii; and action, 131; assurance by,
xxxvii; and attention, 46-47; and belief,
114, 115, 122, 129-30, 198, 201-202; of infer­
ence, 202; intellectual, xl, 112, 291; inter­
prétant as, xxxix-xl; and Lamarckian
theory, 290, 360-61; and law of mind,
292, 327-29; legisign as, xxxvii; molecular
explanation of, 346-47; physical law de­
veloping from, 223-24, 278-79, 293; physi­
ological basis of, 264-66, 270; in proto­
plasm, 343-46, 348; as Third, 297; and
uniformity, 349; universal tendency to­
ward, xxxiii, 246, 277
Habitualiter, 92
Haecceity, xxvii, 275
Hallam, Henry, 88
Hamilton, Sir William, 35, 359

[page 393]

Index I 393
Hardness, 132
Hartley, David, 100, 103, 285
Hedge, Frederic Henry, 312
Hegel, G. W. F., xxvii, xxx, 87, 237, 247, 296,
310; and agapasticism, 363; and idealism,
51; and logic, 368; and the Outward
Clash, 233; and reasoning, 63, 64-66, 229-
30; his scientific method, 121, 256; his
three stages of thought, 237
Helmholtz, Hermann, 103, 104, 358
Herapath, John, 358
Herbart, Johann Friedrich, 8«, 35«, 37303(1)
Hermeneutics, xxxix
Heroism, 149-50
Herschel, Sir John, 358
History, 84
Hobbes, Thomas, 72, 95, 96«, 246, 285
Hope, 44, 112, 150
Hume, David, 47, 51, 102-103, 103-104; and
phenomenalism, 90
Huygens, Christian, 287
Hypothesis, 9, 35, 52, 188, 189, 245, 300, 327,
3747/6(2), 37407(2); compared to induc­
tion, 32-34, 194-99; and emotion, 44;
rules of, 192-94; scientific, 195-96; and
sensation, 42-43, 198-99; as statistical in­
ference, 78; validity of, 76, 80. See also
Inference: hypothetic
Hypotheticals, 72
I, the, 18
Icon, xxxvii, 226-28
Ideal, 52; ideal-realism, xxiv-xxv, xxxv. See
also Idealism
Idealism: Berkeleyan, 99, 101; vs. Carte-
sianism, 51, 292; definition of, xxiv;
moral, 238-40; objective, xxii, xxxii, 293;
semiotic, xxxv, xl; tychistic, 312, 348
Ideas: affections of, 325; association of, 50-
51; Berkeleyan, 100, 102; clear and dis­
tinct, 124-25,126-27; continuity of, 314-15,
327; individuality of, 313-14; and molecu­
lar theory, 349-50; Platonic, 84, 85, 91;
succession of, 99
Identity, 254, 263
Idiosyncrasy, 52
Ignorance, 20, 25, 38. See also Error
Illation, 202, 207
Illusion, 52, 80
Images, 47-50
Imagination, xxvi, 21, 98, 100, 136
Immortality, 84
Impressions, unity of, 1-2, 3, 6
Incognizable, 24, 26, 30, 51-53, 63
Indecision, 128. See also Doubt
Indefinites, xxxvii
Indeterminacy, 257, 275, 278
Index (Indices), xxvi-xxvii, xxxvii, 7, 9,
226-28, 232
Individual and the general, 106
Individualism, xxiv, 104
Individuation, principle of, 106-108
Inducents, xxxvii
Induction, xxxviii, 25, 35, 52, 78,189, 214, 245,
300; and attention, 46; compared to hy­
pothesis, 32-34,194-99; and frequency of
characters, 176-77, 179-80; and habit, 47,
198-99, 327-29; as inference of rule, 188,
191; in Kant, 17-18»; as miracle, 168; rules
of, 192-94; and sampling, 302-303; scep­
tics of, 234-35; and synthetic inference,
168-69; and uniformity of Nature, 177—
79; validity of, 76, 78-80,84. Seealso Infer­
ence: inductive; Reasoning: synthetical
Inexplicable, 42. See also Incognizable
Inference, 14, 28, 47, 51; ampliative, 194, 300;
by analogy, 77; analytic, 169; and Bar­
bara, 187; classification of, 189; complete
and incomplete, 31; explicative, 194; falla­
cious, 37-38; guiding principle of, 112;
habits of, 202; hypothetic, 25, 34-35, 198,
328; immediate, 205; inductive, 32, 33, 177,
198; and judgment, 56, 60, 201; and proba­
bility, 145-47,157-58; provisional, 301-302;
scientific, 214; and self-consciousness, 21;
statistical, 78; synthetic, 168-69; validity
35—
37, 58-59, 78-81, 203. See also Deduc­
tion; Hypothesis; Induction; Syllogism
Infinitesimal, 315, 316, 322
Infinity, xxxvi, 64, 316-22; endless, 319; in a
series, 23
Inquiry, 114—
15. See also Doubt
Insolubilia, 73-75
Instinct, 377«22; assurance by, xxxvii
Insurance company, 81, 148-49
Intelligence, 222; artificial, xx
Intensity, relations of, 107-108
Intentions, first and second, 7
Interprétant, xxxix; final, xxxvi-xxxvii; im­
mediate, xxxvii; reference to, 5-7, 9, 10;
in the sign relation, xl; and symbol, 8
Introspection, 3-4, 22-23, 30
Intuition, 11—
12, 24, 48«, 262; denial of,
xxxix, 30; and the distinction of space
and time, 232-33; intellectual, 75; intui­
tive recognition of, denied, 12-18, 26, 39;
and sensation, 42; of the subjective ele­
ment of a cognition, 21-22
Intuitionism, xxix
Investigation, scientific, 138-40
It, 2, 6
I think, the, 54
James, Henry, 353
James, William, xix, xx, xxvii, 324, 346
Jevons, William Stanley, xxii, 233
John of Salisbury, 85, 100, 37406(1)
Johns Hopkins University, xix, xxi, xxix
Joule, James Prescott, 335
Jourdain, Amable Louis, xxii

[page 394]

394 I Index
Joy, 43
Judgment, 41, 50-51; a priori synthetical,
167-68; and inference, 56, 60-61, 201; syn­
thetical, 78, 167-69. See also Reasoning:
synthetical
Kant, xxi, 246, 282; categories of, xxx, 46;
and continuity, 320-21; critique of, xxiv;
and divisions of the mind, 257-58; on ex­
perience, 17-18»; on hypotheses, 35; on
intuition, 48, 232-33; and logic, xxix, 231-
32; and phenomenalism, 90-91; and sign
theory, xxxvi; and synthetical judg­
ments, 78, 167-68
Kepler, Johannes, 110-11, 119, 214
King, Clarence, 290
Knowledge, xxii, 25, 32; of mind, 22-23; and
self-consciousness, 30; sources of, 13. See
also Cognitions
Kolliker, Rudolf Albert von, 359
Kronig, 358
Lamarck, Jean Baptiste, 289-90, 360-61
Language, 43, 136, 140; compared to voice,
282; deceits of, 102; learning of, 19
Lavoisier, Antoine-Laurent, in, 142
Law, xxxii, xxxiii, xxxvii, 287; definition
of, 3797*2(2); of fatigue, 329; irregularity
in, 304-305; progress from chance to, 218-
24, 243-44, 276-77; psycho-physical, 159;
as Second, 297; universal, 288. See also
Regularity
Leading principle, 201, 202-205
Learning: and thirdness, xxxi
“ Leaving the Cave” period of Peirce’s
thought, xxiv
Legisign, xxxvii
Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 126
Leverrier, U. J. J., 370
Liebig, Justus von, 104
Likeness, 7, 9, 94, 98
Line: covered, 69; measurement of, 294
Linguistics, computational, xx
Locke, John: on the idea, 47, 48», 97, 100;
and nominalism, 96; on the probable ar­
gument, 145
Logarithm of the chance, 159. See also
Chance
Logic, xx, xxiv, 7-10; algebra of, xxvi, 228;
branches of, xxxi; and critic, xxxviii;
and Darwinism, in; derivation of, 200-
202; and education, 212-14; Formal, 231-32,
233; as method, 210-12; and naturalism,
xxix; as normative science, xxxi, xxxii;
and philosophy, xxix-xxx; and proba­
bilities, 144; questioning fundamental
axiom of, 216-22; of relations, xxiii, xxiv,
xxvi, xxx; of relatives, xxiii, 213-14, 245;
and the social principle, 149, 150; and
speculative rhetoric, xxxix; study of,
109-10; and threeness, 296; triad in, 246;
validity of 56-57, 80. See also Arguments;
Inference; Reasoning; Sophisms; Syllo­
gism
Love, xxii, xxxiii; and evolution, 362; and
growth, 353-54; and hate, 352-53. See also
Agapasm; Agapasticism; Agapism
Lucretius, 274
McAlister, J. M., 14
Mackaye, Steele, 282, 283-84, 3847*2(1)
Malebranche, Nicolas, 96
Malthus, Thomas, 212
Man, 53-55
Mandeville, Bernard, 357
Mansel, Henry Longueville, 359
Man-sign, material quality of, 54
Martingale method of gambling, 148
Materialism, 104, 292, 299
Materia prima, 95-96«. See also Matter
Mathematics, xxx, xxxiv, xli, 102, 105, 227-
28; applied to philosophy, 237, 293-96;
and sign theory, xxxvi. See also Algebra;
Arithmetic; Geometry; Number; Prob­
ability
Matter, 95-96«, 100; as effete mind, xxii,
xxxii, 293; its existence denied, 84,98,102;
as Second, 297; theory of, 334-41
Maxwell, James Clerk, hi, 212, 218, 358
Mechanics, law of, 287-88
Mediation: and thirdness, xxxi
Melancholy, 43
Memory, 46, 259
Metaphysics, xxx, xxxi, xxxii-xxxiii, xli,
84; and geometry, 246, 273; and mathe­
matics, 237, 296; and naturalism, xxix;
and sensations. 107-108; triad in, 246,
2515-57
Methodeutic, xxxix
Methods: of reasoning, xxxix; of research,
210-14; of science, xxix, xxxiv, 120-23,
211—
13
Mill, James, 104, 285
Mill, John Stuart, xxvii, 194, 274, 305; on
hypothesis, 35«; and motivation, ym; his
nominalism, 104, 359; and syllogism, 6in;
and uniformity of Nature, 76-77,177,178,
179, 217
Mind: according to Berkeley, 94, 98, 101;
denial of, 102; effete, xxii, xxxii, 293; as
First, 297; innate ideas in, 181-82; knowl­
edge of, 22-23; and Lamarckian evolu­
tion, 361; law of, 292, 313, 323, 328, 329-30,
334; and matter, 349; and reality, 53,91; its
relation to sign, 225-26; and the syllo­
gism, 62-63; trisection of, 258; universal
in, 92-93; and the world, xl
Miracles, 168, 299
Mitchell, O. H., xxvi, 227
Molecular theory, 335-36

[page 395]

Index I 395
Monism, 292
Monist period of Peirce’s thought, xxvi,
xxvii-xxviii
Morals, theory of, 237-40
Morris, Charles, xxxii
Motion: animal, 44-45; arguments against,
67-68; and force, 133-35
Murphey, Murray, xxiv, xxviii
Murphy, Joseph John, 380/11(2)
Mystical theories, 183-84
Nágeli, Karl Wilhelm von, 359
Naturalism, xxviii-xxix
Naturalist, 143
Natural selection, 75,105, in, 112, 218, 270-73,
358, 370; triad in, 253
Nature: as chaos, 164; as characteristic of
things, 92-93; freedom in, 243; law of, 172,
195; uniformity of, 75-77, 177-79, 192-93»
217, 235-36. See also Habit; Law; Universe
Necessitarianism, 299, 300, 303, 309-11, 329
Necessity, xxviii, xxxvi; evolution by, 359—
60. See also Anancasm
Negation, 45, 52
Negative: universal and particular, 208
Nerves, excitation of, 16
Neutralism, 292-93
Newton, Isaac, 287
Nominalism, 48,93-102; definition of, xxiv;
and naturalism, xxviii; and Platonism,
85,100; vs. realism, xxv-xxvi, xli, 53, 85w
,
87-88, 91,104-105,137, 314; and utilitarian­
ism, 359
Normative Science, xxx, xxxi
Not, 69; in syllogisms, 59-60
Nothingness, xxxii-xxxiii
Not-I, 23
Notions, 99,100; clear and distinct, 126. See
also Ideas
Noumena, 90
Number, xxx, 143, 214; finite, 316, 322; in­
commensurable, 319; infinite, 316; philo­
sophical preferences for, 247; relative,
151-53; transfinite, xxvi. See also In­
finitesimal; Infinity
Objects, 88; accusative, 9; classes of, 106;
dynamic, xxxvi, xxxvii, xxxix; and fact,
xxvii; general and individual, 106-108;
immediate, xxxvi, xxxvii, xxxix; refer­
ence to, 7, 8; relation to sign, 225-26; of
symbol, 10; triadic divisions of, xxxvii
Ockham. See William of Ockham
Ogden, C. K., xxii
Opinion, xl; settling of, 115, 137-39; and
truth, 89
Opposition, propositions of, 9
Other, 6, 67
Other than, 69; in syllogisms, 59-60
Outward Clash, xxvii, 233, 234
Pain, 258-59
Pantomime, 282
Paradox of freedom and fate, 72
Parallelogram of forces, 134-35
Parmenides, 146
Particular: inference from universal to, 70.
See also Nominalism
Paths, 134-35
Paul, Apostle, 150
Peirce, Benjamin, xix
Perception, xl; and existence, 98; internal,
102
Percy, Walker, xxi
Personality, 330-32
Peters, Christian August Friedrich, 385/113
Petitio principii, 61
Phenomena, xxxi, xxxii
Phenomenalism, 90, 104
Phenomenology, xxiv, xxx, xxxi, xli; and
naturalism, xxix
Philodemus, 211
Philosophy: architectonic system of, 286;
branches of, xxx-xxxiii; British, 84-85,
285-86; and God, 332-33; and logic, xxix-
xxx; and love, 352; and mathematics, 237,
293-96; and number, 247; mechanical,
287-88, 300; pragmatic, xxxiv-xxxv; and
the sciences, xxxiv, 29; semiotic, xxxv
Phoenix, John, 3837*34
Physics, xxix, 3807*5(1); cosmological, xxxii;
triad in, 246, 253, 273-79
Physiology: triad in, 246, 253, 262-70
Plasticity, 3867*12(2)
Plato, xx, 119, 230, 258, 273; True Gorgias, 70-
72. See also Ideas: Platonic; Platonism
Platonism, 85, 92, 100. See also Ideas: Pla­
tonic
Pleasure, 258
Plotinus, 313
Plurality, common character among,
174-76
Pneumatology, 246
Polar sense, 263-64
Popper, Karl, xx
Positivism, xxxiv, 103
Possibility, xxxii, xxxiii, 234; sign of,
xxxvii; universe of, xxviii
Possible, xxvii
Postulate, 300-302
Potentiality, xxxiii
Power, of external things, 89
Practical, and distinction of thought, 131
Pragmatic maxim, xxxiv
Pragmatism, xxii, xxiv, xxvi, xxxv; divi­
sions of, xxxi; and positivism, xxxiv;
proof of, xxviii; and semiotic, xl; and
speculative rhetoric, xxxix
Prantl, Carl, 367
Predicate, 2, 9; contrary, 69-70; its relation
to subject, 58—
59; and universality, 92

[page 396]

396 I Index
Prejudices, 28-29, 3°» 38
Premises, 201; and the conclusion, 9, 12, 14;
and fallacies, 37-38; first, 61; and hypoth­
esis, 34-35; and induction, 33; and proof,
60-61; and syllogistic process, 31; and
valid inference, 36-37
Pre-Monist period of Peirce’s thought,
xxvi-xxvii
Prescision, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7
Present in general, 1, 2
Priestley, Joseph, 104
Principle: of causality, 50, 274; of con­
tiguity, 50; guiding, 112-13; of individ­
uation, 106-108; leading, 201, 202-205; of
resemblance, 50; social, 149,150; of sport­
ing, 272-73, 360
Probability, 78; and chance, 158, 220-21; and
collective cases, 148-49; conceptualistic
view of, 156-57, 159, 161, 168; and conse­
quences, 155—
56; equal, 162-65; frequency
theory of, xxvii; and the independence
of events, 153; inductive, 166,167; and the
isolated case, 147-48; materialistic view
of, 156—
57; and modes of inference, 145-
47; rule for the addition of, 155; rule for
the multiplication of, 156; rules for the
calculation of, 151-54; theory of, 144-45;
and unlimited community, 149-51
Progress, xli
Pronouns, xxvi
Proof, value of, 60-61
Propepositivism, xxxiv
Propositions, 245; and being, 4; definitions
of, 8-9; erroneous, 232; forms of, 206-209;
hypothetical, 24, 25; possibility of error
in, 231-32; symbols as, 8; unity of, 2; uni­
versal, 17, 24, 25, 77
Protoplasm, 266-70, 341-49; properties of,
284; theory of, 334-41
Psychology: associationalist, 103; empiri­
cal, 3, 5; triad in, 246, 290
Ptolemy, xxi
Purpose, xxxv
Putnam, Hilary, xx
Pythagoras, 247, 258
Quale, xxvii, 6
Qualisign, xxxvii
Quality, xxxvii, 4, 5, 113; as category, 6,
7; existence of, 94; as universal, 76
Quantification theory, xx, xxiv, xxvi,
XXX
Quantity, continuous, 143, 144, 303, 304
Questions, answerability of all, 234-36
Quételet, Adolphe, 144, 162, 358
Quine, W. V., xx
Ramsey, F. P., xxii
Ramus, Peter, 247
Rankine, William J. M., 335, 359, 370
Reaction: and secondness, xxxi; sense of,
xxvii
Real, 52-53, 88, 136-40
Realism, xxvii, xxxiv, 98; definition of,
xxiv; moral, 238-40; vs. nominalism,
xxv-xxvi, xli, 53, 85«, 87-88, 91-93, 104-
105, 137-38, 314; scholastic, 53; semiotic,
xxxv, xl; and transcendentalism, xxviii
Realiter, 93
Reality, xl, 80, 202; and causation, 64; and
the divine mind, 99; and fiction, 136, 137,
146; and investigations of man, 230-31; as
product of mental action, 91; and real­
ism, 98; and the scientific method, 120,
138-40; and Second, 248; and sensation,
88-90
Reason, 284; analytic, 165; and authority, 13,
no; and emotions, 45; relation of, 253-54,
280-81; and social sentiment, 150; syn­
thetic, 165, 283. See also Reasoning
Reasoning: abductive, xxxiv; according to
Hegel, 63; analytic, 161, 167-69; deduc­
tive, 74-75,161,191, 227; from definition to
definitum, 43,44; division of, xxxviii; ex­
plicative, 161, 162; fallacious, 37-38; guid­
ing principles of, 112-13; hypothetic, 198;
inductive, 161, 162; object of, m-12; rules
of, 113; synthetical, 78,161,162,167-69,176—
79, 187-89; triad in, 245. See also Deduc­
tion; Hypothesis; Induction; Reason
Reductio ad absurdum, 69-72
Reduction thesis, xxx
Reflection, 96, 102, 222, 223
Regularity, 75-77, 101, 175, 278, 348; as argu­
ment against chance, 305-307. See also
Law; Uniformity
Relate, 5, 6, 7, 151
Relation, 59,131; as category, 6; degenerate,
225-26; of intensity, 107-108; kinds of, 7;
of reason, 253-54, 280-81; as Second,
xxvii, 248; as universal, 76, 94
Relative frequency, 162, 165-66
Relative numbers, 151-53. See also Probabil-
i t y .
Relatives, logic of, xxiii, 213-14, 245
Religion, 236, 331; and the method of au­
thority, 86, 117—
18; and the order of na­
ture, 170-71; and science, 184-85. See also
Christianity; God; Scholasticism
Repetition, 201
Representamen, 6
Representation, xxi, xxii, xxxi, 7; as cate­
gory, 6; feeling as, 43; immediate, 106;
mediate, 5, 106
Research, scientific, 138
Resemblance, 253-54, 259, 263; association
by, 51; and hypothesis, 193; principle of,
50
Result: in arguments, 187-91
Retina, blind spot on, 15-16, 49

[page 397]

Index I 397
Rheme, xxxvii
Rhetoric: formal, 8; speculative, xxxi,
xxxviii-xxxix
Richards, I. A., xxii
Roscellin de Compiegne, 53, 100, 367
Royce, Josiah, xix, xxvi; and erroneous
propositions, 230-32; moral theory of,
236-40; and possibility, 234
Rule: in arguments, 187-91
Rumford, Benjamin Thompson, 335
Rutherfurd, Lewis Morris, 381/19
St. Lawrence Power Company, xxi
Sampling, 176-77, 274, 303
Savan, David, xxxv
Scepticism: absolute, 56; Cartesian, 125;
moral, 237, 239-40; in Royce, 230; useful­
ness of, 235
Schelling, F. W. J. von, 230, 247, 312-13
Schiller, Friedrich, xxxvi
Scholasticism, 28, 85-87, 94«; development
of, 367; truth in, 138
Schroder, Ernst, xix, xxii, xxvii, 232
Science: Berkeleyan, 84, 101; classification
of, xxxiii; development of, 111; experi­
mental, xli; methods of, xxix, xxxiv, 120-
23, 211—
13; and nominalism, 104; norma­
tive, xxx, xxxi; and presumption, 183-84;
and quantitative treatments, 142-44; and
religion, 184-85; and theory of signs, xxi;
truth in, 138-40; and the universal, 92
Scotus. See Duns Scotus
Second, 6, 247-49, 296-97; absolute, 251;
consciousness of, 260; degenerate, 280-
Si; External, 250, 254; in evolutionary
theory, 278-79; genuine, 280; Internal,
254; as law, 243, 277; phenomena as, xxxi;
psychological origin of, 257; reality of,
xxvii, xxviii. See also Secondness
Secondness, 249; degenerate, 253-54; in
evolutionary theory, xxxiii, 278; facts
of, xxvii; and haecceity, 275; signs of,
xxvii; as universal category, xxvii, xxx,
xxxi
Self, 6, 20
Self-consciousness, 30, 125; intuitive, 18-21
Self-control, 72n
Self-sacrifice, 81, 149-50
Semiosis, xl, xxxiii
Semiotic, xx-xxi, xxii, xxiv, xxviii, xxx;
branches of, xxxi, xxxvi-xxxix; and nat­
uralism, xxix
Sensationalism, 96, 104
Sensations, 42-43, 106, 107; according to
Berkeley, 96, 100; of doubting and be­
lieving, 114; emotion and, 44-46; infer­
ences from, 89; and mind, 22-23, 88; of
reaction, 291; and reality, 90, 99; in sight,
103; succession of, 129; unity of, 131. See
also Sense
Sense, 1, 284; and dual consciousness, 283;
External and Internal, 261
Sensibility, law of, 159
Sentimentalism, 356, 371
Separation, mental,^2-3
Sequence, logical vs. causal, 206«
Series: continuous, 61, 320; of finite dis­
tances, 67-68; infinite, 23
Set theory, xxiv
Short, Thomas, xxxv
Signification 57«
Signification, 94, 375« 4
Signs, 7; association by, 51; and Being, 45;
classification of, xxxvi-xxxviii; concep­
tions as, 93; consistency of, 54; general, 7,
9; and the incognizable, 24-25; inference
from, 29; material qualities of, 40, 44;
mediation of, xxxix; references of, 38;
and the scheme of categories, xxvii;
and sight, 103; substitution between,
59; theory of, xx-xxi, xxvii, xxxv,
xxxvi-xl; thinking in, 23-24, 30, 38-40,
46; as third, 281-82; triple relation of,
225-26; universal, xxviii, 94. See also
Thought-sign
Simon, Collyns, 101
Simpler, 20677
Singularity, in images, 47-50
Singulars, xxxvii, 93, 94
Sinsign, xxxvii
Smith, Adam, 104
Socialism, logical, xl
Sociology: triad in, 246
Socrates, 137
Some, in syllogisms, 60
Sophisms, 67-75, I31
Sound, sensation of, 42
Sowa, John, xx
Space: dimensions of, 14-17; as distinct
from time, 233; and the doctrine of the
absolute, 295; as fiction, 243; idea of, 180,
181
Specialists, scientific, 212-13
Speculation, xxviii
Speech, 132
Spencer, Herbert, xxii, 222, 239, 289
Spirit, 99, 101
Spiritualism, 215, 216
Spontaneity, xxxiii
Sporting, principle of, 272-73, 360
Stallo, John Bernard, 335
Stoicism, 299
Stokes, Sir George, 3817/9
Story, William Edward, 215, 381772(2)
Subject, 2, 58—
59; existence of, 69; nomina­
tive, 9; and universality, 92
Subjectivism, 81
Substance, 2; transition of being to, 3-6
Substitution, 36
Succession, 129

[page 398]

398 I Index
“ Sun Set Free, The,” period of Peirce’s
thought, xxiv
Supernaturalism, 215-16
Suppositio communis, 57
Survival of the fittest, 270, 272
Swift, Jonathan, 62
Syllogism, 206, 213; association in, 51; Bar­
bara, 73, 186-87, 190, 191; Baroco, 190, 191;
Bocardo, 190, 191; deductive, 31-32, 34-35;
and false conclusions, 64-67; formulae
of, 57-60; and icon, 227-28; inductive, 33;
as mechanical process, 62-64; objections
to their formulae, 60-67; as petitio prin-
cipii, 60-61; probable, 31; subjectivity in,
64; three kinds of, 245; of transposed
quantity, 316-17. See also Arguments
Syllogistic process, 30-31
Symbol, xxxvii, 7-8, 9, 3827*1(1)
Sympathy, xxii
Syncategorematics, 93
Synechism, xxii, 313, 354, 363, 369. See also
Continuity
Synthetical judgments a priori, 167-68
System, 336
Tabula rasa, xxxiv
Tangible, 131
Taste, 119
Tenacity method of fixing belief, 115—
17,118,
120, 121, 122, 137
Terms, 8, 245
Testimony, 19-20, 20-21, 28
Tetens, Johannes Nikolaus, 258
Thales, 256
Theology, xxix; triad in, 246
Theophrastean moods, 60
Theory, scientific, 195-96
Thinking, physiological basis of, 200-202.
See also Thought
Third, 6, 9, 247-48, 249, 250, 280, 296-97;
accidental, 254-55, 261; consciousness of,
260; degenerate, 254-55, 281-82; genuine,
281; as habit-taking, 277; as mediate be­
tween chance and law, 243, 277; phenom­
ena as, xxxii; psychological origin of,
257; reality of, xxviii; relative, 251. See also
Thirdness
Thirdness, xxvii, xxxiii, 246; and combina­
tions, 251-52; facts of, xxvii; as universal
category, xxx, xxxi
Thomas Aquinas, 85, 86
Thomson, William, 222, 325, 370
Thought, xxviii, xxxviii, 40-42, 3737*3(3);
and attention, 46; and belief, 127,129; and
community, 54-55; elements of, 42; and
emotions, 43-46; and habits of action, 131;
sensational elements of, 107
Thought-sign, 38-40, 44, 46, 88
Threeness, 250. See also Triad
Tillotson, Archbishop, 172, 174
Time: analysis of, 323; and attention, 46;
conception of, 17; and consciousness,
314-15; continuity of, 323-24; as distinct
from space, 233; idea of, 180, 181; in­
finitesimal intervals of, 315, 322; as regu­
larity, 278
Tokens, xxii, 226-28
Tone, pitch of, 15
Transcendentalism, xxviii-xxix, 313
Transubstantiation, no, 131-32
Triad, xxx, 245-47, 255-56; in biology, 270-
73; in metaphysics, 256-57; in physics,
273-79; in physiology, 262-70; in psychol-
ogy, 257-62. See also First; Second; Third
Trichotomic, 280
True Gorgias, 70-72
Truth, xxxi, 25, 147; and belief, 137-40; and
critic, xxxviii; and experience, xxxiv;
and fallibilism, xxii; and inference, 80-
81; in Insolubilia, 73-75; in nominalism,
95; and opinion, 89; and scholasticism,
86; and self-consciousness, 125; of sym­
bols, 8; tendency toward, xxxix, 90
Truth-functional analysis, xxx
Truth-tables, xxvi
Tychasm, 362, 363, 364, 365-66, 367
Tychism, xxii, 312-13, 347, 362-63. See also
Chance
Type-token distinction, xxii
Uniformity: and evolution, 288; and habit,
277-79, 349; in Nature, 75-77, 172-79, 192-
93, 217, 235-36. See also Law; Regularity
Unity: of impressions, 1-2, 3, 6; in thought,
54
Universality, 92; and induction, 79
Universals, 85, 87, 91; denial of, 95; as figure
of speech, 76; kinds of, 70; in the mind,
96; reality of, 88, 92-93; as singulars,
94. See also Idealism; Nominalism; Real­
ism
Universe, xxviii; chance in, 172-74, 217-18,
305; as without character, 183; death of,
221; of discourse, 207; infinite vs. limited,
182-83; and love, xxii; and progress from
chance to law in, 243-44, 276-77, 298-300;
regularity in, 76-77,101,170-71,175; riddle
of, xli; and signs, xxxvi; and Third, 251;
variety in, 296, 308
University, xxi-xxii, 211
Unreal, 52
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, xix, xxi
Utilitarianism, 359
Vacherot, M., 171, 184
Validity, xxxviii; logical vs. extralogical,
204. See also Induction; Inference
Van der Waals, 337-39, 340
Velocity, 134-35, 294
Venn, John, 156, 227

[page 399]

Index I 399
Victoria Lady Welby, xxii
Virial, law of, 336-39
Vision: and images, 49-50; theory of, 103
Voice, 282
Volition: and attention, 23; as element of
thought, 129, 230, 231; and the Outward
Clash, 2«; physiological account of, 263.
See also Will
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 370
Weight, 133
Weismann, August, 290, 359, 360
Whately, Richard, xxiii, xxix, 233
What is, 6
Whewell, William, 104, 367-68
Whitehead, Alfred North, xx
Will, 23, 54, 258, 259-60; and dual conscious­
ness, 283; External and Internal, 261;
freedom of, 299, 300. See also Volition
William of Champeaux, 85
William of Ockham, 54, 85, 87, 93-97, 106;
on the Insolubilia, 74»
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, xxii
Wonder, 44
Words, 53-54, 93
Wright, Chauncey, 3747*2
Wundt, Wilhelm, 381/79
Zeno, 67, 68, 283
Zöllner, Johann Karl Friedrich, 215, 381/13(2)
