15. Design and Chance (1883-84)

[page 215]

Design and Chance MS 875. [First published, as MS 494, in ¡¥4:544-54.] Writ ten in December 1883/January 1884, thisfragmentary manu script was usedfor a lecture entitled “Design and Chance,” before the Johns Hopkins University Metaphysical Club on 17January 1884. Despite its brevity and incomplete ness, it represents a major advance in Peirce 9 sprogress toward his guess at the riddle of the universe, and it marks the beginning of his evolutionary explanation of the laws of nature (and his architectonic metaphysics detailed in items 21-25). By the hypotheses of absolute chance, habit-taking, and universal evolution, Peirce extends thepostulate that “everything is explicable... in a general way.” The epoch of intellectual history at which the world is now arrived finds thought still strongly under the influence imparted to it in 1859 by D arw in’s great work.1 But a new element has crept in, not intro duced by any great book, yet already showing itself in different direc tions, and destined as it seems to me to play a considerable part in the coming years,— I mean the tendency to question the exact truth of axioms. It appears to me that the development of this general idea in the various realms of mathematics, positive science, and philosophy is, in the immediate future, likely to teach us more than any other general conception. It has already done important work in geometry, in which our own Professor Story has an honorable share.2 In physics we see its influence in the investigations of Crookes and Zöllner3 into the phenomena of spiritualism & supernaturalism, in regard to which the attitude of scientific men must now be essentially different from what it was 25 years ago. For my part, I cannot withhold my approval of the proceedings of the society for the prosecution of psychical research, which is engaged in the careful examination of all kinds of phenomena which suggest the possibility of the relation between body and soul being different from what ordinary experience leads us to conceive it.4 I do not mean to say, and that society does not say, that any facts have yet been established sufficient to call for a modification of existing conceptions; but I do say that enough evidence has been collected to

[page 216]

make a careful & serious examination of the matter no waste of time; and that the bias that formerly existed and was rightly entertained in favor of the dicta of common sense upon this subject, is sensibly weak ened and rightly weakened by its having been proved that the axioms of geometry are mere empirical laws whose perfect exactitude we have no reason whatever tofeel confident of. The scientific world will not be disturbed because all the weakminded persons whose mental equilibrium was shaken by spiritualism during the period when it was in fashion will now turn round and say, we investigated these things long ago and always told you you were wrong not to investigate them,— and now we are glad you see your error. The scientific world was entirely right before, when it declined to waste time in absurd inquiries; and it is quite consistent in saying,— as I think it is about to say,— that the pretended facts seem now to deserve examination. More than that, as a general maxim in scientific method, I maintain that at one stage of inquiry it is quite right to insist strongly on the exactitude of established laws, to question which would only lead to confusion, while at a later stage it is proper to question the exactitude of those same laws when we are in possession of a guiding idea which shows us in what manner they may possibly be corrected. I may illustrate this point by something which comes within the experience of every man. Every man at some time mislays something; I for my part, I am ashamed to confess, am rather apt to do so. I entirely forget what I did with the object and am obliged to hunt it up. Now at the beginning of my hunt, I am guided by the knowledge that I have of my own habits; I look for the object where the ordinary rule of my action would have led me to place it, and I rightly decline to spend my time in looking where I almost know I should never have left it. But at a later stage of my search when the likely places are exhausted I begin to look in the unlikely ones, and in doing so I am equally in the right. In a somewhat similar way, when we first begin to question an axiom, we do not say that it is likely to be inexact;— far from it. We only say that the question whether it is exact or not has come to have a claim to consideration greater than it had had in a former state of science. What I propose to do tonight is, following the lead of those mathe maticians who question whether the sum of the three angles of a triangle is exactly equal to two right angles, to call in question the perfect accuracy of the fundamental axiom of logic. This axiom is that real things exist or in other words, what comes to the same thing, that every intelligible question whatever is suscepti ble in its own nature of receiving a definitive and satisfactory answer, if it be sufficiently investigated by observation and reasoning. This is

[page 217]

the way I should put it; different logicians would state the axiom differently. Mill, for instance, throws it into the form: Nature is uni form. 5 I am not now concerned with inquiring how it ought to be stated. It is the axiom itself whatever be the proper form of it which I wish to call into doubt. Let me be quite understood. As far as all ordinary and practical questions go I insist upon this axiom as much as ever,— as much as anybody can do. I should think that any man who proposed to go on any other principle as a maxim of reasoning would be as insane as Gauss, Lobachewsky, Riemann or Helmholtz would hold that geode sist to be, who should think that he could detect any departure from the accepted laws of geometry, in any triangle measured on this earth. It is worth while to notice how much it means to question the exacti tude of an axiom. There are 25 stars whose parallaxes have been determined by unexceptionable methods. According to ordinary geometry, this parallax should slightly exceed zero. According to the non-Euclidean geometry, it might be either more or less than zero, and the value the nearest possible to zero should be proportional to the area of the triangle. Now of the 25 stars, there is but one for which the parallax comes out negative. It is a Cygni of which there is but one determination and the probable error is more than half the value of the negative parallax. There are however several whose parallax is less than o."i, among them Groombridge 1830, one of the best determined of all. We may therefore conclude that for a star sof ar distant that the area of the triangle is over a thousand millions of millions of millions of square miles the error of the ordinary Geometry is a quantity less than 5^ of the smallest speck that can be seen on the broad horizon, and the extinction of the human race is to be expected sooner than the applicability of the non-Euclidean geometry to any geodesic triangle. It is a doubt comparable to this which I propose in regard to the axiom of logic. In order to explain what I mean, let us take one of the most familiar, although not one of the most scientifically accurate statements of the axiom viz.: that every event has a cause. I question whether this is exactly true. Bodies obey sensibly the laws of mechanics; but may it not be that if our means of measurement were inconceivably nicer, or if we were to wait inconceivable ages for an exception, exceptions irreducible in their own nature to any law would be found? In short, may it not be that chance, in the Aristotelian sense, mere absence of cause, has to be admitted as having some slight place in the universe. Is this a mere idle doubt? Are there any considerations which lead to such a supposition and can any use be made of it if it be granted? In the first place for the motive of the doubt. If we are to admit that every event has a cause, we are bound by every maxim of consistency to grant that every fact has an explanation, a reason. When we detect

[page 218]

a motion among bodies, the demand for a cause is held to be just. Suppose then we find that cause to be that the bodies repel one another inversely as the fifth power of the distance, according to Maxwell’s theory about molecules. Now that force is itself not an event; but are we, merely because it is not an event, but is a different kind of fact, not entitled to ask why molecules should repel one another inversely as the fifth power of the distance, with the confidence that some reason for it there must be? Gravitation seems less strange in its law, which is that of an emanation. In the case of heat we have energy radiated from the sun; but the energy of gravity does not follow the law of radiation. The singular analogy, therefore, between the acceleration of gravitation and the energy of heat demands an explanation. There has been an attempt to explain gravitation by the impact of particles, but the law of impact is as unreasonable as that of gravity or more so. Among the things that demand explanation, then, are the laws of physics; and not this law or that law only but every single law. Why are the three laws of mechanics as they are and not otherwise? What is the cause of the restriction of extended bodies to three dimensions? And then the general fact that there are laws, how is that to be explained? The general idea of evolution governs science more and more; and every system of philosophy since Kant, however idealistic or however materialistic has strongly felt its influence. Evolution is the postulate of logic, itself; for what is an explanation but the adoption of a simpler supposition to account for a complex state of things. Every theory of evolution that I have seen is more or less special. It is true that in order to be scientifically grounded a theory must be special; but nevertheless evolutionist science and evolutionist philoso phy are more closely connected in logic than scientists //commonly suppose/are apt to think// them to be. Upon this subject, I refer to the remarks of Clifford’s concerning very general conclusions a propos of Spontaneous Generation.6 A most important premise, playing a great part in the establishment of the Nebular Hypothesis or the Theory of Natural Selection, is that things must on the whole have proceeded from the Homogeneous to the Heterogeneous. Now the theories of evolution that have hitherto been set forth, at least to the very limited extent, I am sorry to confess it, with which I am familiar with them, while they do go to make it probable that organisms and worlds have taken their origin from a state of things indefinitely homogeneous, all suppose essentially the same basis of physical law to have been operative in every age of the universe. But I maintain that the postulate that things shall be explicable extends itself to laws as well as to states of things. We want a theory of the evolution of physical law. We ought to suppose that as we go back into the indefinite past not merely special laws but law itself is

[page 219]

found to be less and less determinate. And how can that be if causation was always as rigidly necessary as it is now? But let me state the point in all its generality. That very postulate of logic whose rigid accuracy I call in question, itself demands that every determinate fact shall have an explanation, and there is no rea son in making any exception. Now among the determinate facts which ought thus to be explained is the very fact supposed in this postulate. This must also be explained, must be among the things which have been somehow brought about. How then can it be absolutely, rigidly & immoveably true? So much for the motive of the doubt. Now for the question to what useful result will this hypothesis lead? It is not my purpose to offer any determinate explanation of a single one of the laws of nature. All that I can do is to suggest that they may perhaps be explicable by means of hypotheses having a certain general [.. J It has always seemed to me singular that when we put the question to an evolutionist, Spencerian, Darwinian, or whatever school he may belong to, what are the agencies which have brought about evolution, he mentions various determinate facts and laws, but among the agen cies at work he never once mentions Chance. Yet it appears to me that chance is the one essential agency upon which the whole process depends. About the nature of the ordinary phenomena of chance there can be no dispute whatever. A certain antecedent, for example that I throw a die from a box, determines the general character of a conse quent, namely that a number is turned up, but does not specifically determine the character of the consequent, that is what number that is to be; but that is determined by other causes which cannot be taken into account. I suppose that on excessively rare sporadic occasions a law of nature is violated in some infinitesimal degree; that may be called absolute chance; but ordinary chance is merely relative to the causex that are taken into account. The laws of the two kinds of chance are in the main the same. Speaking first of ordinary and relative chance, a man with an indefinite number of silver dollars who sits down to a perfectly fair game and bets one dollar on every throw of the dice will go on losing and winning in about equal measure. Speaking of absolute chance, the same thing will happen, for if not there would ipsof acto be a definite tendency toward winning or losing. The only difference between the two cases is this, that the hypothesis of absolute chance is part and parcel of the hypothesis that everything is explicable, not absolutely, rigidly without the smallest inexactitude or sporadic exception, for that is a self-contradictory supposition but yet explicable in a general way. Explicability has no determinate & absolute limit. Everything being explicable, everything has been brought about; and conse quently everything is subject to change and subject to chance. Now

[page 220]

everything that can happen by chance, sometime or other will happen by chance. Chance will sometime bring about a change in every condi tion; or, at least, this is as near a correct statement of the matter as can readily be drawn up, for quite correct it certainly is not. Now I propose to prove that the operation of chance will always present this phenomenon when the objects operated upon are very manifold. A million players sit down to play a fair game. Each bets one dollar each time which he has an even chance of winning or losing. Let each player be provided at the outset with a pile of a million silver dollars. Now it is a curious & apparently paradoxical result that although everything is supposed to happen by pure chance yet we know very closely how those million players will stand at the end of a million bets. About 10 will have lost $2000 or more, no one over $3000; and half of them after playing day and night for nearly a fortnight at the rate of one bet a second will stand within $300 of where they started. But now we will suppose that the dice used by the players become worn down in the course of time. Chance changes everything & chance will change that. And we will suppose that they are worn down in such a way that every time a man wins, he has a slightly better chance of winning on subsequent trials. This will make little difference in the first million bets, but its ultimate effect would be to separate the players into two classes those who had gained and those who had lost with few or none who had neither gained nor lost and these classes would separate themselves more and more, faster and faster. If on the other hand the wearing down of the dice were to have the opposite effect and were to tend to make him lose who had heretofore gained and vice versa, the tendency would be to prevent the separation of rich and poor. But chance will act in various ways. At one time it will have one effect at another time another. If these effects were to be alternated after billions of trials, the effect would be to make numbers of distinct classes of players. It would be easy if I had time to state the solutions to a number of similar problems in probabilities. Suffice it to say that as everything is subject to change everything will change after a time by chance, and among these changeable cir

[page 221]

cumstances will be the effects of changes on the probability of fur ther change. And from this it follows that chance must act to move things in the long run from a state of homogeneity to a state of het erogeneity. These are unlikely states of things. It is unlikely that a player should go on winning money billions of times and never be poorer than he began. But this is the effect of chance. Nor can you prevent it by killing the player whom you see taking such a course. You deprive chance of one means but it supplies another in the person of another player and the ultimate result is unaffected. The operation of chance, therefore, does show a definite tendency to bring about unlikely events by varying means under varying cir cumstances. I have no time to give more than a slight inkling of the conse quences upon science and philosophy of attention to this principle. You have all heard of the dissipation of energy. It is found that in all transformations of energy a part is converted into heat and heat is always tending to equalize its temperature. The consequence is that the energy of the universe is tending by virtue of its necessary laws toward a death of the universe in which there shall be noforce but heat and the temperature everywhere the same. This is a truly astounding result, and the most materialistic the most anti-teleological conceiv able. We may say that we know enough of the forces at work in the universe to know that there is none that can counteract this tendency away from every definite end but death. But although noforce can counteract this tendency, chance may and will have the opposite influence. Force is in the long run dissipa tive; chance is in the long run concentrative. The dissipation of energy by the regular laws of nature is by those very laws accompanied by circumstances more and more favorable to its reconcentration by chance. There must therefore be a point at which the two tendencies are balanced and that is no doubt the actual condition of the whole universe at the present time. Certain laws of nature, the laws of Boyle and Charles,7 the second law of thermodynamics, and some others are known to be results of chance,— statistical facts so to say. Molecules are so inconceivably numerous, their encounters so inconceivably frequent, that chance with them is omnipotent. I cannot help believing that more of the molecular laws— the principles of chemistry for example— will be found to involve the same element, especially as almost all these laws present the peculiarity of not being rigidly exact. Now when we take into account that feature of chance which I have been bringing to your notice we find that this agent, although it

[page 222]

can only work upon the basis of some law or uniformity, or more or less definite ratio towards a uniformity, has the property of being able to produce uniformities far more strict than those from which it works. It is therefore possible to suppose that not only the laws of chemis try but the other known laws of matter are statistical results. Thomson supposes matter to consist of eddies in fluid. If a fluid is composed again of molecules its laws will be mainly due to chance. Now I will suppose that all known laws are due to chance and repose upon others far less rigid themselves due to chance and so on in an infinite regress, the further we go back the more indefinite being the nature of the laws, and in this way we see the possibility of an indefinite approximation toward a complete explanation of nature. Chance is indeterminacy, is freedom. But the action of freedom issues in the strictest rule of law. / D e s i g n a n d C h a n c e (A)/ Epicurus makes the Gods consist of atoms but their superiority is due to the finer material of which they are composed. Thus, divineness comes from a special cause & does not originate by chance from ele ments not containing it. Darw in’s view is nearer to mine. Indeed, my opinion is only Dar winism analyzed, generalized, and brought into the realm of On tology. But Darwin holds the development of Animals and Plants to be due to certain special characters, Reproduction, Spontaneous Varia tion, Heredity, etc. Herbert Spencer and many other evolutionists hold that the opera tion of chance is an important factor in the development of self-consciousness. But they all admit other primordial elements, the conserva tion of energy and the like, to be necessary factors. Whereas my principle is that [...]* holds a place in Nature independent of every accident of matter. Before I can prove my proposition I must first show what it means. I must analyze the conception of Design or Intelligence and find what it consists in. In the first place, then, to eliminate the element offeeling as being either no essential element of intelligence or at least only a subsidiary one. The internal sense, reflection, which makes us aware of what we think, is, in truth, the main thing which distinguishes us from the brutes. It is by this means that we control our thoughts, and conquer impulses which we do not approve. But because it happens to be thus valuable to us, because it happens to be the instrument by which we make ourselves rational, it does not follow that it is essential to ratio

[page 223]

nality. What is essential is that all our cognitions should be gathered into a unity and that our actions should proceed from the entirety of our knowledge. Because our thought is only imperfectly brought to unity, it requires effort to collect it, and it requires a watchful eye to be directed to the imperfections of this unity. But were we so happily constituted that we should always without reflection completely as similate everything we learned, so as to take due account of it in every act, we might well be spared the trouble of reflecting; and we should be only the more rational if we could thus behave with intelligence by the first intention of the mind, without reflection,— and knowing no more of what was going on in our minds than a healthy man does of what is going on in his stomach. I have several times shown to my classes how some of the main laws of cerebration and particularly the formation of habits could be ac counted for by the principles of probability, and I have shown by experiment how a certain regularity of arrangement can be impressed upon a pack of cards by imitating the action of habit. The main element of habit is the tendency to repeat any action which has been performed before. It is a phenomenon at least coexten sive with life, and it may cover a still wider real realm. Imagine a large number of systems in some of which there is a decided tendency toward doing again what has once been done, in others a tendency against doing what has once been done, in others elements having one tendency and elements having the other. Let us consider the effects of chance upon these different systems. Tofix our ideas suppose players playing with dice, some of their dice are worn down in such a way that the act of losing tends to make them lose again, others in such a way that the act of losing tends to make them win. The latter will win or lose much more slowly, yet after a sufficient length of time they will be in danger of being ruined and if the game is quite even, they will eventually be ruined and destroyed. Those whose dice are so worn as to reproduce the same effects, will be divided into two parts, one of which will quickly be destroyed, the other made stronger and stronger. For every kind of an organism, system, form, or compound, there is an absolute limit to a weakening process. It ends in destruc tion; there is no limit to strength. The result is that chance in its action tends to destroy the weak & increase the average strength of the objects remaining. Systems or compounds which have bad habits are quickly destroyed, those which have no habits follow the same course; only those which have good habits tend to survive. May not the laws of physics be habits gradually acquired by sys tems. Why, for instance, do the heavenly bodies tend to attract one another? Because in the long run bodies that repel or do not attract will get thrown out of the region of space leaving only the mutually

[page 224]

attracting bodies. Why do they attract inversely as the square of the distance? This may be only their average law of attraction; we see how a comet throws away its repulsive material as it approaches the sun. But in the long run, matter that attracts inversely to a higher power of the distance tends perhaps to aggregate itself together, so that the masses of planets which have long been separate tend to attract in this manner.
