17. An American Plato: Review of Royce's Religious Aspect of Philosophy (1885)

[page 229]

An American Plato: Review of Royces Religious Aspect of Philosophy MS 1369. [Published, as MS 341, in W3:221-34 and in CP 8.39-34 (without the opening paragraph).] Written for the Popular Science Monthly in the summer of 1883 (but re-jected by the editor, E. L. Youmans), this lengthy review is, according to Peirce 's28 October 1883 letter to William James, “something really very good.” After praising Royce for his style of reasoning, which is like Plato V, Peirce criticizes his idealism as being too much like Hegel's, whose “capital error... which permeates his whole system... is that he almost altogether ignores the Outward Clash.” Peirce repeats the thesis of item 16, that three kinds of signs are indispensable in all reasoning, and emphasizes that indexes are necessary to refer to individuals: uOne such index must enter into every proposition, its function being to designate the subject of discourse.” (According to Max Fisch, items 16 and 17 mark an important stage in Peirce's passagefrom a one-category to a two-category realism.) When I meet with an opinion held by sane and instructed men, which is so radically different from my own that it seems strange and incomprehensible to me how men can believe such a thing, I for my part (and I suppose others have the same curiosity) am always tempted to examine the grounds of that opinion with a good deal of care, and am not satisfied until I have either become a convert to it or at least can fully understand and feel how it is that others hold to it. Such an opinion the scientific man finds in Hegelianism; not so much in its conclusions, which relate for the most part to matters upon which science does not touch, as in the extraordinary modes of reasoning by which it professes to reach those conclusions. But, as every one knows, the system of Hegel is very difficult to understand. A real mastership of it is what neither Hegel himself nor any of his followers or critics

[page 230]

has possessed. It contains many distinct elements; and the study of logic has not yet been carried far enough to estimate precisely the value of all of them. Dr. Royce has produced a work which will form a good introduc tion to Hegel. His language and his thought are equally lucid and within the capacity of ordinary minds; his style is animated and readable, and in passages rises without eifort to true philosophical eloquence. His method is a dialectic one; that is to say, it proceeds by the criticism of opinions, first, destructively to absolute scepticism, and then finds hidden in that scepticism itself the highest truth. It differs, however, very decidedly from the dialectic of Hegel; and in its simplicity and general tone reminds us rather of the reasoning of Plato. But before we examine the method, let us glance at the philosoph ical upshot of the book. This is, that the reality of whatever really exists consists in the real thing being thought by G od.1 Ordinary people think that things exist by the will of God; and if thought be taken in so wide a sense as to include volition, they have no difficulty in admitting the proposition which Dr. Royce has borrowed from Hegel and Schelling.2 But ordinary people say that not merely the real but all that can possibly enter into the mind of man must be within the thought of God in some sense; so that it must be some particular kind of divine thought which constitutes reality; and that particular kind of thought must be distinguished by a volitional ele ment. In short, ordinary people make, at once, the very same criti cism that the profoundest students of philosophy have made, namely, that the Hegelian school overlooks the importance of the will as an element of thought. A certain writer has suggested that reality, the fact that there is such a thing as a true answer to a question, consists in this: that human inquiries,— human reasoning and observation,—tend toward the set tlement of disputes and ultimate agreement in definite conclusions which are independent of the particular stand-points from which the different inquirers may have set out; so that the real is that which any man would believe in, and be ready to act upon, if his investigations were to be pushed sufficiently far.3 Upon the luckless putter-forth of this opinion Dr. Royce is extremely severe. He will not even name him (perhaps to spare the family), but refers to him by various satirical nick-names, especially as “Thrasymachus,”— a foolish character intro duced into the Republic and another dialogue of Platofor the purpose of showing how vastly such an ignorant pretender to philosophy is inferior to Socrates (that is, to Plato himself) in every quality of mind and heart, and especially in good manners.4 But I must with shame confess that if I understand what the opinion of this poor, Royce-

[page 231]

forsaken Thrasymachus is, I coincide with it exactly. I ask any man, Suppose you could be miraculously assured that a certain answer to any question that interests you would be the one in which, were your life and mental vigor to be indefinitely prolonged, you must eventually rest, would you not cease all inquiries at once, and be content with that answer now, as being the very thing you had been striving after? This question Dr. Royce answers explicitly in the negative. “No barely possible judge,” he says, “who would see the error, i f he were there, will dofor us.” 5 Yet if I were to represent Dr. Royce as preferring to believe for a little while that which a certain Being— no matter who— imagines, rather than to come at once to the belief to which investiga tion is destined at last to carry him, I should probably be doing him injustice; because I suppose he would say that the thing which God imagines, and the opinion to which investigation would ultimately lead him, in point of fact coincide. If, however, these two things coincide, I fail to understand why he should be so cruel to the childish Thrasymachus; since after all there is no real difference between them, but only a formal one,—each maintaining as a theorem that which the other adopts as a definition. As was just remarked, the Hegelian school do not sufficiently take into account the volitional element of cogni tion. Dr. Royce admits in words that belief is what a man will act from;6but he does not seem to have taken the truth of this proposition home to him, or else he would see that the whole end of inquiry is the settlement of belief;7 so that a man shall not war against himself, nor undo tomorrow that which he begins to do today. Dr. Royce’s main argument in support of his own opinion, to the confusion of Thrasymachus, is drawn from the existence of error. Namely, the subject of an erroneous proposition could not be identified with the subject of the corresponding true proposition, except by being com pletely known, and in that knowledge no error would be possible. The truth must, therefore, be present to the actual consciousness of a living being. This is an argument drawn from Formal Logic, for formal logic it is which inquires how different propositions are made to refer to the same subject, and the like. German metaphysics has, since Kant, drawn its best arguments from formal logic; and it is quite right in doing so, for the conceptions which are proved to be indispensible in formal logic, must have been already rooted in the nature of the mind when reasoning first began, and are, sof ar, a priori. But one would surely have supposed that when the German philosophers8 were thus drawing their arguments from formal logic, they would have post poned their venturesome flights into the thin air of theology and the vacuum of pure reason, until they had carefully tried the strength of every part of that logical machine on which they were to depend. Instead of that, they have left the great work of creating a true system

[page 232]

of formal logic to English authors, who, while they have done most excellent work, have (with the insignificant exception of the present writer) been quite indifferent to the transcendental bearings of their results. Kant gives a half dozen only of his brief pages to the develop ment of the system of logic upon which his whole philosophy rests;9 and though many valuable treatises on the science have appeared in Germany, there is hardly one of them which is not more or less marred by some arrant absurdity, acknowledged to be so by all the others; Grassm ann10 and Schroeder alone pursuing the one method which will yield positive results properly secured against error. We must not, therefore, wonder that Dr. Royce’s argument from formal logic over looks one of the most important discoveries that have lately resulted from the study of that exact branch of philosophy. He seems to think that the real subject of a proposition can be denoted by a general term of the proposition; that is, that precisely what it is that you are talking about can be distinguished from other things by giving a general description of it. Kant already showed, in a celebrated passage of his cataclysmic work,11 that this is not so; and recent studies in formal logic* have put it in a clearer light. We now find that, besides general terms, two other kinds of signs are perfectly indispensible in all rea soning. One of these kinds is the index, which like a pointing finger, exercises a real physiological force over the attention, like the power of a mesmerizer, and directs it to a particular object of sense. One such index at least must enter into every proposition, its function being to designate the subject of discourse. Now observe that Dr. Royce does not merely say that there are no means by which an erroneous proposition can be produced; what he says is that the conception of an erro neous proposition (without an actual including consciousness) is ab surd. If the subject of discourse had to be distinguished from other things, if at all, by a general term, that is, by its peculiar characters, it would be quite true that its complete segregation would require a full knowledge of its characters and would preclude ignorance. But the index, which in point of fact alone can designate the subject of a proposition, designates it without implying any characters at all. A blinding flash of lightning forces my attention and directs it to a certain moment of time with an emphatic “Now!” Directly following it, I may judge that there will be a terrific peal of thunder, and if it does not come I acknowledge an error. One instant of time is, in itself, exactly like any other instant, one point of space like any other point; nevertheless dates and positions can be approximately distinguished. And how are they so distinguished? By intuition says Kant;13 perhaps *Mitchell in Studies in Logic. By Members of theJohns Hopkins University, and Peirce in The American Journal of Mathematics, vol. vii [item 16 above].12

[page 233]

not in so many words; but it is because of this property that he distin guishes Space and Tim e from the general conceptions of the under standing and sets them off by themselves under the head of intuition. But I should prefer to say that it is by volitional acts that dates and positions are distinguished. The element of feeling is so prominent in sensations, that we do not observe that something like Will enters into them, too. You may quarrel with the word volition if you like; I wish I had a more general one at my hand.14 But what I mean is that that strong, clear, and voluntary consciousness in which we act upon our muscles is nothing more than the most marked variety of a kind of consciousness which enters into many other phenomena of our life, a consciousness of duality or dual consciousness. Feeling is simple consciousness, the consciousness that can be contained within an instant of time, the consciousness of the excitation of nerve-cells; it has no parts and no unity. What I call volition is the consciousness of the discharge of nerve-cells, either into the muscles, etc., or into other nerve-cells; it does not involve the sense of time (i.e. not of a con tinuum) but it does involve the sense of action and reaction, resistance, externality, otherness, pair-edness. It is the sense that something has hit me or that I am hitting something; it might be called the sense of collision or clash. It has an outward and an inward variety, corre sponding to Kant’s outer and inner sense,15 to will and self-control, to nerve-action and inhibition, to the two logical types A:B and A: A. The capital error of Hegel which permeates his whole system in every part of it is that he almost altogether ignores the Outward Clash.* Besides the lower consciousness of feeling and the higher consciousness of nutrition, this direct consciousness of hitting and of getting hit enters into all cognition and serves to make it mean something real. It is formal logic which teaches us this; not that of a Whately or a Jevons, but formal logic in its new development, drawing nutriment from physiology and from history without leaving the solid ground of logi cal forms. An objection different from that of Dr. Royce might be raised. Nam ely it might be asked how two different men can know they are speaking of the same thing. Suppose, for instance, one man should say a flash of lightning was followed by thunder and another should deny it. How would they know they meant the same flash? The answer is that they would compare notes somewhat as follows. One would say, “I mean that very brilliant flash which was preceded by three slighter flashes, you know.” The second man would recognize the mark, and *“We must be in contact with our subject-matter,” says he in one place, “whether it be by means of our external senses, or; what is better; by our profounder mind and our innermost self-consciousness.” 16

[page 234]

thus by a probable and approximate inference they would conclude they meant the same flash. Dr. Royce in describing the opinion of Thrasymachus has selected the expression “a barely possible judge.” 17 Is there not an ambiguity in this mode of speech which is unfair to Thrasymachus? The final opin ion which would be sure to result from sufficient investigation may possibly, in reference to a given question, never be actually attained, owing to a final extinction of intellectual life or for some other rea son.18 In that sense, this final judgment is not certain but only possible. But when Dr. Royce says “bare possibility is blank nothingness,” 19 he would seem to be speaking of mere logical possibility, and not a possi bility which differs but by a hair’s-breadth from entire certainty. Let us consider what probability there is that a given question, say one capable of being answered by yes or no, will never get answered. Let us reason upon this matter by inductive logic. Dr. Royce and his school, I am well aware, consider inductive reasoning to be radically vicious; so that we unhappily cannot carry them along with us. [They often deny this, by the way, and say they rest entirely on experience. This is because they so overlook the Outward Clash, that they do not know what experience is. They are like Roger Bacon, who after stating in eloquent terms that all knowledge comes from experience, goes on to mention spiritual illumination from on high as one of the most valuable kinds of experiences.]20 But they will not succeed in explod ing the method of modern science; and there is no reason why those who believe in induction at all, should not be willing to apply it to the subject now in hand. In the first place, then, upon innumerable ques tions, we have already reached the final opinion. How do we know that? Do we fancy ourselves infallible? Not at all; but throwing off as probably erroneous a thousandth or even a hundredth of all the beliefs established beyond present doubt, there must remain a vast multitude in which the final opinion has been reached. Every directory, guide book, dictionary, history, and work of science is crammed with such facts. In the history of science, it has sometimes occurred that a really wise man has said concerning one question or another that there was reason to believe it never would be answered. The proportion of these which have in point of fact been conclusively settled very soon after the prediction has been surprizingly large. Our experience in this direction warrants us in saying with the highest degree of empirical confidence that questions that are either practical or could conceivably become so are susceptible of receiving final solutions provided the existence of the human race be indefinitely prolonged and the particular question excite sufficient interest. As for questions which have no conceivable practical bearings, as the question whether force is an entity, they mean nothing, and may be answered as we like, without

[page 235]

error. We may take it as certain that the human race will ultimately be extirpated; because there is a certain chance of it every year, and in an indefinitely long time the chance of survival compounds itself nearer and nearer to zero. But, on the other hand, we may take it as certain that other intellectual races exist on other planets,— if not of our solar system, then of others; and also that innumerable new intel lectual races have yet to be developed; so that on the whole, it may be regarded as most certain that intellectual life in the universe will never finally cease. The problem whether a given question will ever get answered or not is not so simple; the number of questions asked is constantly increasing, and the capacity for answering them is also on the increase. If the rate of the latter increase is greater than that of the form er21 the probability is unity that any given question will be an swered; otherwise the probability is zero. Considerations too long to be explained here lead me to think that the former state of things is the actual one. In that case, there is but an infinitesimal proportion of questions which do not get answered, although the multitude of unan swered questions is forever on the increase. It plainly is not fair to call a judgment which is certain to be made a “barely possible” one. But I will admit (if the reader thinks the admission has any meaning, and is not an empty proposition) that some finite number of questions, we can never know which ones, will escape getting answered forever. Nor must I forget that I have not given the reader my proof that out of the questions asked at any time the proportion that will never be answered is infinitesimal; so that he may be in doubt upon this point. That is not a thing to be regretted; for scepticism about the reality of things,— provided it be genuine and sincere, and not a sham,— is a healthful and growing stage of mental development.22 Let us suppose, then, for the sake of argument, that some questions eventually get settled, and that some others, indistinguishable from the former by any marks, never do. In that case, I should say that the conception of reality was rather a faulty one, for while there is a real sof ar as a question that will get settled goes, there is none for a question that will never be settled; for an unknowable reality is nonsense. The non-idealistic reader will start at this last assertion; but consider the matter from a practical point of view. You say that real things are manifested by their effects. True; for example, if the timbers of my house are inwardly rotting, it will some day fall down, and thus there will be a practical effect for me, whether I know the beams be rotten or not. Well, but if all the effects consist ently point to the theory that the beams are rotting, it will come to be admitted at last that they are so; and if nothing is ever settled about the matter, it will be because the phenomena do not consistently point to any theory; and in that case there is a want of that “uniformity of nature” (to use a popular but very loose expression) which constitutes

[page 236]

reality, and makes it differ from a dream.23 In that way, if we think that some questions are never going to get settled, we ought to admit that our conception of nature as absolutely real is only partially correct. Still, we shall have to be governed by it practically; because there is nothing to distinguish the unanswerable questions from the answera ble ones, so that investigation will have to proceed as if all were answerable. In ordinary life, no matter how much we believe in ques tions ultimately getting answered, we shall always put aside an innu merable throng of them as beyond our powers. We shall not in our day seek to know whether the centre of the sun is distant from that of the earth by an odd or an even number of miles on the average; we shall act as if neither man nor God could ever ascertain it. There is, how ever, an economy of thought, in assuming that it is an answerable question. From this practical and economical point of view, it really makes no difference whether or not all questions are actually an swered, by man or by God, so long as we are satisfied that investigation has a universal tendency toward the settlement of opinion; and this I conceive to be the position of Thrasymachus. If there be any advantage to religion in supposing God to be omni scient, this sort of scepticism about reality can do no practical harm. We can still suppose that He knows all that there is of reality to be known. On the theory of Dr. Royce, the real existence of God would consist in his imagining or positing Himself; it would thus be, accord ing to him, of the same nature as the reality of anything else. For my part, I hold another theory, which I intend to take an early opportu nity of putting into print. I think that the existence of God, as well as we can conceive of it, consists in this, that a tendency toward ends is so necessary a constituent of the universe that the mere action of chance upon innumerable atoms has an inevitable teleological result. One of the ends so brought about is the development of intelligence and of knowledge; and therefore I should say that God’s omniscience, humanly conceived, consists in the fact that knowledge in its develop ment leaves no question unanswered. The scepticism just spoken of would admit this omniscience as a regulative but not a speculative conception. I believe that even that view is more religiously fruitful than the opinion of Dr. Royce. Let us now turn to the examination of Dr. Royce’s peculiar method of reasoning; for that is always the most important element in every system of philosophy. His work is divided into a brief intro duction and two books, the first entitled “The search for a moral ideal”; the second “The search for a religious truth.” These titles seem to me to point, at the outset, to a fault of method. The pursuit of a conscience, if one hasn’t one already, or of a religion, which is the subjective basis of conscience, seems to me an aimless and hypo chondriac pursuit. If a man finds himself under no sense of obliga

[page 237]

tion, let him congratulate himself. For such a man to hanker after a bondage to conscience, is as if a man with a good digestion should cast about for a regimen of food. A conscience, too, is not a theorem or a piece of information which may be acquired by reading a book; it must be bred in a man from infancy or it will be a poor imitation of the genuine article. If a man has a conscience, it may be an article of faith with him that he should reflect upon that conscience, and thus it may receive a further development. But it never will do him the least good to get up a make-believe scepticism and pretend to himself not to believe what he really does believe. In point of fact, every man born and reared in a Christian community, however little he may believe the dogmas of the Church, does find himself believing with the strongest conviction in the moral code of Christendom. He has a horror of murder and incest, a disapproval of lying, etc., which he cannot escape from. The modern dialectician (if he will pardon a touch of exaggeration) would have such a man say to himself, Now I am going to be sceptical, but only provisionally so, in order to return to my faith with renewed conviction! But the whole history of thought shows that men cannot doubt at pleasure or merely be cause they find they have no positive reason for the belief they al ready hold. Reasons concern the man who is coming to believe, not the man who believes already. It has often been remarked that meta physics is an imitation of mathematics; and it may be added that the philosophic doubt is an imitation of the absurd proceedure of ele mentary geometry, which begins by giving worthless demonstrations of propositions nobody ever questions. When Hegel tells me that thought has three stages, that of naïve acceptance, that of reaction and criticism, and that of rational conviction;24 in a general sense, I agree to it. And a down-right living scepticism, without arrière-pensée, may be beneficial. It is not perhaps easy to see why an imaginary scepticism might not sometimes serve the same purpose; but experi ence shows that in questions of magnitude men haven’t imagination enough to put themselves in the true doubter’s shoes. But be that as it may, the idea that the mere reaction of assent and doubt, the mere play of thought, the heat-lightning of the brain, is going to settle anything in this real world to which we appertain,— such an idea only shows again how the Hegelians overlook the facts of volitional action & reaction in the development of thought. I find myself in a world of forces which act upon me, and it is they and not the logical transformations of my thought which determine what I shall ulti mately believe. Dr. Royce seems to hold that at least in the philosophy of morals and religion a mere contemplation of our own crude beliefs will lead us to absolute scepticism and that then a mere contemplation of our own absolute scepticism will lead us back to rational conviction. N ei

[page 238]

ther I nor the readers of the Popular Science Monthly can possibly believe that, in advance. But let us see how the method will work when applied to the discussion of ethics. The moral stand-point from which every man with a Christian training sets out, even if he be a dogmatic atheist, is pretty nearly the same. He has a horror of certain crimes and a disapproval of certain lesser sins. He is also more or less touched with the spirit of Christian love, which he believes should be his beacon, and which in point of fact, by its power in his heart, shall and will govern him in all ques tions of disputed morals. More or less, in all of us, this sentiment replaces and abolishes conscience; like Huckleberry Finn, we act from Christian charity without caring very much whether conscience ap proves of the act or not. This is the state of mind of the ordinary man or woman who will open Dr. Royce’s book. And now Dr. Royce proposes that this person shall ask himself the question what validity or truth is there in the distinction of right and wrong. To me, it plainly appears that such a person, if he have a clear head, will at once reply, right and wrong are nothing to me except sof ar as they are connected with certain rules of living by which I am enabled to satisfy a real impulse which works in my heart; and this impulse is the love of my neighbor elevated into a love of an ideal and divine humanity which I identify with the providence that governs the world. But Dr. Royce says that different people will answer the question in different ways; some will take the position of the “moral realist” and say that moral distinctions are founded on some matter of fact (say a decree from Sinai), while others will take the position of the “moral idealist” and say that these distinc tions are founded on an inward sentiment,—an ideal.25 Tw o such persons come into collision; they find by mutual criticism that both positions are unsatisfactory; external fact can only determine what is, not what ought to be; while inward sentiment cannot be a restingplace, because it is only individual caprice and has no authority for another man. From this criticism the only outcome is ethical scepti cism. This is a fair specimen of Dr. Royce’s logical method, which is a mere apotheosis of the dilemma, as the great instrument of thought. As compared with syllogistic method of the middle ages (which sur vives in certain quarters, yet) it is certainly wonderfully superior; but as compared with the mathematical reasoning upon which modern science is built, it is inefficacious and restricted. In the particular case in hand, it appears to me that the ordinary Christian does not find himself caught in Dr. Royce’s dilemma at all. He is a moral idealist; yet far from being shaken by the spectacle of different men having different passions, he feels that every man may

[page 239]

come to the same passion which animates him by a mere enlargement of his horizon, and that his is the only sentiment in which all others may be reconciled. For altruism is but a developed egoism; that same sensitiveness which in its lowest state is selfishness, first transforms itself into esprit de corps or collective selfishness; then, passing from feeling for others collectively tofeeling for themindividually, it be comes philanthropy, pity, sympathy tossed hither and thither rudder less on the ocean of human misery; finally, steadying itself by the conception of an ideal humanity and a divine providence, it passes into Christian charity, which gathers up all selfishnesses and all pities and is ready to give each its due measure. The author having stated the above argument with admirable clear ness, fills a hundred pages with a perhaps not altogether necessary, though a charmingly written and highly interesting elaboration and illustration of it. He here passes in review a goodly number of the ethical theories which have been proposed at different times. After the Sophists, Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics, he criticizes what he con ceives to be the ethics of Jesus.26 Every Christian will tell him that he makes the mistake of viewing that as a theory or speculation which is really a spiritual experience;— another example of his neglect of the volitional element. For instance, he asks, “If I feel not the love of God, how prove to me that I ought tofeel it?” 27 The answer to that need not be pointed out. In what he says about Herbert Spencer, he seems toforget that Mr. Spencer is not addressing a body of moral sceptics but readers ani mated by the sentiments which, in our day, animate every man who reads at all.28 At last he takes up the thread of his argument as follows. The conflict between moral realism and idealism can only lead to moral scepticism. Now what is this scepticism? It is the contemplation of two opposing aims. Here he adduces the testimony of modern psy chologists to show that we cannot think of willing without actually willing.29 (But for all that, I fancy I notice a difference sometimes in cold weather between thinking of willing to take my morning dash of cold water and actually willing to take it.) Scepticism, then, shares at once these opposing aims, or strives to share them. It has thus itself an aim, namely, to reconcile opposing aims. So absolute moral scepticism is self-destructive. “Possibly this result may be somewhat unexpected,” says our author.30 Not at all unexpected to one who does not believe in the dialectical method. You started with a hypo chondriac hankering after an aim; and now you have acquired it. Eurekas! Well, what is it, this aim which you have at last got? Why, to have an aim! But that is nothing but the old nonsensical longing with which you set out. Like Kant’s dove,31 you have been winging a vac

[page 240]

uum, without remarking that you never advanced an inch. I do not misrepresent the author. “For behold,” he says, “made practical, brought down from its lonesome height, my Ideal very simply means the Will to direct my acts towards the attainment of universal H ar mony.” 32 But this, I must insist, was obviously implied in the origi nal fantastic desire to have an aim. When I say that this is a fantastic desire, I do not of course mean to deny that there may be such an operation as the choice of an aim, if by that aim be meant a secondary or derived one; but I do say that it is absurd to speak of choosing an original and ultimate aim. That is something which if you haven’t it, you have nothing to do but wait till the grace of God confers it on you. I should think, however, that were it once admitted to be a rational performance to go a-hunting for an ultimate aim or end, the first preliminary would be to recognize the axiom that such an end must have unity, after which the hunt might begin. But Royce, call ing this axiom the “ideal of ideals,” as it certainly is, in a sense, ex claims “Here I have the aim I wanted, and the hunt is over.” 33 If one might be permitted to enliven a dry subject with a little folly, I should say that it reminded me of the surveyor Phoenix, who after purchasing 365 solar compasses and a vast amount of other parapher nalia, in order to ascertain the distance between San Francisco and the Mission of Dolores, stepped into a grocery and inquired how far it was, and returned “much pleased at so easily acquiring so much valuable information.” 34 If Dr. Royce merely means that it can be shown that a man whof ancies he has no moral ideal really has one, I heartily grant it; and I will further admit that dialectic is the proper instrument to show this. But then a very lowly kind of dialec tic will do; and a rather more definite ideal may be pointed out. The rest of Book I is occupied, as it seems to me, with illicitly slipping some content into an empty formula. Much of this part of the book is splendidly said. But other passages seem to me to preach, in a way quite uncalled for by the premises, an ethics of the evil eye. “It is well that we should feel... joy whenever pride has a fall.... In all such ways... we must showno mercy.” “When the hedonist gives us his picture of a peaceful society, where, in the midst of good humor, his ideal, the happiness of everybody concerned, is steadfastly pursued, we find ourselves disappointed and contemptuous.... Who cares whether that wretched set... think themselves happy or not?” “The appearance of anybody who pretends to be content with himself must be the signal not for admiration at the sight of his success, but for a good deal of contempt.” etc.35 Some of the students to whom this ethics is taught at Harvard may upon reflection think that Christian charity is not so much lower a frame of mind after all. In Book II Dr. Royce undertakes by the same dialectic proceedure to establish the existence of a God. /S7pace does not permit me to enter

[page 241]

into a criticism of the second book; nor is it necessary, for it consists only of an application of the same method to a subject to which dialec tics is far less suited. Besides, to the reader who has had the kindness and the resolution tofollow me to this point I can say, “You are the man to enjoy Dr. Royce’s own book, which I can promise you you shall find, in comparison with harsh and crabbed matter you have been reading here, to be ‘as musical as is Apollo’s lute.’” 36
